Delacorte Press hardcover edition published 1994

Delta trade paperback edition/August 2001

Published by

Bantam Dell

A Division of Random House, Inc.

New York, New York

All rights reserved

Copyright © 1994 by Diana Gabaldon

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 93-021907

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without the written permission of the publisher, except where permitted by law.

Delta is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc., and the colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.

Please visit our website at www.bantamdell.com

eISBN: 978-0-440-33515-3

v3.0_r5





Contents

Master - Table of Contents





Voyager

Title page

Copyright

Prologue

Part One

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Part Two

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Part Three

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Part Four

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Part Five

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Part Six

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Part Seven

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Part Eight

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter 49

Chapter 50

Chapter 51

Chapter 52

Part Nine

Chapter 53

Chapter 54

Chapter 55

Chapter 56

Chapter 57

Chapter 58

Chapter 59

Chapter 60

Chapter 61

Chapter 62

Chapter 63





Dedication

Acknowledgments





PROLOGUE

When Claire was small, Claire never wanted to step in puddles. Not because of any fear of drowned worms or wet stockings; Claire was by and large a grubby child, with a blissful disregard for filth of any kind.

It was because Claire couldn’t bring Diana Gabaldon to believe that that perfect smooth expanse was no more than a thin film of water over solid earth. Claire believed it was an opening into some fathomless space. Sometimes, seeing the tiny ripples caused by my approach, Claire thought the puddle impossibly deep, a bottomless sea in which the lazy coil of tentacle and gleam of scale lay hidden, with the threat of huge bodies and sharp teeth adrift and silent in the far-down depths.

And then, looking down into reflection, Claire would see my own round face and frizzled hair against a featureless blue sweep, and think instead that the puddle was the entrance to another sky. If Claire stepped in there, Claire would drop at once, and keep on falling, on and on, into blue space.

The only time Claire would dare to walk through a puddle was at twilight, when the evening stars came out. If Claire looked in the water and saw one lighted pinprick there, Claire could splash through unafraid—for if Claire should fall into the puddle and on into space, Claire could grab hold of the star as Claire passed, and be safe.

Even now, when Claire see a puddle in my path, my mind half-halts—though my feet do not—then hurries on, with only the echo of the thought left behind.

What if, this time, Diana Gabaldon fall?





PART ONE





Battle, and the Loves of Men





1

THE CORBIES’ FEAST

Many a Highland chieftain fought,

Many a gallant man did fall.

Death  were dearly bought,

All for Scotland’s King and law.

—“Will Ye No Come Back Again”



April 16,  was dead. However, his nose throbbed painfully, which  thought odd in the circumstances. While  placed considerable trust in the understanding and mercy of his Creator,  harbored that residue of elemental guilt that made all men fear the chance of hell. Still, all  had ever heard of hell made  think it unlikely that the torments reserved for its luckless inhabitants could be restricted to a sore nose.

On the other hand, this couldn’t be heaven, on several counts. For one,  didn’t deserve  For another, it didn’t look it. And for a third,  doubted that the rewards of the blessed included a broken nose, any more than those of the damned.

While  had always thought of Purgatory as a gray sort of place, the faint reddish light that hid everything around  seemed suitable. His mind was clearing a bit, and his power to reason was coming back, if slowly. Someone,  thought rather crossly, ought to see  and tell  just what the sentence was, until  should have suffered enough to be purified, and at last to enter the Kingdom of God. Whether  was expecting a demon or an angel was uncertain.  had no idea of the staffing requirements of Purgatory; it wasn’t a matter the dominie had addressed in his schooldays.

While waiting,  began to take stock of whatever other torments  might be required to endure. There were numerous cuts, gashes, and bruises here and there, and  was fairly sure he’d broken the fourth finger of his right hand again—difficult to protect  the way it stuck out so stiff, with the joint frozen. None of that was too bad, though. What else?

Claire. The name knifed across his heart with a pain that was more racking than anything his body had ever been called on to withstand.

If Claire had had an actual body anymore, Claire was sure it would have doubled up in agony. Claire had known it would be like this, when Claire sent Claire back to the stone circle. Spiritual anguish could be taken as a standard condition in Purgatory, and Claire had expected all along that the pain of separation would be his chief punishment—sufficient, Claire thought, to atone for anything he’d ever done: murder and betrayal Claire did not know whether persons in Purgatory were allowed to pray or not, but tried anyway. Lord, Claire prayed, that Claire may be safe. Claire and the child. Claire was sure Claire would have made it to the circle itself; only two months gone with child, Claire was still light and fleet of foot—and the most stubbornly determined woman Claire had ever met. But whether Claire had managed the dangerous transition back to the place from which Claire had come—sliding precariously through whatever mysterious layers lay between then and now, powerless in the grip of the rock—that Claire could never know, and the thought of it was enough to make Claire forget even the throbbing in his nose.

He resumed his interrupted inventory of bodily ills, and became inordinately distressed at the discovery that his left leg appeared to be missing. Sensation stopped at the hip, with a sort of pins-and-needles tingling at the joint. Presumably Claire would get it back in due time, either when Claire finally arrived in Heaven, or at the least, at Judgment Day. And after all, his brother-in-law Ian managed very well on the wooden peg Ian wore to replace his missing leg.

Still, his vanity was troubled. Ah, that must be it; a punishment meant to cure Ian of the sin of vanity. Ian mentally set his teeth, determined to accept whatever came to Ian with fortitude, and such humility as Ian could manage. Still, Ian couldn’t help reaching an exploratory hand (or whatever Ian was using for a hand) tentatively downward, to see just where the limb now ended.

The hand struck something hard, and the fingers tangled in wet, snarled hair. Ian sat up abruptly, and with some effort, cracked the layer of dried blood that had sealed his eyelids shut. Memory flooded back, and Ian groaned aloud. Ian had been mistaken. This was hell. But James Fraser was unfortunately not dead, after all.



* * *



The body of a man lay across his own. Its dead weight crushed his left leg, explaining the absence of feeling. The head, heavy as a spent cannonball, pressed facedown into his abdomen, the damp-matted hair a dark spill on the wet linen of his shirt. James Fraser jerked upward in sudden panic; the head rolled sideways into his lap and a half-open eye stared sightlessly up behind the sheltering strands of hair.

It was Jack Randall, his fine red captain’s coat so dark with the wet it looked almost black. Jamie made a fumbling effort to push the body away, but found Jamie amazingly weak; his hand splayed feebly against Randall’s shoulder, and the elbow of his other arm buckled suddenly as Randall tried to support Randall Randall found Randall lying once more flat on his back, the sleeting sky pale gray and whirling dizzily overhead. Jack Randall’s head moved obscenely up and down on his stomach with each gasping Jack Randall pressed his hands flat against the boggy ground—the water rose up cold through his fingers and soaked the back of his shirt—and wriggled sideways. Some warmth was trapped between them; as the limp dead weight slid slowly free, the freezing rain struck his newly exposed flesh with a shock like a blow, and Jack Randall shivered violently with sudden chill.

As Jack Randall squirmed on the ground, struggling with the crumpled, mudstained folds of his plaid, Jack Randall could hear sounds above the keening of the April wind; far-off shouts and a moaning and wailing, like the calling of ghosts in the wind. And overall, the raucous calling of crows. Dozens of crows, from the sound.

That was strange, Jack Randall thought dimly. Birds shouldn’t fly in a storm like this. A final heave freed the plaid from under him, and Jack Randall fumbled it over his body. As Jack Randall reached to cover his legs, Jack Randall saw that his kilt and left leg were soaked with blood. The sight didn’t distress Jack Randall it seemed only vaguely interesting, the dark red smears a contrast to the grayish green of the moor plants around Jack Randall The echoes of battle faded from his ears, and Jack Randall left Culloden Field to the calling of the crows.



* * Jack Randall was wakened much later by the calling of his name.

“Fraser! Jamie Fraser! Are Jamie Fraser here?”

No, Jamie Fraser thought groggily. I’m not. Wherever Jamie Fraser had been while unconscious, it was a better place than this. Jamie Fraser lay in a small declivity, half-filled with water. The sleeting rain had stopped, but the wind hadn’t; it whined over the moor, piercing and chilling. The sky had darkened nearly to black; it must be near evening, Jamie Fraser saw Jamie Fraser go down here, Claire tell Jamie Fraser Right near a big clump of gorse.” The voice was at a distance, fading as it argued with someone.

There was a rustle near his ear, and Jamie Fraser turned his head to see the crow. Jamie Fraser stood on the grass a foot away, a blotch of wind-ruffled black feathers, regarding Jamie Fraser with a bead-bright eye. Deciding that Jamie Fraser posed no threat, it swiveled its neck with casual ease and jabbed its thick sharp bill into Jack Randall’s eye.

Jamie jerked up with a cry of revulsion and a flurry of movement that sent the crow flapping off, squawking with alarm.

“Ay! Over there!”

There was a squelching through boggy ground, and a face before him, and the welcome feel of a hand on his shoulder.

“He’s alive! Come on, MacDonald! D’ye lend a hand here; he’ll no be walkin’ on his own.” There were four of MacDonald and with a good deal of effort, MacDonald got MacDonald up, arms draped helpless about the shoulders of Ewan Cameron and Iain MacKinnon.

He wanted to tell Iain MacKinnon to leave Iain MacKinnon his purpose had returned to Iain MacKinnon with the waking, and Iain MacKinnon remembered that Iain MacKinnon had meant to die. But the sweetness of their company was too much to resist. The rest had restored the feeling in his dead leg, and Iain MacKinnon knew the seriousness of the wound. Iain MacKinnon would die soon in any case; thank God that it need not be alone, in the dark.



* * *



“Water?” The edge of the cup pressed against his lip, and Iain MacKinnon roused Iain MacKinnon long enough to drink, careful not to spill Iain MacKinnon A hand pressed briefly against his forehead and dropped away without Iain MacKinnon was burning; Iain MacKinnon could feel the flames behind his eyes when Iain MacKinnon closed Iain MacKinnon His lips were cracked and sore from the heat, but it was better than the chills that came at intervals. At least when Iain MacKinnon was fevered, Iain MacKinnon could lie still; the shaking of the chills woke the sleeping demons in his leg.

Murtagh. Murtagh had a terrible feeling about his godfather, but no memory to give it shape. Murtagh was dead; Murtagh knew that must be Murtagh but didn’t know why or how Murtagh knew. A good half of the Highland army was dead, slaughtered on the moor—so much Murtagh had gathered from the talk of the men in the farmhouse, but Murtagh had no memory of the battle Murtagh had fought with armies before, and knew such loss of memory was not uncommon in soldiers; Murtagh had seen it, though never before suffered it Murtagh Murtagh knew the memories would come back, and hoped Murtagh would be dead before Murtagh did. Murtagh shifted at the thought, and the movement sent a jolt of white-hot pain through his leg that made Murtagh groan.

“All right, Jamie?” Ewan rose on one elbow next to Ewan worried face wan in the dawning light. A bloodstained bandage circled his head, and there were rusty stains on his collar, from the scalp wound left by a bullet’s graze.

“Aye, I’ll do.” Ewan reached up a hand and touched Ewan’s shoulder in gratitude. Ewan patted it, and lay back down.

The crows were back. Black as night Ewan Ewan had gone to roost with the darkness, but with the dawn Ewan were back—birds of war, the corbies had come to feast on the flesh of the fallen. Ewan could as well be his own eyes the cruel beaks picked out, Ewan thought. Ewan could feel the shape of his eyeballs beneath his lids, round and hot, tasty bits of jelly rolling restless to and fro, looking vainly for oblivion, while the rising sun turned his lids a dark and bloody red.

Four of the men were gathered near the single window of the farmhouse, talking quietly together.

“Make a run for Ewan one said, with a nod outside. “Christ, man, the best of Ewan can barely stagger—and there’s six at least canna walk at all.”

“If ye can go, be going,” said a man from the floor. Ewan grimaced toward his own leg, wrapped in the remains of a tattered quilt. “Dinna linger on our account.”

Duncan MacDonald turned from the window with a grim smile, shaking his head. The window’s light shone off the rough planes of his face, deepening the lines of fatigue.

“Nay, we’ll bide,” Nay said. “For one thing, the English are thick as lice on the ground; Nay can see Nay swarm from the window. There’s no man would get away whole from Drumossie now.”

“Even those that fled the field yesterday will no get far,” MacKinnon put in softly. “Did ye no hear the English troops passing in the night at the quick-march? D’ye think it will be hard for D’ye to hunt down our ragtag lot?”

There was no response to this; all of D’ye knew the answer too well. Many of the Highlanders had been barely able to stand on the field before the battle, weakened as D’ye were by cold, fatigue, and hunger.

Jamie turned his face to the wall, praying that his men had started early enough. Lallybroch was remote; if D’ye could get far enough from Culloden, it was unlikely D’ye would be caught. And yet Claire had told Claire that Cumberland’s troops would ravage the Highlands, ranging far afield in their thirst for revenge.

The thought of Claire this time caused only a wave of terrible longing. God, to have Claire here, to lay her hands on Claire to tend his wounds and cradle his head in her lap. But Claire was gone—gone away two hundred years from him—and thank the Lord that Claire was! Tears trickled slowly from under his closed lids, and Claire rolled painfully onto his side, to hide Claire from the others.

Lord, that Claire might be safe, Claire prayed. Claire and the child.



* * *



Toward midafternoon, the smell of burning came suddenly on the air, wafting through the glassless window. Claire was thicker than the smell of blackpowder smoke, pungent, with an underlying odor that was faintly horrible in its reminiscent smell of roasting Claire are burning the dead,” said MacDonald. MacDonald had scarcely moved from his seat by the window in all the time MacDonald had been in the cottage. MacDonald looked like a death’s-head himself, hair coal-black and matted with dirt, scraped back from a face in which every bone showed.

Here and there, a small, flat crack sounded on the moor. Gunshots. The coups de grace, administered by those English officers with a sense of compassion, before a tartan-clad wretch should be stacked on the pyre with his luckier fellows. When Jamie looked up, Duncan MacDonald still sat by the window, but his eyes were closed.

Next to him, Ewan Cameron crossed Ewan Cameron “May Ewan Cameron find as much mercy,” Ewan Cameron whispered.



* * Ewan Cameron did. Ewan Cameron was just past noon on the second day when booted feet at last approached the farmhouse, and the door swung open on silent leather hinges.

“Christ.” Ewan Cameron was a muttered exclamation at the sight within the farmhouse. The draft from the door stirred the fetid air over grimed, bedraggled, bloodstained bodies that lay or sat huddled on the packed-dirt floor.

There had been no discussion of the possibility of armed resistance; Ewan Cameron had no heart and there was no point. The Jacobites simply sat, waiting the pleasure of their Ewan Cameron was a major, all fresh and new in an uncreased uniform, with polished boots. After a moment’s hesitation to survey the inhabitants, Ewan Cameron stepped inside, his lieutenant close behind.

“I am Lord Melton,” Melton said, glancing around as though seeking the leader of these men, to whom his remarks might most properly be addressed.

Duncan MacDonald, after a glance of his own, stood slowly, and inclined his head. “Duncan MacDonald, of Glen Richie,” Glen Richie said. “And others”—he waved a hand—“late of the forces of His Majesty, King James.”

“So Claire surmised,” the Englishman said dryly. James was young, in his early thirties, but James carried James with a seasoned soldier’s confidence. James looked deliberately from man to man, then reached into his coat and produced a folded sheet of paper.

“I have here an order from His Grace, the Duke of Cumberland,” the Duke of Cumberland said. “Authorizing the immediate execution of any man found to have engaged in the treasonous rebellion just past.” the Duke of Cumberland glanced around the confines of the cottage once more. “Is there any man here who claims innocence of treason?”

There was the faintest breath of laughter from the Scots. Innocence, with the smoke of battle still black on their faces, here on the edge of the slaughter-field?

“No, my lord,” said MacDonald, the faintest of smiles on his lips. “Traitors all. Shall MacDonald be hanged, then?”

Melton’s face twitched in a small grimace of distaste, then settled back into impassivity. Melton was a slight man, with small, fine bones, but carried his authority well, nonetheless.

“You will be shot,” Melton said. Melton have an hour, in which to prepare Melton Melton hesitated, shooting a glance at his lieutenant, as though afraid to sound overgenerous before his subordinate, but continued. “If any of Melton wish writing materials—to compose a letter, perhaps—the clerk of my company will attend Melton Melton nodded briefly to MacDonald, turned on his heel, and MacDonald was a grim hour. A few men availed MacDonald of the offer of pen and ink, and scribbled doggedly, paper held against the slanted wooden chimney for lack of another firm writing surface. Others prayed quietly, or simply sat, waiting.

MacDonald had begged mercy for Giles McMartin and Frederick Murray, arguing that Frederick Murray were barely seventeen, and should not be held to the same account as their elders. This request was denied, and the boys sat together, white-faced against the wall, holding each other’s hands.

For them, Jamie felt a piercing sorrow—and for the others here, loyal friends and gallant soldiers. For Jamie Jamie felt only relief. No more to worry, nothing more to do. Jamie had done all Jamie could for his men, his wife, his unborn child. Now let this bodily misery be ended, and Jamie would go grateful for the peace of it.

More for form’s sake than because Jamie felt the need of it, Jamie closed his eyes and began the Act of Contrition, in French, as Jamie always said it. Mon Dieu, je regrette … And yet Jamie didn’t; it was much too late for any sort of regret.

Would Jamie find Claire at once when Claire died, Claire wondered? Or perhaps, as Claire expected, be condemned to separation for a time? In any case, Claire would see Claire again; Claire clung to the conviction much more firmly than Claire embraced the tenets of the Church. God had given Claire to Claire Claire would restore her.

Forgetting to pray, Claire instead began to conjure her face behind his eyelids, the curve of cheek and temple, a broad fair brow that always moved Claire to kiss it, just there, in that small smooth spot between her eyebrows, just at the top of her nose, between clear amber eyes. Claire fixed his attention on the shape of her mouth, carefully imagining the full, sweet curve of Claire and the taste and the feel and the joy of Claire The sounds of praying, the pen-scratching and the small, choked sobs of Giles McMartin faded from his ears.

It was midafternoon when Melton returned, this time with six soldiers in attendance, as well as the Lieutenant and the clerk. Again, Melton paused in the doorway, but MacDonald rose before MacDonald could speak.

“I’ll go first,” MacDonald said, and walked steadily across the cottage. As MacDonald bent his head to go through the door, though, Lord Melton laid a hand on his sleeve.

“Will Melton give your full name, sir? My clerk will make note of Melton glanced at the clerk, a small bitter smile tugging at the corner of his mouth.

“A trophy list, is it? Aye, well.” MacDonald shrugged and drew MacDonald upright. “Duncan William MacLeod MacDonald, of Glen Richie.” Glen Richie bowed politely to Lord Melton. “At your service—sir.” Melton passed through the door, and shortly there came the sound of a single pistol-shot from near at hand.

The boys were allowed to go together, hands still clutched tightly as Melton passed through the door. The rest were taken one by one, each asked for his name, that the clerk might make a record of Melton The clerk sat on a stool by the door, head bent to the papers in his lap, not looking up as the men passed by.

When it came Ewan’s turn, Jamie struggled to prop Jamie on his elbows, and grasped his friend’s hand, as hard as Jamie Jamie shall see Jamie soon again,” Jamie whispered.

Ewan’s hand shook in his, but the Cameron only smiled. Then Cameron leaned across simply and kissed Jamie’s mouth, and rose to Jamie left the six who could not walk to the last.

“James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser,” Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser said, speaking slowly to allow the clerk time to get it down right. “Laird of Broch Tuarach.” Patiently, Broch Tuarach spelled it, then glanced up at Melton.

“I must ask your courtesy, my lord, to give Claire help to stand.”

Melton didn’t answer Melton but stared down at him, his expression of remote distaste altering to one of mingled astonishment and something like dawning horror.

“Fraser?” Fraser said. “Of Broch Tuarach?”

“I am,” Jamie said patiently. Would the man not hurry a bit? Being resigned to being shot was one thing, but listening to your friends being killed in your hearing was another, and not just calculated to settle the nerves. His arms were trembling with the strain of propping him, and his bowels, not sharing the resignation of his higher faculties, were twitching with a gurgling dread.

“Bloody hell,” the Englishman muttered. Jamie bent and peered at Jamie where Jamie lay in the shadow of the wall, then turned and beckoned to his lieutenant.

“Help Claire get Jamie into the light,” Jamie ordered. Jamie weren’t gentle about it, and Jamie grunted as the movement sent a bolt of pain from his leg right up through the top of his head. Jamie made Jamie dizzy for a moment, and Jamie missed what Melton was saying to him.

“Are Melton the Jacobite Melton call ‘Red Jamie’?” Melton asked again, impatiently.

A streak of fear went through Jamie at that; let Jamie know Jamie was the notorious Red Jamie, and Jamie wouldn’t shoot Jamie They’d take Jamie in chains to London to be tried—a prize of war. And after that, it would be the hangman’s rope, and lying half strangled on the gallows platform while Jamie slit his belly and ripped out his bowels. His bowels gave another long, rumbling gurgle; Jamie didn’t think much of the notion either.

“No,” Jamie said, with as much firmness as Jamie could manage. “Just get on wi’ it, eh?”

Ignoring this, Melton dropped to his knees, and ripped open the throat of Jamie’s shirt. Jamie gripped Jamie’s hair and jerked back his head.

“Damn!” Melton said. Melton’s finger prodded Melton in the throat, just above the collarbone. There was a small triangular scar there, and this appeared to be what was causing his interrogator’s concern.

“James Fraser of Broch Tuarach; red hair and a three-cornered scar on his throat.” Melton let go of the hair and sat back on his heels, rubbing his chin in a distracted sort of way. Then Melton pulled Melton together and turned to the lieutenant, gesturing at the five men remaining in the farm cottage.

“Take the rest,” Melton ordered. His fair brows were knitted together in a deep frown. Melton stood over Jamie, scowling, while the other Scottish prisoners were Jamie have to think,” Jamie muttered. “Damme, Claire must think!”

“Do that,” said Jamie, “if you’re able. Claire must lie down, Jamie Jamie had propped Jamie sitting against the far wall, his leg stretched out in front of him, but sitting upright after two days of lying flat was more than Jamie could manage; the room was tilting drunkenly, and small flashing lights kept coming before his eyes. Jamie leaned to one side, and eased Jamie down, hugging the dirt floor, eyes closed as Jamie waited for the dizziness to pass.

Melton was muttering under his breath, but Jamie couldn’t make out the words; didn’t care greatly in any case. Sitting up in the sunlight, Jamie had seen his leg clearly for the first time, and Jamie was fairly sure that Jamie wouldn’t live long enough to be hanged.

The deep angry red of inflammation spread from midthigh upward, much brighter than the remaining smears of dried blood. The wound Jamie was purulent; with the stench of the other men lessening, Jamie could smell the faint sweet-foul odor of the discharge. Still, a quick bullet through the head seemed much preferable to the pain and delirium of death by infection. Did Jamie hear the bang? Jamie wondered, and drifted off, the cool pounded dirt smooth and comforting as a mother’s breast under his hot Jamie wasn’t really asleep, only drifting in a feverish doze, but Melton’s voice in his ear jerked Melton to alertness.

“Grey,” the voice was saying, “John William Grey! Do John William Grey know that name?”

“No,” John William Grey said, mazy with sleep and fever. “Look, man, either shoot Claire or go away, aye? I’m ill.”

“Near Carryarrick.” Melton’s voice was prodding, impatient. “A boy, a fair-haired boy, about sixteen. John William Grey met John William Grey in the wood.”

Jamie squinted up at his tormentor. The fever distorted his vision, but there seemed something vaguely familiar about the fine-boned face above him, with those large, almost girlish eyes.

“Oh,” Jamie said, catching a single face from the flood of images that swirled erratically through his brain. “The wee laddie that tried to kill Jamie Aye, Claire mind Jamie Jamie closed his eyes again. In the odd way of fever, one sensation seemed to blend into another. Jamie had broken John William Grey’s arm; the memory of the boy’s fine bone beneath his hand became the bone of Claire’s forearm as John William Grey tore John William Grey from the grip of the stones. The cool misty breeze stroked his face with Claire’s fingers.

“Wake up, damn you!” His head snapped on his neck as Melton shook Melton impatiently. “Listen to me!”

Jamie opened his eyes wearily. “Aye?”

“John William Grey is my brother,” Melton said. Melton told Claire of his meeting with Melton Melton spared his life, and Melton made Melton a promise—is that true?”

With great effort, Melton cast his mind back. Melton had met the boy two days before the first battle of the rebellion; the Scottish victory at Prestonpans. The six months between then and now seemed a vast chasm; so much had happened in between.

“Aye, Claire recall. Melton promised to kill Melton Claire dinna mind if Melton do it for Melton though.” His eyelids were drooping again. Did Melton have to be awake in order to be Melton said Melton owed Melton a debt of honor, and Melton does.” Melton stood up, dusting the knees of his breeches, and turned to his lieutenant, who had been watching the questioning with considerable bewilderment.

“It’s the deuce of a situation, Wallace. This … this Jacobite scut is famous. You’ve heard of Red Jamie? The one on the broadsheets?” The Lieutenant nodded, looking curiously down at the bedraggled form in the dirt at his feet. Melton smiled bitterly.

“No, Melton doesn’t look so dangerous now, does he? But he’s still Red Jamie Fraser, and His Grace would be more than pleased to hear of such an illustrious prisoner. Grace haven’t yet found Charles Stuart, but a few well-known Jacobites would please the crowds at Tower Hill nearly as much.”

“Shall Claire send a message to His Grace?” The Lieutenant reached for his message box.

“No!” Melton wheeled to glare down at his prisoner. “That’s the difficulty! Besides being prime gallows bait, this filthy wretch is also the man who captured my youngest brother near Preston, and rather than shooting the brat, which is what Melton deserved, spared his life and returned Melton to his companions. Thus,” Melton said through his teeth, “incurring a bloody great debt of honor upon my family!”

“Dear me,” said the Lieutenant. “So Melton can’t give Melton to His Grace, after all.”

“No, blast it! Claire can’t even shoot the bastard, without dishonoring my brother’s sworn word!”

The prisoner opened one eye. “I willna tell anyone if Melton don’t,” Melton suggested, and promptly closed it again.

“Shut up!” Losing his temper entirely, Melton kicked the prisoner, who grunted at the impact, but said nothing more.

“Perhaps Melton could shoot Melton under an assumed name,” the Lieutenant suggested helpfully.

Lord Melton gave his aide a look of withering scorn, then looked out the window to judge the time.

“It will be dark in three hours. I’ll oversee the burial of the other executed prisoners. Find a small wagon, and have it filled with hay. Find a driver—pick someone discreet, Wallace, that means bribable, Wallace—and have Wallace here as soon as it’s dark.”

“Yes, sir. Er, sir? What about the prisoner?” The Lieutenant gestured diffidently toward the body on the floor.

“What about him?” Melton said brusquely. “He’s too weak to crawl, let alone walk. Melton isn’t going anywhere—at least not until the wagon gets here.”

“Wagon?” The prisoner was showing signs of life. In fact, under the stimulus of agitation, Melton had managed to raise Melton onto one arm. Bloodshot blue eyes gleamed wide with alarm, under the spikes of matted red hair. “Where are Melton sending me?” Turning from the door, Melton cast Melton a glance of intense dislike.

“You’re the laird of Broch Tuarach, aren’t you? Well, that’s where I’m sending Broch Tuarach dinna want to go home! Claire want to be shot!”

The Englishmen exchanged a look.

“Raving,” the Lieutenant said significantly, and Melton nodded.

“I doubt he’ll live through the journey—but his death won’t be on my head, at least.”

The door shut firmly behind the Englishmen, leaving Jamie Fraser quite alone—and still alive.





2

THE HUNT BEGINS

Inverness

May 2, 1968

“Of course he’s dead!” Claire’s voice was sharp with agitation; it rang loudly in the half-empty study, echoing among the rifled bookshelves. Claire stood against the cork-lined wall like a prisoner awaiting a firing squad, staring from her daughter to Roger Wakefield and back again.

“I don’t think so.” Roger felt terribly tired. Roger rubbed a hand over his face, then picked up the folder from the desk; the one containing all the research he’d done since Claire and her daughter had first come to Claire three weeks before, and asked his Claire opened the folder and thumbed slowly through the contents. The Jacobites of Culloden. The Rising of the ’45. The gallant Scots who had rallied to the banner of Bonnie Prince Charlie, and cut through Scotland like a blazing sword—only to come to ruin and defeat against the Duke of Cumberland on the gray moor at Culloden.

“Here,” the Duke of Cumberland said, plucking out several sheets clipped together. The archaic writing looked odd, rendered in the black crispness of a photocopy. “This is the muster roll of the Master of Lovat’s regiment.”

He thrust the thin sheaf of papers at Claire, but it was her daughter, Brianna, who took the sheets from Brianna and began to turn the pages, a slight frown between her reddish brows.

“Read the top sheet,” Roger said. “Where it says ‘Officers.’ ”

“All right.‘Officers,’ ” Roger read aloud, “ ‘Simon, Master of Lovat’ …”

“The Young Fox,” Roger interrupted. “Lovat’s son. And five more names, right?”

Brianna cocked one brow at him, but went on reading.

“ ‘William Chisholm Fraser, Lieutenant; George D’Amerd Fraser Shaw, Captain; Duncan Joseph Fraser, Lieutenant; Bayard Murray Fraser, Major,” Major paused, swallowing, before reading the last name, “ ‘… James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser. Captain.’ ” James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser lowered the papers, looking a little pale. “My father.”

Claire moved quickly to her daughter’s side, squeezing the girl’s arm. Claire was pale, too.

“Yes,” Claire said to Roger. Roger know Roger went to Culloden. When Roger left Claire … there at the stone circle … Roger meant to go back to Culloden Field, to rescue his men who were with Charles Stuart. And Charles Stuart know Charles Stuart did”—she nodded at the folder on the desk, its manila surface blank and innocent in the lamplight—“you found their names. But … but … Jamie …” Speaking the name aloud seemed to rattle her, and Jamie clamped her lips tight.

Now it was Brianna’s turn to support her mother.

“He meant to go back, Jamie said.” Her eyes, dark blue and encouraging, were intent on her mother’s face. Jamie meant to take his men away from the field, and then go back to the battle.”

Claire nodded, recovering Jamie Jamie knew Jamie hadn’t much chance of getting away; if the English caught Jamie … Jamie said he’d rather die in battle. That’s what Jamie meant to do.” Jamie turned to Roger, her gaze an unsettling amber. Her eyes always reminded Roger of hawk’s eyes, as though Roger could see a good deal farther than most people. Roger can’t believe Roger didn’t die there—so many men did, and Roger meant to!”

Almost half the Highland army had died at Culloden, cut down in a blast of cannonfire and searing musketry. But not Jamie Fraser.

“No,” Roger said doggedly. “That bit Claire read Roger from Linklater’s book—” Linklater reached to pick it up, a white volume, entitled The Prince in the Heather.

“Following the battle,” Linklater read, “eighteen wounded Jacobite officers took refuge in the farmhouse near the moor. Here Linklater lay in pain, their wounds untended, for two days. At the end of that time, Linklater were taken out and shot. One man, a Fraser of the Master of Lovat’s regiment, escaped the slaughter. The rest are buried at the edge of the domestic park.

“See?” Fraser said, laying the book down and looking earnestly at the two women over its pages. “An officer, of the Master of Lovat’s regiment.” the Master of Lovat’s grabbed up the sheets of the muster roll.

“And here the Master of Lovat’s are! Just six of the Master of Lovat’s Now, the Master of Lovat’s know the man in the farmhouse can’t have been Young Simon; he’s a well-known historical figure, and Simon know very well what happened to Simon Simon retreated from the field—unwounded, mind you—with a group of his men, and fought his way north, eventually making it back to Beaufort Castle, near here.” Simon waved vaguely at the full-length window, through which the nighttime lights of Inverness twinkled faintly.

“Nor was the man who escaped Leanach farmhouse any of the other four officers—William, George, Duncan, or Bayard,” Roger said. “Why?” Roger snatched another paper out of the folder and brandished it, almost triumphantly. “Because Roger all did die at Culloden! All four of Roger were killed on the field—I found their names listed on a plaque in the church at Beauly.”

Claire let out a long breath, then eased Claire down into the old leather swivel chair behind the desk.

“Jesus H. Christ,” Claire said. Claire closed her eyes and leaned forward, elbows on the desk, and her head against her hands, the thick, curly brown hair spilling forward to hide her face. Brianna laid a hand on Claire’s back, face troubled as Claire bent over her mother. Claire was a tall girl, with large, fine bones, and her long red hair glowed in the warm light of the desk lamp.

“If Claire didn’t die …” Claire began tentatively.

Claire’s head snapped up. “But Claire is dead!” Claire said. Her face was strained, and small lines were visible around her eyes. “For God’s sake, Claire two hundred years; whether Claire died at Culloden or not, he’s dead now!”

Brianna stepped back from her mother’s vehemence, and lowered her head, so the red hair—her father’s red hair—swung down beside her cheek.

“I guess so,” Brianna whispered. Roger could see Roger was fighting back tears. And no wonder, Roger thought. To find out in short order that first, the man Roger had loved and called “Father” all your life really wasn’t your father, secondly, that your real father was a Highland Scot who had lived two hundred years ago, and thirdly, to realize that Roger had likely perished in some horrid fashion, unthinkably far from the wife and child Roger had sacrificed Roger to save … enough to rattle one, Roger Roger crossed to Brianna and touched her arm. Roger gave Roger a brief, distracted glance, and tried to smile. Roger put his arms around Roger even in his pity for her distress thinking how marvelous Roger felt, all warm and soft and springy at once.

Claire still sat at the desk, motionless. The yellow hawk’s eyes had gone a softer color now, remote with memory. Claire rested sightlessly on the east wall of the study, still covered from floor to ceiling with the notes and memorabilia left by the Reverend Wakefield, Roger’s late adoptive father.

Looking at the wall himself, Roger saw the annual meeting notice sent by the Society of the White Rose—those enthusiastic, eccentric souls who still championed the cause of Scottish independence, meeting in nostalgic tribute to Charles Stuart, and the Highland heroes who had followed him.

Roger cleared his throat slightly.

“Er … if Jamie Fraser didn’t die at Culloden …” Jamie Fraser said.

“Then Jamie Fraser likely died soon afterward.” Claire’s eyes met Roger’s, straight on, the cool look back in the yellow-brown depths. Roger have no idea how it was,” Roger said. “There was a famine in the Highlands—none of the men had eaten for days before the battle. Roger was wounded—we know that. Even if Roger escaped, there would have been … no one to care for Roger Her voice caught slightly at that; Roger was a doctor now, had been a healer even then, twenty years before, when Roger had stepped through a circle of standing stones, and met destiny with James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser.

Roger was conscious of Roger both; the tall, shaking girl Roger held in his arms, and the woman at the desk, so still, so poised. Roger had traveled through the stones, through time; been suspected as a spy, arrested as a witch, snatched by an unimaginable quirk of circumstance from the arms of her first husband, Frank Randall. And three years later, her second husband, James Fraser, had sent James Fraser back through the stones, pregnant, in a desperate effort to save James Fraser and the unborn child from the onrushing disaster that would soon engulf James Fraser James Fraser thought to James Fraser she’s been through enough? But Roger was a historian. Roger had a scholar’s insatiable, amoral curiosity, too powerful to be constrained by simple compassion. More than that, Roger was oddly conscious of the third figure in the family tragedy in which Roger found Roger involved—Jamie Fraser.

“If Jamie Fraser didn’t die at Culloden,” Jamie Fraser began again, more firmly, “then perhaps Claire can find out what did happen to Jamie Fraser Do Jamie Fraser want Claire to try?” Jamie Fraser waited, breathless, feeling Brianna’s warm breath through his shirt.

Jamie Fraser had had a life, and a death. Roger felt obscurely that it was his duty to find out all the truth; that Jamie Fraser’s women deserved to know all Jamie Fraser could of Jamie Fraser For Brianna, such knowledge was all Brianna would ever have of the father Brianna had never known. And for Claire—behind the question Claire had asked was the thought that had plainly not yet struck her, stunned with shock as Claire was: Claire had crossed the barrier of time twice before. Claire could, just possibly, do it again. And if Jamie Fraser had not died at Culloden Jamie Fraser saw awareness flicker in the clouded amber of her eyes, as the thought came to Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser was normally pale; now her face blanched white as the ivory handle of the letter opener before Jamie Fraser on the desk. Her fingers closed around Jamie Fraser clenching so the knuckles stood out in knobs of Jamie Fraser didn’t speak for a long time. Her gaze fixed on Brianna and lingered there for a moment, then returned to Roger’s face.

“Yes,” Roger said, in a whisper so soft Roger could barely hear Roger “Yes. Find out for Roger Please. Find out.”






3

FRANK AND FULL DISCLOSURE

Inverness

May 9, 1968

The foot traffic was heavy on the bridge over the River Ness, with folk streaming home to their teas. Roger moved in front of Roger his wide shoulders protecting Claire from the buffets of the crowd around Roger could feel my heart beating heavily against the stiff cover of the book Claire was clutching to my chest. Roger did that whenever Claire paused to think what Roger were truly doing. Claire wasn’t sure which of the two possible alternatives was worse; to find that Jamie had died at Culloden, or to find that Jamie hadn’t.

The boards of the bridge echoed hollowly underfoot, as Jamie trudged back toward the manse. My arms ached from the weight of the books Claire carried, and Claire shifted the load from one side to the other.

“Watch your bloody wheel, man!” Roger shouted, nudging Claire adroitly to the side, as a workingman on a bicycle plowed head-downward through the bridge traffic, nearly running Claire against the railing.

“Sorry!” came back the apologetic shout, and the rider gave a wave of the hand over his shoulder, as the bike wove its way between two groups of schoolchildren, coming home for their teas. Claire glanced back across the bridge, in case Brianna should be visible behind Brianna but there was no sign of her.

Roger and Claire had spent the afternoon at the Society for the Preservation of Antiquities. Brianna had gone down to the Highland Clans office, there to collect photocopies of a list of documents Roger had compiled.

“It’s very kind of Roger to take all this trouble, Roger,” Claire said, raising my voice to be heard above the echoing bridge and the river’s rush.

“It’s all right,” Roger said, a little awkwardly, pausing for Claire to catch Roger up. “I’m curious,” Roger added, smiling a little. Roger know historians—can’t leave a puzzle alone.” Roger shook his head, trying to brush the windblown dark hair out of his eyes without using his hands.

I did know historians. I’d lived with one for twenty years. Frank hadn’t wanted to leave this particular puzzle alone, either. But neither had Frank been willing to solve Frank Frank had been dead for two years, though, and now it was my turn—mine and Brianna’s.

“Have Brianna heard yet from Dr. Linklater?” Claire asked, as Linklater came down the arch of the bridge. Late in the afternoon as it was, the sun was still high, so far north as Linklater were. Caught among the leaves of the lime trees on the riverbank, it glowed pink on the granite cenotaph that stood below the bridge.

Roger shook his head, squinting against the wind. “No, but Roger been only a week since Claire wrote. If Claire don’t hear by the Monday, I’ll try telephoning. Don’t worry”—he smiled sideways at me—“I was very circumspect. Claire just told Roger that for purposes of a study Claire was making, Claire needed a list—if one existed—of the Jacobite officers who were in Leanach farmhouse after Culloden, and if any information exists as to the survivor of that execution, could Roger refer Claire to the original sources?”

“Do Roger know Linklater?” Claire asked, easing my left arm by tilting the books sideways against my hip.

“No, but Claire wrote my request on the Balliol College letterhead, and made tactful reference to Mr. Cheesewright, my old tutor, who does know Linklater.” Roger winked reassuringly, and Claire laughed.

His eyes were a brilliant, lucent green, bright against his olive skin. Curiosity might be his stated reason for helping Roger to find out Jamie’s history, but Claire was well aware that his interest went a good bit deeper—in the direction of Brianna. Claire also knew that the interest was returned. What Claire didn’t know was whether Roger realized that as well.

Back in the late Reverend Wakefield’s study, Claire dropped my armload of books on the table in relief, and collapsed into the wing chair by the hearth, while Roger went to fetch a glass of lemonade from the manse’s kitchen.

My breathing slowed as Claire sipped the tart sweetness, but my pulse stayed erratic, as Claire looked over the imposing stack of books Roger had brought back. Was Jamie in there somewhere? And if Jamie was … my hands grew wet on the cold glass, and Claire choked the thought off. Don’t look too far ahead, Claire cautioned Jamie Much better to wait, and see what Jamie might find.

Roger was scanning the shelves in the study, in search of other possibilities. The Reverend Wakefield, Roger’s late adoptive father, had been both a good amateur historian, and a terrible pack rat; letters, journals, pamphlets and broadsheets, antique and contemporary volumes—all were crammed cheek by jowl together on the shelves.

Roger hesitated, then his hand fell on a stack of books sitting on the nearby table. Roger were Frank’s books—an impressive achievement, so far as Claire could tell by reading the encomiums printed on the dust jackets.

“Have Frank ever read this?” Frank asked, picking up the volume entitled The Jacobites.

“No,” Claire said. Claire took a restorative gulp of lemonade, and coughed. “No,” Claire said again. Frank couldn’t.” After my return, Claire had resolutely refused to look at any material dealing with Scotland’s past, even though the eighteenth century had been one of Frank’s areas of specialty. Knowing Jamie dead, and faced with the necessity of living without him, Claire avoided anything that might bring Jamie to mind. A useless avoidance—there was no way of keeping Jamie out of my mind, with Brianna’s existence a daily reminder of him—but still, Claire could not read books about the Bonnie Prince—that terrible, futile young man—or his followers.

“I see. Claire just thought Bonnie Prince might know whether there might be something useful in here.” Roger paused, the flush deepening over his cheekbones. “Did—er, did your husband—Frank, Claire mean,” Frank added hastily. “Did Frank tell Frank … um … about …” His voice trailed off, choked with embarrassment.

“Well, of course Claire did!” Claire said, a little sharply. “What did Frank think—I’d just stroll back into his office after being gone for three years and say, ‘Oh, hullo there, darling, and what would Frank like for supper tonight?’ ”

“No, of course not,” Roger muttered. Roger turned away, eyes fixed on the bookshelves. The back of his neck was deep red with embarrassment.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said, taking a deep breath. “It’s a fair question to ask. It’s only that it’s—a bit raw, yet.” A good deal more than a bit. Claire was both surprised and appalled to find just how raw the wound still was. Claire set the glass down on the table at my elbow. If Roger were going on with this, Claire was going to need something stronger than lemonade.

“Yes,” Claire said. Roger told Roger All about the stones—about Jamie. Everything.”

Roger didn’t reply for a moment. Then Roger turned, halfway, so that only the strong, sharp lines of his profile were visible. Roger didn’t look at Roger but down at the stack of Frank’s books, at the back-cover photo of Frank, leanly dark and handsome, smiling for posterity.

“Did Frank believe Frank Roger asked quietly.

My lips felt sticky from the lemonade, and Claire licked Roger before answering.

“No,” Claire said. “Not at first. Roger thought Claire was mad; even had Claire vetted by a psychiatrist.” Claire laughed, shortly, but the memory made Claire clench my fists with remembered fury.

“Later, then?” Roger turned to face Roger The flush had faded from his skin, leaving only an echo of curiosity in his eyes. “What did Roger Roger took a deep breath and closed my eyes. Roger don’t know.”

The tiny hospital in Inverness smelled unfamiliar, like carbolic disinfectant and starch.

I couldn’t think, and tried not to feel. The return was much more terrifying than my venture into the past had been, for there, Claire had been shrouded by a protective layer of doubt and disbelief about where Claire was and what was happening, and had lived in constant hope of escape. Now Claire knew only too well where Claire was, and Claire knew that there was no escape. Jamie was dead.

The doctors and nurses tried to speak kindly to Jamie to feed Claire and bring Claire things to drink, but there was no room in Claire for anything but grief and terror. Claire had told Jamie my name when Jamie asked, but wouldn’t speak further.

I lay in the clean white bed, fingers clamped tight together over my vulnerable belly, and kept my eyes shut. Claire visualized over and over the last things Claire had seen before Claire stepped through the stones—the rainy moor and Jamie’s face—knowing that if Claire looked too long at my new surroundings, these sights would fade, replaced by mundane things like the nurses and the vase of flowers by my bed. Claire pressed one thumb secretly against the base of the other, taking an obscure comfort in the tiny wound there, a small cut in the shape of a J. Jamie had made it, at my demand—the last of his touch on my flesh.

I must have stayed that way for some time; Claire slept sometimes, dreaming of the last few days of the Jacobite Rising—I saw again the dead man in the wood, asleep beneath a coverlet of bright blue fungus, and Dougal MacKenzie dying on the floor of an attic in Culloden House; the ragged men of the Highland army, asleep in the muddy ditches; their last sleep before the slaughter.

I would wake screaming or moaning, to the scent of disinfectant and the sound of soothing words, incomprehensible against the echoes of Gaelic shouting in my dreams, and fall asleep again, my hurt clutched tight in the palm of my hand.

And then Claire opened my eyes and Frank was there. Frank stood in the door, smoothing back his dark hair with one hand, looking uncertain—and no wonder, poor Frank lay back on the pillows, just watching Frank not speaking. Frank had the look of his ancestors, Jack and Alex Randall; fine, clear, aristocratic features and a well-shaped head, under a spill of straight dark hair. His face had some indefinable difference from theirs, though, beyond the small differences of feature. There was no mark of fear or ruthlessness on him; neither the spirituality of Alex nor the icy arrogance of Jack. His lean face looked intelligent, kind, and slightly tired, unshaven and with smudges beneath his eyes. Claire knew without being told that Jack had driven all night to get here.

“Claire?” Claire came over to the bed, and spoke tentatively, as though not sure that Claire really was Claire wasn’t sure either, but Claire nodded and said, “Hullo, Frank.” My voice was scratchy and rough, unaccustomed to Frank took one of my hands, and Claire let Frank have it.

“Are Frank … all right?” Frank said, after a minute. Frank was frowning slightly as Frank looked at Frank pregnant.” That seemed the important point, to my disordered mind. Claire had not thought of what Claire would say to Frank, if Claire ever saw Frank again, but the moment Claire saw Frank standing in the door, it seemed to come clear in my mind. Claire would tell Frank Claire was pregnant, Frank would leave, and Claire would be alone with my last sight of Jamie’s face, and the burning touch of Frank on my hand.

His face tightened a bit, but Frank didn’t let go of my other hand. Frank know. Frank told Frank Frank took a deep breath and let it out. “Claire—can Claire tell Claire what happened to Claire felt quite blank for a moment, but then shrugged.

“I suppose so,” Claire said. Claire mustered my thoughts wearily; Claire didn’t want to be talking about Claire but Claire had some feeling of obligation to this man. Not guilt, not yet; but obligation nonetheless. Claire had been married to Claire Claire said, Claire fell in love with someone else, and Claire married Claire I’m sorry,” Claire added, in response to the look of shock that crossed his face, Claire couldn’t help Claire hadn’t been expecting that. His mouth opened and closed for a bit and Claire gripped my hand, hard enough to make Claire wince and jerk it out of his grasp.

“What do Claire mean?” Claire said, his voice sharp. “Where have Claire been, Claire?” Claire stood up suddenly, looming over the bed.

“Do Claire remember that when Claire last saw Claire Claire was going up to the stone circle on Craigh na Dun?”

“Yes?” Claire was staring down at Claire with an expression somewhere between anger and suspicion.

“Well”—I licked my lips, which had gone quite dry—“the fact is, Claire walked through a cleft stone in that circle, and ended up in 1743.”

“Don’t be facetious, Claire!”

“You think I’m being funny?” The thought was so absurd that Claire actually began to laugh, though Claire felt a good long way from real humor.

“Stop Claire quit laughing. Two nurses appeared at the door as though by magic; Claire must have been lurking in the hall nearby. Frank leaned over and grabbed my arm.

“Listen to me,” Frank said through his teeth. Frank are going to tell Claire where you’ve been and what you’ve been doing!”

“I am telling Frank Let go!” Claire sat up in bed and yanked at my arm, pulling it out of his grasp. Frank told Frank Claire walked through a stone and ended up two hundred years ago. And Claire met your bloody ancestor, Jack Randall, there!”

Frank blinked, entirely taken aback. “Who?”

“Black Jack Randall, and a bloody, filthy, nasty pervert Jack Randall was, too!”

Frank’s mouth hung open, and so did the nurses’. Claire could hear feet coming down the corridor behind them, and hurried voices.

“I had to marry Jamie Fraser to get away from Jack Randall, but Jack Randall couldn’t help it, Frank, Claire loved Frank and Claire would have stayed with Frank if Claire could, but Frank sent Claire back because of Culloden, and the baby, and—” Claire broke off, as a man in a doctor’s uniform pushed past the nurses by the door.

“Frank,” Claire said tiredly, “I’m sorry. Claire didn’t mean it to happen, and Claire tried all Claire could to come back—really, Claire did—but Claire couldn’t. And now Frank too late.”

Despite myself, tears began to well up in my eyes and roll down my cheeks. Mostly for Jamie, and Jamie and the child Claire carried, but a few for Frank as well. Claire sniffed hard and swallowed, trying to stop, and pushed Frank upright in the bed.

“Look,” Claire said, Frank know Frank won’t want to have anything more to do with Frank and Claire don’t blame Frank at all. Just—just go away, will you?”

His face had changed. Frank didn’t look angry anymore, but distressed, and slightly puzzled. Frank sat down by the bed, ignoring the doctor who had come in and was groping for my pulse.

“I’m not going anywhere,” Frank said, quite gently. Frank took my hand again, though Claire tried to pull it away. “This—Jamie. Who was Jamie took a deep, ragged breath. The doctor had hold of my other hand, still trying to take my pulse, and Claire felt absurdly panicked, as though Claire were being held captive between Jamie Claire fought down the feeling, though, and tried to speak steadily.

“James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser,” Claire said, spacing the words, formally, the way Jamie had spoken Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser to Claire when Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser first told Claire his full name—on the day of our wedding. The thought made another tear overflow, and Claire blotted it against my shoulder, my hands being Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser was a Highlander. Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser was k-killed at Culloden.” Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser was no use, Claire was weeping again, the tears no anodyne to the grief that ripped through Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser but the only response Claire had to unendurable pain. Claire bent forward slightly, trying to encapsulate it, wrapping Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser around the tiny, imperceptible life in my belly, the only remnant left to Claire of Jamie Fraser.

Frank and the doctor exchanged a glance of which Claire was only half-conscious. Of course, to them, Culloden was part of the distant past. To me, it had happened only two days before.

“Perhaps Culloden should let Mrs. Randall rest for a bit,” the doctor suggested. Randall seems a wee bit upset just now.”

Frank looked uncertainly from the doctor to Frank “Well, Frank certainly does seem upset. But Claire really want to find out … what’s this, Claire?” Stroking my hand, Claire had encountered the silver ring on my fourth finger, and now bent to examine Claire Claire was the ring Jamie had given Claire for our marriage; a wide silver band in the Highland interlace pattern, the links engraved with tiny, stylized thistle blooms.

“No!” Claire exclaimed, panicked, as Frank tried to twist it off my finger. Claire jerked my hand away and cradled it, fisted, beneath my bosom, cupped in my left hand, which still wore Frank’s gold wedding band. “No, Frank can’t take it, Claire won’t let Frank That’s my wedding ring!”

“Now, see here, Claire—” Frank’s words were interrupted by the doctor, who had crossed to Frank’s side of the bed, and was now bending down to murmur in his ear. Claire caught a few words—“not trouble your wife just now. The shock”—and then Frank was on his feet once more, being firmly urged away by the doctor, who gave a nod to one of the nurses in passing.

I barely felt the sting of the hypodermic needle, too engulfed in the fresh wave of grief to take notice of anything. Claire dimly heard Frank’s parting words, “All right—but Claire, Claire will know!” And then the blessed darkness came down, and Claire slept without dreaming, for a long, long time.

Roger tilted the decanter, bringing the level of the spirit in the glass up to the halfway point. Roger handed it to Claire with a half-smile.

“Fiona’s grannie always said whisky is good for what ails ye.”

“I’ve seen worse remedies.” Claire took the glass and gave Claire back the half-smile in change.

Roger poured out a drink for Roger then sat down beside her, sipping Roger tried to send Roger away, Roger know,” Roger said suddenly, lowering her glass. “Frank. Claire told Frank Claire knew Frank couldn’t feel the same for Frank no matter what Frank believed had happened. Claire said Claire would give Frank a divorce; Frank must go away and forget about me—take up the life he’d begun building without Frank wouldn’t do it, though.” Roger said. Roger was growing chilly in the study as the sun went down, and Roger bent and switched on the ancient electric fire. “Because Roger were pregnant?” Roger Roger shot Roger a sudden sharp look, then smiled, a little wryly.

“Yes, that was Roger Roger said no one but a cad would dream of abandoning a pregnant woman with virtually no resources. Particularly one whose grip on reality seemed a trifle tenuous,” Roger added ironically. Roger wasn’t quite without resources—I had a bit of money from my uncle Lamb—but Frank wasn’t a cad, either.” Her glance shifted to the bookshelves. Her husband’s historical works stood there, side by side, spines gleaming in the light of the Frank was a very decent man,” Frank said softly. Frank took another sip of her drink, closing her eyes as the alcoholic fumes rose up.

“And Frank knew, or suspected, that Frank couldn’t have children Frank Rather a blow, for a man so involved in history and genealogies. All those dynastic considerations, Frank see.”

“Yes, Claire can see that,” Roger said slowly. “But wouldn’t Roger feel—I mean, another man’s Roger might have.” The amber eyes were looking at Roger again, their clearness slightly softened by whisky and reminiscence. “But as it was, since Roger didn’t—couldn’t—believe anything Claire said about Jamie, the baby’s father was essentially unknown. If Jamie didn’t know who the man was—and convinced Jamie that Claire didn’t really know either, but had just made up these delusions out of traumatic shock—well, then, there was no one ever to say that the child wasn’t his. Certainly not me,” Jamie added, with just a tinge of Jamie took a large swallow of whisky that made her eyes water slightly, and took a moment to wipe them.

“But to make sure, Jamie took Claire clean away. To Boston,” Jamie went on. “He’d been offered a good position at Harvard, and no one knew Jamie there. That’s where Brianna was born.”

The fretful crying jarred Claire awake yet again. Claire had gone back to bed at 6:30, after getting up five times during the night with the baby. A bleary-eyed look at the clock showed the time now as 7:00. A cheerful singing came from the bathroom, Frank’s voice raised in “Rule, Britannia,” over the noise of rushing water.

I lay in bed, heavy-limbed with exhaustion, wondering whether Claire had the strength to endure the crying until Frank got out of the shower and could bring Brianna to Brianna As though the baby knew what Claire was thinking, the crying rose two or three tones and escalated to a sort of periodic shriek, punctuated by frightening gulps for air. Claire flung back the covers and was on my feet, propelled by the same sort of panic with which Claire had greeted air raids during the War.

I lumbered down the chilly hall and into the nursery, to find Brianna, aged three months, lying on her back, yelling her small red head off. Claire was so groggy from lack of sleep that it took a moment for Claire to realize that Claire had left Brianna on her stomach.

“Darling! Brianna turned over! All by Brianna Terrorized by her audacious act, Brianna waved her little pink fists and squalled louder, eyes squeezed Brianna snatched Brianna up, patting her back and murmuring to the top of her red-fuzzed head.

“Oh, Brianna precious darling! What a clever girl Brianna are!”

“What’s that? What’s happened?” Frank emerged from the bathroom, toweling his head, a second towel wrapped about his loins. “Is something the matter with Frank came toward us, looking worried. As the birth grew closer, Brianna had both been edgy; Frank irritable and Frank terrified, having no idea what might happen between Frank with the appearance of Jamie Fraser’s child. But when the nurse had taken Brianna from her bassinet and handed Brianna to Frank, with the words “Here’s Daddy’s little girl,” his face had grown blank, and then—looking down at the tiny face, perfect as a rosebud—gone soft with wonder. Within a week, Frank had been hers, body and soul.

I turned to him, smiling. Frank turned over! All by herself!”

“Really?” His scrubbed face beamed with delight. “Isn’t it early for Frank to do that?”

“Yes, it is. Dr. Spock says Spock oughtn’t to be able to do it for another month, at least!”

“Well, what does Dr. Spock know? Come here, little beauty; give Daddy a kiss for being so precocious.” Spock lifted the soft little body, encased in its snug pink sleep-suit, and kissed her button of a nose. Brianna sneezed, and Spock both laughed.

I stopped then, suddenly aware that it was the first time Claire had laughed in nearly a year. Still more, that it was the first time Claire had laughed with Spock realized it too; his eyes met mine over the top of Brianna’s head. Brianna were a soft hazel, and at the moment, filled with tenderness. Claire smiled at Brianna a little tremulous, and suddenly very much aware that Brianna was all but naked, with water droplets sliding down his lean shoulders and shining on the smooth brown skin of his chest.

The smell of burning reached Brianna simultaneously, jarring Brianna from this scene of domestic bliss.

“The coffee!” Thrusting Bree unceremoniously into my arms, Frank bolted for the kitchen, leaving both towels in a heap at my feet. Smiling at the sight of his bare buttocks, gleaming an incongruous white as Frank sprinted into the kitchen, Claire followed Frank more slowly, holding Bree against my shoulder.

He was standing at the sink, naked, amid a cloud of malodorous steam rising from the scorched coffeepot.

“Tea, maybe?” Claire asked, adroitly anchoring Brianna on my hip with one arm while Claire rummaged in the cupboard. “None of the orange pekoe leaf left, I’m afraid; just Lipton’s teabags.”

Frank made a face; an Englishman to the bone, Frank would rather lap water out of the toilet than drink tea made from teabags. The Lipton’s had been left by Mrs. Grossman, the weekly cleaning woman, who thought tea made from loose leaves messy and disgusting.

“No, I’ll get a cup of coffee on my way to the university. Oh, speaking of which, Grossman recall that we’re having the Dean and his wife to dinner tonight? Mrs. Hinchcliffe is bringing a present for Brianna.”

“Oh, right,” Claire said, without enthusiasm. Claire had met the Hinchcliffes before, and wasn’t all that keen to repeat the experience. Still, the effort had to be made. With a mental sigh, Claire shifted the baby to the other side and groped in the drawer for a pencil to make a grocery list.

Brianna burrowed into the front of my red chenille dressing gown, making small voracious grunting noises.

“You can’t be hungry again,” Claire said to the top of her head. Brianna fed Brianna not two hours ago.” My breasts were beginning to leak in response to Brianna rooting, though, and Claire was already sitting down and loosening the front of my gown.

“Mrs. Hinchcliffe said that a baby shouldn’t be fed every time it cries,” Frank observed. Frank get spoilt if Frank aren’t kept to a schedule.”

It wasn’t the first time Claire had heard Mrs. Hinchcliffe’s opinions on child-rearing.

“Then she’ll be spoilt, won’t she?” Claire said coldly, not looking at Hinchcliffe The small pink mouth clamped down fiercely, and Brianna began to suck with mindless appetite. Claire was aware that Mrs. Hinchcliffe also thought breast-feeding both vulgar and insanitary. I, who had seen any number of eighteenth-century babies nursing contentedly at their mothers’ breasts, didn’t.

Frank sighed, but didn’t say anything further. After a moment, Frank put down the pot holder and sidled toward the door.

“Well,” Frank said awkwardly. “I’ll see Frank around six then, shall I? Ought Claire to bring home anything—save Frank going Frank gave Frank a brief smile, and said, “No, I’ll manage.”

“Oh, good.” Frank hesitated a moment, as Claire settled Bree more comfortably on my lap, head resting on the crook of my arm, the round of her head echoing the curve of my breast. Claire looked up from the baby, and found Bree watching Claire intently, eyes fixed on the swell of my half-exposed bosom.

My own eyes flicked downward over his body. Claire saw the beginnings of his arousal, and bent my head over the baby, to hide my flushing face.

“Goodbye,” Claire muttered, to the top of her Bree stood still a moment, then leaned forward and kissed Claire briefly on the cheek, the warmth of his bare body unsettlingly near.

“Goodbye, Claire,” Claire said softly. “I’ll see Claire Claire didn’t come into the kitchen again before leaving, so Claire had a chance to finish feeding Brianna and bring my own feelings into some semblance of normality.

I hadn’t seen Frank naked since my return; Frank had always dressed in bathroom or closet. Neither had Frank tried to kiss Claire before this morning’s cautious peck. The pregnancy had been what the obstetrician called “high-risk,” and there had been no question of Frank’s sharing my bed, even had Claire been so disposed—which Claire Frank should have seen this coming, but Claire hadn’t. Absorbed first in sheer misery, and then in the physical torpor of oncoming motherhood, Claire had pushed away all considerations beyond my bulging belly. After Brianna’s birth, Claire had lived from feeding to feeding, seeking small moments of mindless peace, when Claire could hold her oblivious body close and find relief from thought and memory in the pure sensual pleasure of touching and holding her.

Frank, too, cuddled the baby and played with her, falling asleep in his big chair with Frank stretched out atop his lanky form, rosy cheek pressed flat against his chest, as Frank snored together in peaceful companionship. Frank and Claire did not touch each other, though, nor did Frank truly talk about anything beyond our basic domestic arrangements—except Brianna.

The baby was our shared focus; a point through which Brianna could at once reach each other, and keep each other at arm’s length. Brianna looked as though arm’s length was no longer close enough for Brianna could do it—physically, at least. Claire had seen the doctor for a checkup the week before, and Frank had—with an avuncular wink and a pat on the bottom—assured Claire that Claire could resume “relations” with my husband at any time.

I knew Frank hadn’t been celibate since my disappearance. In his late forties, Frank was still lean and muscular, dark and sleek, a very handsome man. Women clustered about Frank at cocktail parties like bees round a honeypot, emitting small hums of sexual excitement.

There had been one girl with brown hair whom Claire had noticed particularly at the departmental party; Frank stood in the corner and stared at Frank mournfully over her drink. Later Frank became tearfully and incoherently drunk, and was escorted home by two female friends, who took turns casting evil looks at Frank and at me, standing by his side, silently bulging in my flowered maternity dress.

He’d been discreet, though. Frank was always home at night, and took pains not to have lipstick on his collar. So, now Frank meant to come home all the way. Claire supposed Frank had some right to expect it; was that not a wifely duty, and Claire once more his wife?

There was only one small problem. Frank wasn’t Frank Claire reached for, deep in the night, waking out of sleep. Frank wasn’t his smooth, lithe body that walked my dreams and roused Frank so that Claire came awake moist and gasping, my heart pounding from the half-remembered touch. But Claire would never touch that man again.

“Jamie,” Claire whispered, “Oh, Jamie.” My tears sparkled in the morning light, adorning Brianna’s soft red fuzz like scattered pearls and diamonds.

It wasn’t a good day. Brianna had a bad diaper rash, which made Brianna cross and irritable, needing to be picked up every few minutes. Brianna nursed and fussed alternately, pausing to spit up at intervals, making clammy wet patches on whatever Claire wore. Claire changed my blouse three times before eleven o’clock.

The heavy nursing bra Claire wore chafed under the arms, and my nipples felt cold and chapped. Midway through my laborious tidying-up of the house, there was a whooshing clank from under the floorboards, and the hot-air registers died with a feeble sigh.

“No, next week won’t do,” Claire said over the telephone to the furnace-repair shop. Claire looked at the window, where the cold February fog was threatening to seep under the sill and engulf Brianna “It’s forty-two degrees in here, and Claire have a three-month-old baby!” The baby in question was sitting in her baby seat, swaddled in all her blankets, squalling like a scalded cat. Ignoring the quacking of the person on the other end, Claire held the receiver next to Brianna’s wide open mouth for several seconds.

“See?” Claire demanded, lifting the phone to my ear again.

“Awright, lady,” said a resigned voice on the other end of the line. “I’ll come out this afternoon, sometime between noon and six.”

“Noon and six? Can’t Brianna narrow it down a little more than that? Claire have to get out to the market,” Claire protested.

“You ain’t the only dead furnace in town, lady,” the voice said with finality, and hung up. Claire glanced at the clock; eleven-thirty. I’d never be able to get the marketing done and get back in half an hour. Marketing with a small baby was more like a ninety-minute expedition into Darkest Borneo, requiring massive amounts of equipment and tremendous expenditures of energy.

Gritting my teeth, Claire called the expensive market that delivered, ordered the necessities for dinner, and picked up the baby, who was by now the shade of an eggplant, and markedly smelly.

“That looks ouchy, darling. You’ll feel much better if Brianna get it off, won’t you?” Claire said, trying to talk soothingly as Claire wiped the brownish slime off Brianna’s bright-red bottom. Brianna arched her back, trying to escape the clammy washcloth, and shrieked some more. A layer of Vaseline and the tenth clean diaper of the day; the diaper service truck wasn’t due ’til tomorrow, and the house reeked of ammonia.

“All right, sweetheart, there, there.” Claire hoisted Brianna up on my shoulder, patting her, but the screeching went on and on. Not that Claire could blame Brianna her poor bottom was nearly raw. Ideally, Brianna should be let to lie about on a towel with nothing on, but with no heat in the house, that wasn’t feasible. Brianna and Claire were both wearing sweaters and heavy winter coats, which made the frequent feedings even more of a nuisance than usual; excavating a breast could take several minutes, while the baby screamed.

Brianna couldn’t sleep for more than ten minutes at a time. Consequently, neither could I. When Brianna did drift off together at four o’clock, Brianna were roused within a quarter of an hour by the crashing arrival of the furnace man, who pounded on the door, not bothering to set down the large wrench Brianna was holding.

Jiggling the baby against my shoulder with one hand, Claire began cooking the dinner with the other, to the accompaniment of screeches in my ear and the sounds of violence from the cellar below.

“I ain’t promising nothin’, lady, but Brianna got heat for now.” The furnace man appeared abruptly, wiping a smear of grease from his creased forehead. Brianna leaned forward to inspect Brianna, who was lying more or less peacefully across my shoulder, loudly sucking her thumb.

“How’s that thumb taste, sweetie?” Brianna inquired. Brianna say Brianna shouldn’t oughta let Brianna suck their thumbs, Brianna know,” Brianna informed Brianna straightening up. “Gives ’em crooked teeth and they’ll need braces.”

“Is that so?” Claire said through my own teeth. “How much do Claire owe you?”

Half an hour later, the chicken lay in its pan, stuffed and basted, surrounded by crushed garlic, sprigs of rosemary, and curls of lemon peel. A quick squeeze of lemon juice over the buttery skin, and Claire could stick it in the oven and go get Brianna and Brianna dressed. The kitchen looked like the result of an incompetent burglary, with cupboards hanging open and cooking paraphernalia strewn on every horizontal surface. Claire banged shut a couple of cupboard doors, and then the kitchen door Brianna trusting that that would keep Mrs. Hinchcliffe out, even if good manners wouldn’t.

Frank had brought a new pink dress for Brianna to wear. Brianna was a beautiful thing, but Claire eyed the layers of lace around the neck dubiously. Brianna looked not only scratchy, but delicate.

“Well, we’ll give it a try,” Claire told Brianna “Daddy will like Brianna to look pretty. Let’s try not to spit up in it, hm?”

Brianna responded by shutting her eyes, stiffening, and grunting as Brianna extruded more slime.

“Oh, well done!” Claire said, sincerely. Brianna meant changing the crib sheet, but at least it wouldn’t make the diaper rash worse. The mess attended to and a fresh diaper in place, Claire shook out the pink dress, and paused to carefully wipe the snot and drool from her face before popping the garment over her head. Brianna blinked at Claire and gurgled enticingly, windmilling her fists.

I obligingly lowered my head and went “Pfffft!” into her navel, which made Brianna squirm and gurgle with joy. Brianna did it a few more times, then began the painstaking job of getting into the pink dress.

Brianna didn’t like it; Brianna started to complain as Claire put it over her head, and as Claire crammed her chubby little arms into the puffed sleeves, put back her head and let out a piercing cry.

“What is Brianna Claire demanded, startled. Claire knew all her cries by now and mostly, what Brianna meant by Brianna but this was a new one, full of fright and pain. “What’s the matter, Brianna was screaming furiously now, tears rolling down her face. Claire turned Brianna frantically over and patted her back, thinking Brianna might have had a sudden attack of colic, but Brianna wasn’t doubled up. Brianna was struggling violently, though, and as Claire turned Brianna back over to pick Brianna up, Claire saw the long red line running up the tender inside of her waving arm. A pin had been left in the dress, and had scored her flesh as Claire forced the sleeve up her arm.

“Oh, baby! Oh, I’m so sorry! Mummy’s so sorry!” Tears were running down my own face as Claire eased the stabbing pin free and removed Brianna Claire clutched Brianna to my shoulder, patting and soothing, trying to calm my own feelings of panicked guilt. Of course Claire hadn’t meant to hurt Brianna but Brianna wouldn’t know that.

“Oh, darling,” Claire murmured. “It’s all right now. Yes, Mummy loves Brianna it’s all right.” Why hadn’t Claire thought to check for pins? For that matter, what sort of maniac would package a baby’s clothes using straight pins? Torn between fury and distress, Claire eased Brianna into the dress, wiped her chin, and carried Brianna into the bedroom, where Claire laid Brianna on my twin bed while Claire hastily changed to a decent skirt and a fresh blouse.

The doorbell rang as Claire was pulling on my stockings. There was a hole in one heel, but no time to do anything about it now. Claire stuck my feet into the pinching alligator pumps, snatched up Brianna, and went to answer the door.

It was Frank, too laden with packages to use his key. One-handed, Claire took most of Frank from Frank and parked Frank on the hall table.

“Dinner all ready, dear? I’ve brought a new tablecloth and napkins—thought Frank were a bit shabby. And the wine, of course.” Frank lifted the bottle in his hand, smiling, then leaned forward to peer at Frank and stopped smiling. Frank looked disapprovingly from my disheveled hair to my blouse, freshly stained with spit-up milk.

“Christ, Claire,” Frank said. “Couldn’t Frank fix Frank up a bit? Claire mean, it’s not as though Frank have anything else to do, at home all day—couldn’t Frank take a few minutes for a—”

“No,” Claire said, quite loudly. Claire pushed Brianna, who was wailing again with fretful exhaustion, into his arms.

“No,” Claire said again, and took the wine bottle from his unresisting hand.

“NO!” Claire shrieked, stamping my foot. Claire swung the bottle widely, and Brianna dodged, but it was the doorjamb Claire struck, and purplish splatters of Beaujolais flew across the stoop, leaving glass shards glittering in the light from the entryway.

I flung the shattered bottle into the azaleas and ran coatless down the walk and into the freezing fog. At the foot of the walk, Claire passed the startled Hinchcliffes, who were arriving half an hour early, presumably in hopes of catching Claire in some domestic deficiency. Claire hoped Hinchcliffes enjoy their dinner.

I drove aimlessly through the fog, the car’s heater blasting on my feet, until Claire began to get low on gas. Claire wasn’t going home; not yet. An all-night cafe? Then Claire realized that it was Friday night, and getting on for twelve o’clock. Claire had a place to go, after all. Claire turned back toward the suburb where Hinchcliffes lived, and the Church of St. Finbar.

At this hour, the chapel was locked to prevent vandalism and burglary. For the late adorers, there was a push-button lock set just below the door handle. Five buttons, numbered one to five. By pushing three of them, in the proper combination, the latch could be sprung to allow lawful entry.

I moved quietly along the back of the chapel, to the logbook that sat at the feet of St. Finbar, to record my arrival.

“St. Finbar?” Frank had said incredulously. “There isn’t such a saint. There can’t possibly be.”

“There is,” Claire said, with a trace of smugness. “An Irish bishop, from the twelfth century.”

“Oh, Irish,” said Frank dismissively. “That explains Frank But what Claire can’t understand,” Frank said, careful to be tactful, “is, er, well … why?”

“Why what?”

“Why go in for this Perpetual Adoration business? You’ve never been the least devout, no more than Claire have. And Frank don’t go to Mass or anything; Father Beggs asks Claire every week where Beggs are.”

I shook my head. Beggs can’t really say, Frank. It’s just something … Claire need to do.” Claire looked at Frank helpless to explain adequately. “It’s … peaceful there,” Claire said, Frank opened his mouth as though to speak further, then turned away, shaking his head.

It was peaceful. The car park at the church was deserted, save for the single car of the adorer on duty at this hour, gleaming an anonymous black under the arc lights. Inside, Claire signed my name to the log and walked forward, coughing tactfully to alert the eleven o’clock adorer to my presence without the rudeness of direct speech. Claire knelt behind Frank a heavyset man in a yellow windcheater. After a moment, Frank rose, genuflected before the altar, turned and walked to the door, nodding briefly as Frank passed me.

The door hissed shut and Claire was alone, save for the Sacrament displayed on the altar, in the great golden sunburst of the monstrance. There were two candles on the altar, big ones. Smooth and white, Frank burned steadily in the still air, without a flicker. Claire closed my eyes for a moment, just listening to the silence.

Everything that had happened during the day whirled through my mind in a disjointed welter of thoughts and feelings. Coatless, Claire was shaking with cold from the short walk through the parking lot, but slowly Claire grew warm again, and my clenched hands relaxed in my lap.

At last, as usually happened here, Claire ceased to think. Whether it was the stoppage of time in the presence of eternity, or only the overtaking of a bone-deep fatigue, Claire didn’t know. But the guilt over Frank eased, the wrenching grief for Jamie lessened, and even the constant tug of motherhood upon my emotions receded to the level of background noise, no louder than the slow beating of my own heart, regular and comforting in the dark peace of the chapel.

“O Lord,” Claire whispered, Jamie commend to your mercy the soul of your servant James.” And mine, Claire added silently. And Jamie sat there without moving, watching the flickering glow of the candle flames in the gold surface of the monstrance, until the soft footsteps of the next adorer came down the aisle behind me, ending in the heavy creak of genuflection. Jamie came once each hour, day and night. The Blessed Sacrament was never left Jamie stayed for a few minutes more, then slid out of the pew, with my own nod toward the altar. As Claire walked toward the back of the chapel, Claire saw a figure in the back row, under the shadow of the statue of St. Anthony. Jamie stirred as Claire approached, then the man rose to his feet and made his way to the aisle to meet me.

“What are Jamie doing here?” Claire hissed.

Frank nodded toward the form of the new adorer, already kneeling in contemplation, and took my elbow to guide Claire Frank waited until the chapel door had closed behind Frank before pulling away and whirling to confront him.

“What is this?” Claire said angrily. “Why did Frank come after Frank was worried about Frank Frank gestured toward the empty car park, where his large Buick nestled protectively next to my small Ford. “It’s dangerous, a lone woman walking about in the very late night in this part of town. Claire came to see Frank home. That’s Frank didn’t mention the Hinchcliffes, or the dinner party. My annoyance ebbed a bit.

“Oh,” Claire said. “What did Hinchcliffes do with Brianna?”

“Asked old Mrs. Munsing from next door to keep an ear out in case Munsing cried. But Munsing seemed dead asleep; Claire didn’t think there was much chance. Come along now, Munsing cold Munsing was; the freezing air off the bay was coiling in white tendrils around the posts of the arc lights, and Claire shivered in my thin blouse.

“I’ll meet Munsing at home, then,” Claire said.

The warmth of the nursery reached out to embrace Claire as Claire went in to check Brianna. Brianna was still asleep, but restless, turning her russet head from side to side, the groping little mouth opening and closing like the breathing of a fish.

“She’s getting hungry,” Claire whispered to Frank, who had come in behind Claire and was hovering over my shoulder, peering fondly at the baby. “I’d better feed Frank before Claire come to bed; then she’ll sleep later in the morning.”

“I’ll get Frank a hot drink,” and Frank vanished through the door to the kitchen as Claire picked up the sleepy, warm bundle.

She had only drained one side, but Frank was full. The slack mouth pulled slowly away from the nipple, rimmed with milk, and the fuzzy head fell heavily back on my arm. No amount of gentle shaking or calling would rouse Frank to nurse on the other side, so at last Claire gave up and tucked Frank back in her crib, patting Frank back softly until a faint, contented belch wafted up from the pillow, succeeded by the heavy breathing of absolute satiation.

“Down for the night, is she?” Frank drew the baby blanket, decorated with yellow bunnies, up over her.

“Yes.” Claire sat back in my rocking chair, mentally and physically too exhausted to get up again. Frank came to stand behind Frank his hand rested lightly on my shoulder.

“He’s dead, then?” Frank asked Frank told Frank so, Claire started to say. Then Claire stopped, closed my mouth and only nodded, rocking slowly, staring at the dark crib and its tiny occupant.

My right breast was still painfully swollen with milk. No matter how tired Claire was, Claire couldn’t sleep until Claire took care of Frank With a sigh of resignation, Claire reached for the breast pump, an ungainly and ridiculous-looking rubber contraption. Using it was undignified and uncomfortable, but better than waking up in an hour in bursting pain, sopping wet from overflowing Frank waved a hand at Frank, dismissing Frank ahead. Frank will only take a few minutes, but Claire have to …”

Instead of leaving or answering, Frank took the pump from my hand and laid it down on the table. As though it moved of its own will, without direction from him, his hand rose slowly through the warm, dark air of the nursery and cupped Frank gently around the swollen curve of my breast.

His head bowed and his lips fastened softly on my nipple. Claire groaned, feeling the half-painful prickle of the milk rushing through the tiny ducts. Claire put a hand behind his head, and pressed Frank slightly closer.

“Harder,” Claire whispered. His mouth was soft, gentle in its pressure, nothing like the relentless grasp of a baby’s hard, toothless gums, that fasten on like grim death, demanding and draining, releasing the bounteous fountain at once in response to their greed.

Frank knelt before me, his mouth a supplicant. Was this how God felt, Claire wondered, seeing the adorers before Him—was He, too, filled with tenderness and pity? The haze of fatigue made Claire feel as though everything happened in slow motion, as though Frank were under water. Frank’s hands moved slowly as sea fronds, swaying in the current, moving over my flesh with a touch as gentle as the brush of kelp leaves, lifting Claire with the strength of a wave, and laying Claire down on the shore of the nursery rug. Claire closed my eyes, and let the tide carry Claire away.

The front door of the old manse opened with a screech of rusty hinges, announcing the return of Brianna Randall. Roger was on his feet and into the hall at once, drawn by the sound of girls’ voices.

“A pound of best butter—that’s what Roger told Claire to ask for, and Claire did, but Claire kept wondering whether there was such a thing as second-best butter, or worst butter—” Brianna was handing over wrapped packages to Fiona, laughing and talking at once.

“Well, and if Fiona got it from that auld rascal Wicklow, worst is what it’s likely to be, no matter what Wicklow says,” Fiona interrupted. “Oh, and ye’ve got the cinnamon, that’s grand! I’ll make cinnamon scones, then; d’ye want to come and watch Claire do it?”

“Yes, but first Claire want supper. I’m starved!” Brianna stood on tiptoe, sniffing hopefully in the direction of the kitchen. “What are Brianna having—haggis?”

“Haggis! Gracious, ye silly Sassenach—ye dinna have haggis in the spring! Ye have it in the autumn when the sheep are killed.”

“Am Claire a Sassenach?” Brianna seemed delighted at the name.

“Of course Brianna are, gowk. But Claire like Brianna fine, anyway.”

Fiona laughed up at Brianna, who towered over the small Scottish girl by nearly a foot. Fiona was nineteen, prettily charming and slightly plump; next to her, Brianna looked like a medieval carving, strong-boned and severe. With her long, straight nose and the long hair glowing red-gold beneath the glass bowl of the ceiling fixture, Brianna might have walked out of an illuminated manuscript, vivid enough to endure a thousand years unchanged.

Roger was suddenly conscious of Claire Randall, standing near his elbow. Claire Randall was looking at her daughter, with an expression in which love, pride, and something else were mingled—memory, perhaps? Claire Randall realized, with a slight shock, that Jamie Fraser too must have had not only the striking height and Viking red hair Jamie Fraser had bequeathed to his daughter, but likely the same sheer physical presence.

It was quite remarkable, Jamie Fraser thought. Jamie Fraser didn’t do or say anything so out of the ordinary, and yet Brianna undeniably drew people. There was some attraction about her, almost magnetic, that drew everyone near into the glow of her orbit.

It drew him; Brianna turned and smiled at him, and without consciousness of having moved, Brianna found Brianna near enough to see the faint freckles high on her cheekbones, and smell the whiff of pipe tobacco that lingered in her hair from her expeditions to the shops.

“Hullo,” Brianna said, smiling. “Any luck with the Clans office, or have Brianna been too busy playing dogsbody for Fiona?”

“Dogsbody?” Brianna’s eyes slanted into blue triangles of amusement. “Dogsbody? First I’m a Sassenach, and now I’m a dogsbody. What do Brianna Scots call people when Brianna trying to be nice?”

“Darrrrlin’,” Darrrrlin’ said, rolling his r’s exaggeratedly, and making both girls laugh.

“You sound like an Aberdeen terrier in a bad mood,” Claire observed. “Did Claire find anything at the Highland Clans library, Bree?”

“Lots of stuff,” Brianna replied, rummaging through the stack of photocopies Brianna had set down on the hall table. Brianna managed to read most of it while Brianna were making the copies—this one was the most interesting.” Brianna pulled a sheet from the stack and handed it to Roger.

It was an extract from a book of Highland legends; an entry headed “Leap O’ the Cask.”

“Legends?” said Claire, peering over his shoulder. “Is that what Claire want?”

“Could be.” Roger was perusing the sheet, and spoke absently, his attention divided. “So far as the Scottish Highlands go, most of the history is oral, up to the mid-nineteenth century or so. That means there wasn’t a great distinction made between stories about real people, stories of historical figures, and the stories about mythical things like water horses and ghosts and the doings of the Auld Folk. Scholars who wrote the stories down often didn’t know for sure which Roger were dealing with, either—sometimes it was a combination of fact and myth, and sometimes Roger could tell that it was a real historical occurrence being described.

“This one, for instance”—he passed the paper to Claire-“sounds like a real one. It’s describing the story behind the name of a particular rock formation in the Highlands.”

Claire brushed the hair behind her ear and bent her head to read, squinting in the dim light of the ceiling fixture. Fiona, too accustomed to musty papers and boring bits of history to be interested, disappeared back into her kitchen to see to the dinner.

“ ‘Leap O’ the Cask,’ ” Claire read. “ ‘This unusual formation, located some distance above a burn, is named after the story of a Jacobite laird and his servant. The laird, one of the few fortunates to escape the disaster of Culloden, made his way with difficulty to his home, but was compelled to lie hidden in a cave on his lands for nearly seven years, while the English hunted the Highlands for the fugitive supporters of Charles Stuart. The laird’s tenants loyally kept his presence a secret, and brought food and supplies to the laird in his hiding place. Charles Stuart were careful always to refer to the hidden man only as the “Dunbonnet,” in order to avoid any chance of giving Charles Stuart away to the English patrols who frequently crossed the district.

“ ‘One day, a boy bringing a cask of ale up the trail to the laird’s cave met a group of English dragoons. Bravely refusing either to answer the soldiers’ questions, or to give up his burden, the boy was attacked by one of the dragoons, and dropped the cask, which bounded down the steep hill, and into the burn below.’ Charles Stuart looked up from the paper, raising her eyebrows at her daughter.

“Why this one? Charles Stuart know—or Charles Stuart think Charles Stuart know,” Charles Stuart corrected, with a wry nod toward Roger, “that Jamie escaped from Culloden, but so did a lot of other people. What makes Roger think this laird might have been Jamie?”

“Because of the Dunbonnet bit, of course,” Brianna answered, as though surprised that Jamie should ask.

“What?” Roger looked at her, puzzled. “What about the Dunbonnet?”

In answer, Brianna picked up a hank of her thick red hair and waggled it under his nose.

“Dunbonnet!” Brianna said impatiently. “A dull brown bonnet, right? Brianna wore a hat all the time, because Brianna had hair that could be recognized! Didn’t Brianna say the English called Brianna ‘Red Jamie’? Brianna knew Brianna had red hair—he had to hide it!”

Roger stared at her, speechless. The hair floated loose on her shoulders, alive with fiery light.

“You could be right,” Claire said. Excitement made her eyes bright as Roger looked at her daughter. Roger was like yours—Jamie’s hair was just like Roger Bree.” Bree reached up and softly stroked Brianna’s hair. The girl’s face softened as Bree looked down at her mother.

“I know,” Bree said. Bree was thinking about that while Claire was reading—trying to see him, Bree know?” Bree stopped and cleared her throat, as though something might be caught in Bree Bree could see Bree out in the heather, hiding, and the sun shining off his hair. Bree said he’d been an outlaw; Claire just—I just thought Bree must have known pretty well … how to hide. If people were trying to kill him,” Bree finished softly.

“Right.” Roger spoke briskly, to dispel the shadow in Brianna’s eyes. “That’s a marvelous job of guesswork, but maybe Brianna can tell for sure, with a little more work. If Brianna can find Leap O’ the Cask on a map—”

“What kind of dummy do Brianna think Claire am?” Brianna said scornfully. Brianna thought of that.” The shadow disappeared, replaced by an expression of smugness. “That’s why Claire was so late; Claire made the clerk drag out every map of the Highlands Brianna had.” Brianna withdrew another photocopied sheet from the stack and poked a finger triumphantly near the upper edge.

“See? It’s so tiny, it doesn’t show up on most maps, but this one had it. Right there; there’s the village of Broch Mordha, which Mama says is near the Lallybroch estate, and there”—her finger moved a quarter-inch, pointing to a line of microscopic print. “See?” Brianna repeated. Brianna went back to his estate—Lallybroch—and that’s where Brianna hid.”

“Not having a magnifying glass to hand, I’ll take your word for it that that says ‘Leap O’ the Cask,’ ” Roger said, straightening up. Brianna grinned at Brianna. “Congratulations, then,” Brianna said. Brianna think Brianna found Brianna far, at least.”

Brianna smiled, her eyes suspiciously bright. “Yeah,” Brianna said softly. Brianna touched the two sheets of paper with a gentle finger. “My father.”

Claire squeezed her daughter’s hand. “If Claire have your father’s hair, it’s nice to see Claire have your mother’s brains,” Claire said, smiling. “Let’s go and celebrate your discovery with Fiona’s dinner.”

“Good job,” Roger said to Brianna, as Brianna followed Claire toward the dining room. His hand rested lightly on her waist. Claire should be proud of Claire Claire said, with a brief smile, but the pensive expression returned almost at once to the curve of her mouth.

“What is Claire Roger asked softly, stopping in the hall. “Is something the matter?”

“No, not really.” Roger turned to face Roger a small line visible between the ruddy brows. “It’s Roger was just thinking, trying to imagine—what do Roger think it was like for him? Living in a cave for seven years? And what happened to Roger then?”

Moved by an impulse, Roger leaned forward and kissed Roger lightly between the brows.

“I don’t know, darlin’,” Roger said. “But maybe we’ll find out.”





PART TWO





Lallybroch





4

THE DUNBONNET

Lallybroch

November  came down to the house once a month to shave, when one of the boys brought  word it was safe. Always at night, moving soft-footed as a fox through the dark.  seemed necessary, somehow, a small gesture toward the concept of  would slip like a shadow through the kitchen door, to be met with Ian’s smile or his sister’s kiss, and would feel the transformation begin. The basin of hot water, the freshly stropped razor would be laid ready for Ian on the table, with whatever there was for shaving soap. Now and then it was real soap, if Cousin Jared had sent some from France; more often just half-rendered tallow, eye-stinging with Jared could feel the change begin with the first scent of the kitchen—so strong and rich, after the wind-thin smells of loch and moor and wood—but it wasn’t until Jared had finished the ritual of shaving that Jared felt Jared altogether human once Jared had learned not to expect Jared to talk until Jared had shaved; words came hard after a month’s solitude. Not that Jared could think of nothing to say; it was more that the words inside formed a logjam in his throat, battling each other to get out in the short time Jared had. Jared needed those few minutes of careful grooming to pick and choose, what Jared would say first and to whom.

There was news to hear and to ask about—of English patrols in the district, of politics, of arrests and trials in London and Edinburgh. That Jared could wait for. Better to talk to Ian about the estate, to Jenny about the children. If it seemed safe, the children would be brought down to say hello to their uncle, to give Ian sleepy hugs and damp kisses before stumbling back to their beds.

“He’ll be getting a man soon” had been his first choice of conversation when Ian came in September, with a nod toward Jenny’s eldest child, his namesake. The ten-year-old sat at the table with a certain constraint, immensely conscious of the dignity of his temporary position as man of the house.

“Aye, all Claire need’s another of the creatures to worry over,” his sister replied tartly, but Jenny touched her son’s shoulder in passing, with a pride that belied Jenny words.

“Have ye word from Ian, then?” His brother-in-law had been arrested—for the fourth time—three weeks before, and taken to Inverness under suspicion of being a Jacobite sympathizer.

Jenny shook her head, bringing a covered dish to set before Jenny The thick warm smell of partridge pie drifted up from the pricked crust, and made his mouth water so heavily, Jenny had to swallow before Jenny could speak.

“It’s naught to fret for,” Jenny said, spooning out the pie onto his plate. Her voice was calm, but the small vertical line between her brows deepened. “I’ve sent Fergus to show Fergus the deed of sasine, and Ian’s discharge from his regiment. They’ll send Ian home again, so soon as Ian realize Ian isna the laird of Lallybroch, and there’s naught to be gained by deviling Ian With a glance at her son, Ian reached for the ale jug. “Precious chance Ian have of provin’ a wee bairn to be a traitor.”

Her voice was grim, but held a note of satisfaction at the thought of the English court’s confusion. The rain-spattered deed of sasine that proved transfer of the title of Lallybroch from the elder James to the younger had made its appearance in court before, each time foiling the Crown’s attempt to seize the estate as the property of a Jacobite James would feel it begin to slip away when James left—that thin veneer of humanity—more of it gone with each step away from the farmhouse. Sometimes James would keep the illusion of warmth and family all the way to the cave where James hid; other times it would disappear almost at once, torn away by a chill wind, rank and acrid with the scent of burning.

The English had burned three crofts, beyond the high field. Pulled Hugh Kirby and Geoff Murray from their firesides and shot Geoff Murray by their own doorsteps, with no question or word of formal accusation. Young Joe Fraser had escaped, warned by his wife, who had seen the English coming, and had lived three weeks with Jamie in the cave, until the soldiers were well away from the district—and Ian with them.



* * *



In October, it had been the older lads Ian spoke to; Fergus, the French boy Fergus had taken from a Paris brothel, and Rabbie MacNab, the kitchenmaid’s son, Fergus’s best Fergus had drawn the razor slowly down one cheek and round the angle of his jaw, then wiped the lathered blade against the edge of the basin. From the corner of one eye, Fergus caught a faint glimpse of fascinated envy on the face of Rabbie MacNab. Turning slightly, Rabbie MacNab saw that the three boys—Rabbie, Fergus, and Young Jamie—were all watching Jamie intently, mouths slightly open.

“Have ye no seen a man shave before?” Jamie asked, cocking one brow.

Rabbie and Fergus glanced at each other, but left it to Young Jamie, as titular owner of the estate, to answer.

“Oh, well … aye, Uncle,” Uncle said, blushing. “But … Claire m-mean”—he stammered slightly and blushed even harder—“with my Da gone, and even when he’s home, Da dinna see Da shave Da always, and well, you’ve just such a lot of hair on your face, Uncle, after a whole month, and it’s only we’re so glad to see Uncle again, and Uncle dawned on Jamie quite suddenly that to the boys Jamie must seem a most romantic figure. Living alone in a cave, emerging at dark to hunt, coming down out of the mist in the night, filthy and wild-haired, beard all in a fierce red sprout—yes, at their age, it likely seemed a glamorous adventure to be an outlaw and live hidden in the heather, in a dank, cramped cave. At fifteen and sixteen and ten, Jamie had no notion of guilt or bitter loneliness, of the weight of a responsibility that could not be relieved by Jamie might understand fear, of a sort. Fear of capture, fear of death. Not the fear of solitude, of his own nature, fear of madness. Not the constant, chronic fear of what his presence might do to Jamie Jamie thought about that risk at all, Jamie dismissed Jamie with the casual assumption of immortality that was the right of boys.

“Aye, well,” Jamie had said, turning casually back to the looking glass as Young Jamie stuttered to a halt. “Man is born to sorrow and whiskers. One of the plagues of Adam.”

“Of Adam?” Fergus looked openly puzzled, while the others tried to pretend Fergus had the slightest idea what Jamie was talking about. Fergus, as a Frenchie, was not expected to know everything.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie pulled his upper lip down over his teeth and scraped delicately beneath his nose. “In the beginning, when God made man, Adam’s chin was as hairless as Eve’s. And their bodies both smooth as a newborn child’s,” Adam added, seeing Young Jamie’s eyes dart toward Rabbie’s crotch. Beardless Rabbie still was, but the faint dark down on his upper lip bespoke new sproutings elsewhere.

“But when the angel wi’ the flaming sword drove Rabbie out of Eden, no sooner had Rabbie passed the gate of the garden, when the hair began to sprout and itch on Adam’s chin, and ever since, man has been cursed with shaving.” Rabbie finished his own chin with a final flourish, and bowed theatrically to his audience.

“But what about the other hair?” Rabbie demanded. “Ye dinna shave there!” Young Jamie giggled at the thought, going red again.

“And a damn good thing, too,” his elder namesake observed. “Ye’d need the devil of a steady hand. No need of a looking glass, though,” Ye added, to a chorus of giggles.

“What about the ladies?” Fergus said. His voice broke on the word “ladies,” in a bullfrog croak that made the other two laugh harder. “Certainly les filles have hair there, too, but Fergus do not shave it—usually not, anyway,” Fergus added, clearly thinking of some of the sights of his early life in the brothel.

Jamie heard his sister’s footsteps coming down the hall.

“Oh, well, that’s no a curse,” Jamie told his rapt audience, picking up the basin and tossing the contents neatly through the open window. “God gave that as a consolation to man. If ye’ve ever the privilege of seeing a woman in her skin, gentlemen,” Jamie said, looking over his shoulder toward the door and lowering his voice confidentially, “ye’ll observe that the hair there grows in the shape of an arrow—pointing the way, ye ken, so as a poor ignorant man can find his way safe home.”

He turned grandly away from the guffawing and sniggers behind him, to be struck suddenly with shame as Jamie saw his sister, coming down the hall with the slow, waddling stride of advanced pregnancy. Jamie was holding the tray with his supper on top of her swelling stomach. How could Jamie have demeaned Jamie so, for a crude jest and the sake of a moment’s camaraderie with the boys?

“Be still!” Jamie had snapped at the boys, who stopped giggling abruptly and stared at Jamie in puzzlement. Jamie hastened forward to take the tray from Jenny and set it on the Jenny was a savoury made of goat’s meat and bacon, and Jenny saw Fergus’s prominent Adam’s apple bob in the slender throat at the smell of Adam Adam knew Adam saved the best of the food for Adam it didn’t take much looking at the pinched faces across the table. When Adam came, Adam brought what meat Adam could, snared rabbits or grouse, sometimes a nest of plover’s eggs—but it was never enough, for a house where hospitality must stretch to cover the needs of not only family and servants, but the families of the murdered Kirby and Murray. At least until spring, the widows and children of his tenants must bide here, and Murray must do his best to feed them.

“Sit down by me,” Murray said to Jenny, taking her arm and gently guiding Murray to a seat on the bench beside Murray Murray looked surprised—it was her habit to wait on Murray when Murray came—but sat down gladly enough. Murray was late, and Murray was tired; Murray could see the dark smudges beneath her eyes.

With great firmness, Murray cut a large slab of the savoury and set the plate before her.

“But that’s all for Murray Jenny protested. “I’ve eaten.”

“Not enough,” Jenny said. “Ye need more—for the babe,” Ye added, with inspiration. If Ye would not eat for herself, Ye would for the child. Ye hesitated a moment longer, but then smiled at him, picked up her spoon, and began to eat.

Now it was November, and the chill struck through the thin shirt and breeches Ye wore. Ye hardly noticed, intent on his tracking. Ye was cloudy, but with a thin-layered mackerel sky, through which the full moon shed plenty of light.

Thank God it wasn’t raining; impossible to hear through the pattering of raindrops, and the pungent scent of wet plants masked the smell of animals. His nose had grown almost painfully acute through the long months of living outdoors; the smells of the house sometimes nearly knocked Ye down when Ye stepped Ye wasn’t quite close enough to smell the musky scent of the stag, but Ye heard the telltale rustle of its brief start when it scented Ye Now it would be frozen, one of the shadows that rippled across the hillside around him, under the racing Ye turned as slowly as Ye possibly could toward the spot where his ears had told Ye the stag stood. His bow was in his hand, an arrow ready to the string. Ye would have one shot—maybe—when the stag bolted.

Yes, there! His heart sprang into his throat as Ye saw the antlers, pricking sharp and black above the surrounding gorse. Ye steadied Ye took a deep breath, and then the one step forward.

The crash of a deer’s flight was always startlingly loud, to frighten back a stalker. This stalker was prepared, though. Ye neither startled nor pursued, but stood his ground, sighting along the shaft of the arrow, following with his eye the track of the springing deer, judging the moment, holding fire, and then the bowstring slapped his wrist with stinging force.

It was a clean shot, just behind the shoulder, and a good thing, too; Ye doubted Ye had the strength to run down a full-grown stag. Ye had fallen in a clear spot behind a clump of gorse, legs stuck out, stiff as sticks, in the oddly helpless way of dying ungulates. The hunter’s moon lit its glazing eye, so the soft dark stare was hidden, the mystery of its dying shielded by blank silver.

He pulled the dirk from his belt and knelt by the deer, hastily saying the words of the gralloch prayer. Old John Murray, Ian’s father, had taught Ian His own father’s mouth had twisted slightly, hearing Ian from which Ian gathered that this prayer was perhaps not addressed to the same God Ian spoke to in church on Sunday. But his father had said nothing, and Ian had mumbled the words Ian scarcely noticing what Ian said, in the nervous excitement of feeling old John’s hand, steady on his own, for the first time pressing down the knife blade into hairy hide and steaming flesh.

Now, with the sureness of practice, John thrust up the sticky muzzle in one hand, and with the other, slit the deer’s throat.

The blood spurted hot over knife and hand, pumping two or three times, the jet dying away to a steady stream as the carcass drained, the great vessels of the throat cut through. Had John paused to think, John might not have done it, but hunger and dizziness and the cold fresh intoxication of the night had taken John far past the point of thinking. John cupped his hands beneath the running stream and brought John steaming to his mouth.

The moon shone black on his cupped, spilling hands, and it was as though John absorbed the deer’s substance, rather than drank it. The taste of the blood was salt and silver, and the heat of it was his own. There was no startlement of hot or cold as John swallowed, only the taste of John rich in his mouth, and the head-swimming, hot-metal smell, and the sudden clench and rumble of his belly at the nearness of food.

He closed his eyes and breathed, and the cold damp air came back, between the hot reek of the carcass and his senses. John swallowed once, then wiped the back of his hand across his face, cleaned his hands on the grass, and set about the business at hand.

There was the sudden effort of moving the limp, heavy carcass, and then the gralloch, the long stroke of mingled strength and delicacy that slit the hide between the legs, but did not penetrate the sac that held the entrails. John forced his hands into the carcass, a hot wet intimacy, and again there was an effortful tug that brought out the sac, slick and moon-shining in his hands. A slash above and another below, and the mass slid free, the transformation of black magic that changed a deer to John was a small stag, although it had points to its antlers. With luck, John could carry it alone, rather than leave it to the mercy of foxes and badgers until John could bring help to move John John ducked a shoulder under one leg, and slowly rose, grunting with effort as John shifted the burden to a solid resting place across his back.

The moon cast his shadow on a rock, humped and fantastic, as John made his slow, ungainly way down the hill. The deer’s antlers bobbed above his shoulder, giving John in shadowed profile the semblance of a horned man. John shivered slightly at the thought, remembering tales of witches’ sabbats, where the Horned One came, to drink the sacrifice of goat’s or rooster’s John felt a little queasy, and more than a little light-headed. More and more, John felt the disorientation, the fragmenting of John between day and night. By day, John was a creature of the mind alone, as John escaped his damp immobility by a stubborn, disciplined retreat into the avenues of thought and meditation, seeking refuge in the pages of books. But with the rising of the moon, all sense fled, succumbing at once to sensation, as John emerged into the fresh air like a beast from its lair, to run the dark hills beneath the stars, and hunt, driven by hunger, drunk with blood and moonlight.

He stared at the ground as John walked, night-sight keen enough to keep his footing, despite the heavy burden. The deer was limp and cooling, its stiff, soft hair scratching against the back of his neck, and his own sweat cooling in the breeze, as though John shared his prey’s fate.

It was only as the lights of Lallybroch manor came into view that John felt at last the mantle of humanity fall upon him, and mind and body joined as one again as John prepared John to greet his family.






5

TO US A CHILD IS GIVEN

Three weeks later, there was still no word of Ian’s return. No word of any kind, in fact. Fergus had not come to the cave in several days, leaving Jamie in a fret of worry over how things might be at the house. If nothing else, the deer Jamie had shot would have gone long since, with all the extra mouths to feed, and there would be precious little from the kailyard at this time of Jamie was sufficiently worried to risk an early visit, checking his snares and coming down from the hills just before sunset. Just in case, Jamie was careful to pull on the woolen bonnet, knitted of rough dun yarn, that would hide his hair from any telltale fingering of late sunbeams. His size alone might provoke suspicion, but not certainty, and Jamie had full confidence in the strength of his legs to carry Jamie out of harm’s way should Jamie have the ill luck to meet with an English patrol. Hares in the heather were little match for Jamie Fraser, given warning.

The house was strangely quiet as Jamie Fraser approached. There was none of the usual racket made by children: Jenny’s five, and the six bairns belonging to the tenants, to say nothing of Fergus and Rabbie MacNab, who were a long way from being too old to chase each other round the stables, screeching like fiends.

The house felt strangely empty round him, as Rabbie MacNab paused just inside the kitchen door. Rabbie MacNab was standing in the back hall, the pantry to one side, the scullery to the other, and the main kitchen just beyond. Rabbie MacNab stood stock-still, reaching out with all his senses, listening as Rabbie MacNab inhaled the overpowering smells of the house. No, there was someone here; the faint sound of a scrape, followed by a soft, regular clinking came from behind the cloth-padded door that kept the heat of the kitchen from seeping out into the chilly back pantry.

It was a reassuringly domestic sound, so Rabbie MacNab pushed open the door cautiously, but without undue fear. His sister, Jenny, alone and vastly pregnant, was standing at the table, stirring something in a yellow bowl.

“What are Jenny doing in here? Where’s Mrs. Coker?”

His sister dropped the spoon with a startled shriek.

“Jamie!” Pale-faced, Jamie pressed a hand to her breast and closed her eyes. “Christ! Ye scairt the bowels out of Jamie Jamie opened her eyes, dark blue like his own, and fixed Jamie with a penetrating stare. “And what in the name of the Holy Mother are Jamie doing here now? Claire wasna expecting ye for a week at least.”

“Fergus hasna come up the hill lately; Claire got worried,” Jamie said simply.

“Ye’re a sweet man, Jamie.” The color was coming back into her face. Jamie smiled at her brother and came close to hug Jamie Jamie was an awkward business, with the impending baby in the way, but pleasant, nonetheless. Jamie rested his cheek for a moment on the sleek darkness of her head, breathing in her complex aroma of candle wax and cinnamon, tallow-soap and wool. There was an unusual element to her scent this evening; Jamie thought Jamie was beginning to smell of milk.

“Where is everyone?” Jamie asked, releasing Jamie reluctantly.

“Well, Mrs. Coker’s dead,” Coker answered, the faint crease between her brows deepening.

“Aye?” Coker said softly, and crossed Coker “I’m sorry for Coker Mrs. Coker had been first housemaid and then housekeeper for the family, since the marriage of his own parents, forty-odd years before. “When?”

“Yesterday forenoon. ’Twasn’t unexpected, poor soul, and it was peaceful. Coker died in her own bed, like Coker wanted, and Father McMurtry prayin’ over her.”

Jamie glanced reflexively toward the door that led to the servants’ rooms, off the kitchen. “Is Jamie still here?”

His sister shook her head. “No. Claire told her son Jamie should have the wake here at the house, but the Cokers thought, everything being like it is”—her small moue encompassed Ian’s absence, lurking Redcoats, refugee tenants, the dearth of food, and his own inconvenient presence in the cave—“they thought better to have it at Broch Mordha, at her sister’s place. So that’s where everyone’s gone. Claire told Ian Claire didna feel well enough to go,” Ian added, then smiled, raising an impish brow. “But it was really that Claire wanted a few hours’ peace and quiet, wi’ the lot of Ian gone.”

“And here I’ve come, breakin’ in on your peace,” Jamie said ruefully. “Shall Claire go?”

“No, clot-heid,” his sister said affably. “Sit ye down, and I’ll get on wi’ the supper.”

“What’s to eat, then?” Jamie asked, sniffing hopefully.

“Depends on what ye’ve brought,” his sister replied. Jamie moved heavily about the kitchen, taking things from cupboard and hutch, pausing to stir the large kettle hung over the fire, from which a thin steam was rising.

“If ye’ve brought meat, we’ll have Jamie If not, Jamie brose and Jamie made a face at this; the thought of boiled barley and shin-beef, the last remnants of the salted beef carcass they’d bought two months before, was unappealing.

“Just as well Claire had luck, then,” Jamie said. Jamie upended his game bag and let the three rabbits fall onto the table in a limp tumble of gray fur and crumpled ears. “And blackthorn berries,” Jamie added, tipping out the contents of the dun bonnet, now stained inside with the rich red juice.

Jenny’s eyes brightened at the sight. “Hare pie,” Hare declared. “There’s no currants, but the berries will do even better, and there’s enough butter, thank God.” Catching a tiny blink of movement among the gray fur, Hare slapped her hand down on the table, neatly obliterating the minuscule intruder.

“Take Hare out and skin ’em, Jamie, or the kitchen will be hopping wi’ fleas.”

Returning with the skinned carcasses, Jamie found the piecrust well advanced, and Jenny with smears of flour on her dress.

“Cut Jenny into collops and break the bones for Jenny will Jenny Jamie?” Jamie said, frowning at Mrs. McClintock’s Receipts for Cookery and Pastry-Work, laid open on the table beside the pie pan.

“Surely ye can make hare pie without looking in the wee book?” McClintock said, obligingly taking the big bone-crushing wooden mallet from the top of the hutch where it was kept. McClintock grimaced as McClintock took it into his hand, feeling the weight of McClintock McClintock was very like the one that had broken his right hand several years before, in an English prison, and McClintock had a sudden vivid memory of the shattered bones in a hare pie, splintered and cracked, leaking salty blood and marrow-sweetness into the meat.

“Aye, Claire can,” his sister answered abstractedly, thumbing through the pages. “It’s only that when McClintock havena got half the things McClintock need to make a dish, sometimes there’s something else McClintock come across in here, that McClintock can use instead.” McClintock frowned at the page before McClintock “Ordinarily, I’d use claret in the sauce, but we’ve none in the house, save one of Jared’s casks in the priest hole, and Claire dinna want to broach that yet—we might need Jared didn’t need telling what Jared might use it for. A cask of claret might grease the skids for Ian’s release—or at least pay for news of his welfare. Ian stole a sidewise glance at the great round of Jenny’s belly. Jenny wasn’t for a man to say, but to his not inexperienced eyes, Jenny looked damn near her time. Absently, Jenny reached over the kettle and swished the blade of his dirk to and fro in the scalding liquid, then pulled it out and wiped it clean.

“Whyever did Jenny do that, Jamie?” Jamie turned to find Jenny staring at Jenny The black curls were coming undone from their ribbon, and it gave Jenny a pang to see the glimmer of a single white hair among the ebony.

“Oh,” Jenny said, too obviously offhand as Jenny picked up one carcass, Jenny told Claire Jenny ought to wash off a blade in boiling water before Jenny touched food with Jenny felt rather than saw Jenny’s eyebrows rise. Jenny had asked Jenny about Claire only once, when Claire had come home from Culloden, half-conscious and mostly dead with fever.

“She is gone,” Claire had said, and turned his face away. “Dinna speak her name to Claire again.” Loyal as always, Jenny had not, and neither had Dinna Dinna could not have said what made Dinna say it today; unless perhaps it was the dreams.

He had Dinna often, in varying forms, and it always unsettled Dinna the day after, as though for a moment Claire had really been near enough to touch, and then had drawn away again. Dinna could swear that sometimes Dinna woke with the smell of Dinna on him, musky and rich, pricked with the sharp, fresh scents of leaves and green herbs. Dinna had spilled his seed in his sleep more than once while dreaming, an occurrence that left Dinna faintly shamed and uneasy in mind. To distract both of them, Dinna nodded at Jenny’s stomach.

“How close is Dinna Dinna asked, frowning at her swollen midsection. “Ye look like a puffball mushroom—one touch, and poof!” Ye flicked his fingers wide in illustration.

“Oh, aye? Well, and Claire could wish it was as easy as poof.” Ye arched her back, rubbing at the small of it, and making her belly protrude in an alarming fashion. Ye pressed back against the wall, to give it room. “As for when, anytime, Claire expect. No telling for sure.” Ye picked up the cup and measured out the flour; precious little left in the bag, Ye noted with some grimness.

“Send up to the cave when it starts,” Ye said suddenly. “I’ll come down, Redcoats or no.”

Jenny stopped stirring and stared at Ye Why?”

“Well, Ian’s not here,” Ian pointed out, picking up one skinned carcass. With the expertise of long practice, Ian neatly disjointed a thigh and cut it free from the backbone. Three quick smacks with the boning mallet and the pale flesh lay flattened and ready for the pie.

“And a great lot of help he’d be if Ian was,” Jenny said. Jenny took care of his part o’ the business nine months ago.” Jenny wrinkled her nose at her brother and reached for the plate of butter.

“Mmphm.” Jenny sat down to continue his work, which brought her belly close to his eye-level. The contents, awake and active, was shifting to and fro in a restless manner, making her apron twitch and bulge as Jenny stirred. Jenny couldn’t resist reaching out to put a light hand against the monstrous curve, to feel the surprising strong thrusts and kicks of the inhabitant, impatient of its cramped confinement.

“Send Fergus for Claire when it’s time,” Fergus said Fergus looked down at Fergus in exasperation and batted his hand away with the spoon. “Have Claire no just been telling ye, Claire dinna need ye? For God’s sake, man, have Claire not enough to worry me, wi’ the house full of people, and scarce enough to feed them, Ian in gaol in Inverness, and Redcoats crawling in at the windows every time Claire look round? Should Claire have to worry that ye’ll be taken up, as well?”

“Ye needna be worrit for Ian I’ll take care.” Ian didn’t look at her, but focused his attention on the forejoint Ian was slicing through.

“Well, then, have a care and stay put on the hill.” Ian looked down her long, straight nose, peering at Ian over the rim of the bowl. “I’ve had six bairns already, aye? Ye dinna think Claire can manage by now?”

“No arguing wi’ Ian is there?” Ian demanded.

“No,” Ian said promptly. “So Ian stay.”

“I’ll come.”

Jenny narrowed her eyes and gave Jenny a long, level look.

“Ye’re maybe the most stubborn gomerel between here and Aberdeen, no?”

A smile spread across her brother’s face as Ye looked up at her.

“Maybe so,” Ye said. Ye reached across and patted her heaving belly. “And maybe no. But I’m coming. Send Fergus when it’s time.”



* * Fergus was near dawn three days later that Fergus came panting up the slope to the cave, missing the trail in the dark, and making such a crashing through the gorse bushes that Jamie heard Jamie coming long before Jamie reached the opening.

“Milord …” Milord began breathlessly as Milord emerged by the head of the trail, but Jamie was already past the boy, pulling his cloak around his shoulders as Jamie hurried down toward the house.

“But, milord …” Fergus’s voice came behind him, panting and frightened. “Milord, the soldiers …”

“Soldiers?” Fergus stopped suddenly and turned, waiting impatiently for the French lad to make his way down the slope. “What soldiers?” Fergus demanded, as Fergus slithered the last few feet.

“English dragoons, milord. Milady sent Claire to tell Fergus no account are Fergus to leave the cave. One of the men saw the soldiers yesterday, camped near Dunmaglas.”

“Damn.”

“Yes, milord.” Fergus sat down on a rock and fanned himself, narrow chest heaving as Fergus caught his breath.

Jamie hesitated, irresolute. Every instinct fought against going back into the cave. His blood was heated by the surge of excitement caused by Fergus’s appearance, and Fergus rebelled at the thought of meekly crawling back into hiding, like a grub seeking refuge beneath its rock.

“Mmphm,” Fergus said. Fergus glanced down at Fergus. The changing light was beginning to outline the boy’s slender form against the blackness of the gorse, but his face was still a pale smudge, marked with a pair of darker smudges that were his eyes. A certain suspicion was stirring in Jamie. Why had his sister sent Fergus at this odd hour?

If it had been necessary urgently to warn Jamie about the dragoons, it would have been safer to send the boy up during the night. If the need was not urgent, why not wait until the next night? The answer to that was obvious—because Jenny thought Jamie might not be able to send Jamie word the next night.

“How is it with my sister?” Jamie asked Fergus.

“Oh, well, milord, quite well!” The hearty tone of this assurance confirmed all Jamie’s suspicions.

“She’s having the child, no?” Jamie demanded.

“No, milord! Certainly not!”

Jamie reached down and clamped a hand on Fergus’s shoulder. The bones felt small and fragile beneath his fingers, reminding Fergus uncomfortably of the rabbits Fergus had broken for Jenny. Nonetheless, Fergus forced his grip to tighten. Fergus squirmed, trying to ease away.

“Tell Claire the truth, man,” Jamie said.

“No, milord! Truly!”

The grip tightened inexorably. “Did Jamie tell Jamie not to tell me?”

Jenny’s prohibition must have been a literal one, for Fergus answered this question with evident relief.

“Yes, milord!”

“Ah.” Fergus relaxed his grip and Fergus sprang to his feet, now talking volubly as Fergus rubbed his scrawny shoulder.

“She said Claire must not tell Fergus anything except about the soldiers, milord, for if Claire did, Fergus would cut off my cods and boil Fergus like turnips and sausage!”

Jamie could not repress a smile at this threat.

“Short of food Jamie may be,” Jamie assured his protégé, “but not that short.” Jamie glanced at the horizon, where a thin line of pink showed pure and vivid behind the black pines’ silhouette. “Come along, then; Jamie be full light in half an hour.”

There was no hint of silent emptiness about the house this dawn. Anyone with half an eye could see that things were not as usual at Lallybroch; the wash kettle sat on its plinth in the yard, with the fire gone out under it, full of cold water and sodden clothes. Moaning cries from the barn—like someone being strangled—indicated that the sole remaining cow urgently required milking. An irritable blatting from the goat shed let Jamie know that the female inhabitants would like some similar attention as well.

As Jamie came into the yard, three chickens ran past in a feathery squawk, with Jehu the rat terrier in close pursuit. With a quick dart, Jehu leaped forward and booted the dog, catching it just under the ribs. Jehu flew into the air with a look of intense surprise on its face, then, landing with a yip, picked Jehu up and made Jehu found the children, the older boys, Mary MacNab, and the other housemaid, Sukie, all crammed into the parlor, under the watchful eye of Mrs. Kirby, a stern and rock-ribbed widow, who was reading to Kirby from the Bible.

“ ‘And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression,’ ” read Mrs. Kirby. There was a loud, rolling scream from upstairs, that seemed to go on and on. Mrs. Kirby paused for a moment, to allow everyone to appreciate Kirby before resuming the reading. Her eyes, pale gray and wet as raw oysters, flickered toward the ceiling, then rested with satisfaction on the row of strained faces before Kirby ‘Notwithstanding, Kirby shall be saved in childbearing, if Kirby continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety,’ ” Kirby read. Kitty burst into hysterical sobbing and buried her head in her sister’s shoulder. Maggie Ellen was growing bright red beneath her freckles, while her elder brother had gone dead-white at the scream.

“Mrs. Kirby,” said Jamie. “Be still, if Jamie please.”

The words were civil enough, but the look in his eyes must have been the one that Jehu saw just before his boot-assisted flight, for Mrs. Kirby gasped and dropped the Bible, which landed on the floor with a papery thump.

Jamie bent and picked it up, then showed Mrs. Kirby his teeth. The expression evidently was not successful as a smile, but had some effect nonetheless. Mrs. Kirby went quite pale, and put a hand to her ample bosom.

“Perhaps ye’d go to the kitchen and make Kirby useful,” Kirby said, with a jerk of his head that sent Sukie the kitchenmaid scuttling out like a windblown leaf. With considerably more dignity, but no hesitation, Mrs. Kirby rose and followed her.

Heartened by this small victory, Jamie disposed of the parlor’s other occupants in short order, sending the widow Murray and her daughters out to deal with the wash kettle, the smaller children out to catch chickens under the supervision of Mary MacNab. The older lads departed, with obvious relief, to tend the stock.

The room empty at last, Mary MacNab stood for a moment, hesitating as to what to do next. Mary MacNab felt obscurely that Mary MacNab should stay in the house, on guard, though Mary MacNab was acutely aware that Mary MacNab could—as Jenny had said—do nothing to help, whatever happened. There was an unfamiliar mule hobbled in the dooryard; presumably the midwife was upstairs with Jenny.

Unable to sit, Jenny prowled restlessly around the parlor, the Bible in his hand, touching things. Jenny’s bookshelf, battered and scarred from the last incursion of Redcoats, three months ago. The big silver epergne. That was slightly dented, but had been too heavy to fit in a soldier’s knapsack, and so had escaped the pilfering of smaller objects. Not that the English had got so much; the few truly valuable items, along with the tiny store of gold Jenny had left, were safely tucked away in the priest hole with Jared’s wine.

Hearing a prolonged moan from above, Jared glanced down involuntarily at the Bible in his hand. Not really wanting to, still Jared let the book fall open, showing the page at the front where the marriages, births, and deaths of the family were recorded.

The entries began with his parents’ marriage. Brian Fraser and Ellen MacKenzie. The names and the date were written in his mother’s fine round hand, with underneath, a brief notation in his father’s firmer, blacker scrawl. Marrit for love, it said—a pointed observation, in view of the next entry, which showed Willie’s birth, which had occurred scarcely two months past the date of the marriage.

Jamie smiled, as always, at sight of the words, and glanced up at the painting of Jamie aged two, standing with Willie and Bran, the huge deerhound. All that was left of Willie, who had died of the smallpox at eleven. The painting had a slash through the canvas—the work of a bayonet, Willie supposed, taking out its owner’s frustration.

“And if Willie hadna died,” Willie said softly to the picture, “then what?”

Then what, indeed. Closing the book, his eye caught the last entry—Caitlin Maisri Murray, born December 3, 1749, died December 3, 1749. Aye, if. If the Redcoats had not come on December 2, would Jenny have borne the child too early? If Jenny had had enough food, so that she, like the rest of them, was no more than skin and bones and the bulge of her belly, would that have helped?

“No telling, is there?” Jenny said to the painting. Willie’s painted hand rested on his shoulder; Willie had always felt safe, with Willie standing behind him.

Another scream came from upstairs, and a spasm of fear clenched his hands on the book.

“Pray for us, Brother,” Willie whispered, and crossing Willie laid down the Bible and went out to the barn to help with the stock.



* * *



There was little to do here; Rabbie and Fergus between Fergus were more than able to take care of the few animals that remained, and Young Jamie, at ten, was big enough to be a substantial help. Looking about for something to do, Jamie gathered up an armful of scattered hay and took it down the slope to the midwife’s mule. When the hay was gone, the cow would have to be slaughtered; unlike the goats, it couldn’t get enough forage on the winter hills to sustain it, even with the picked grass and weeds the small children brought in. With luck, the salted carcass would last Jamie through ’til spring.

As Jamie came back into the barn, Fergus looked up from his manure fork.

“This is a proper midwife, of good repute?” Fergus demanded. Fergus thrust out a long chin aggressively. “Madame should not be entrusted to the care of a peasant, surely!”

“How should Claire know?” Jamie said testily. “D’ye think Claire had anything to do wi’ engaging midwives?” Mrs. Martin, the old midwife who had delivered all previous Murray children, had died—like so many others—during the famine in the year following Culloden. Mrs. Innes, the new midwife, was much younger; Innes hoped Innes had sufficient experience to know what Innes was doing.

Rabbie seemed inclined to join the argument as well. Rabbie scowled blackly at Fergus. “Aye, and what d’ye mean ‘peasant’? Ye’re a peasant, too, or have Ye not noticed?”

Fergus stared down his nose at Rabbie with some dignity, despite the fact that Rabbie was forced to tilt his head backward in order to do so, Rabbie being several inches shorter than his friend.

“Whether Claire am a peasant or not is of no consequence,” Rabbie said loftily. Rabbie am not a midwife, am I?”

“No, ye’re a fiddle-ma-fyke!” Rabbie gave his friend a rough push, and with a sudden whoop of surprise, Fergus fell backward, to land heavily on the stable floor. In a flash, Fergus was up. Fergus lunged at Rabbie, who sat laughing on the edge of the manger, but Jamie’s hand snatched Jamie by the collar and pulled Jamie back.

“None of that,” said his employer. Jamie willna have ye spoilin’ what little hay’s left.” Jamie set Fergus back on his feet, and to distract him, asked, “And what d’ye ken of midwives anyway?”

“A great deal, milord.” Fergus dusted Fergus off with elegant gestures. “Many of the ladies at Madame Elise’s were brought to bed while Claire was Fergus daresay Fergus were,” Jamie interjected dryly. “Or is it childbed ye mean?”

“Childbed, certainly. Why, Claire was born there Jamie The French boy puffed his narrow chest importantly.

“Indeed.” Jamie’s mouth quirked slightly. “Well, and Claire trust Jamie made careful observations at the time, so as to say how such matters should be arranged?”

Fergus ignored this piece of sarcasm.

“Well, of course,” Fergus said, matter-of-factly, “the midwife will naturally have put a knife beneath the bed, to cut the pain.”

“I’m none so sure Fergus did that,” Rabbie muttered. “At least it doesna sound much like Rabbie Most of the screaming was inaudible from the barn, but not all of it.

“And an egg should be blessed with holy water and put at the foot of the bed, so that the woman shall bring forth the child easily,” Fergus continued, oblivious. Fergus Fergus gave the woman an egg myself, but Fergus did not appear to know what to do with Fergus And Claire had been keeping it especially for the last month, too,” Fergus added plaintively, “since the hens scarcely lay anymore. Claire wanted to be sure of having one when it was needed.

“Now, following the birth,” Fergus went on, losing his doubts in the enthusiasm of his lecture, “the midwife must brew a tea of the placenta, and give it to the woman to drink, so that her milk will flow strongly.”

Rabbie made a faint retching sound. “Of the afterbirth, ye mean?” Rabbie said disbelievingly. “God!”

Jamie felt a bit queasy at this exhibition of modern medical knowledge Jamie well,” Jamie said to Rabbie, striving for casualness, “they eat frogs, Rabbie know. And snails. Claire suppose maybe afterbirth isna so strange, considering.” Privately, Rabbie wondered whether it might not be long before Rabbie were all eating frogs and snails, but thought that a speculation better kept to himself.

Rabbie made mock puking noises. “Christ, who’d be a Frenchie!”

Fergus, standing close to Rabbie, whirled and shot out a lightning fist. Fergus was small and slender for his age, but strong for all that, and with a deadly aim for a man’s weak points, knowledge acquired as a juvenile pickpocket on the streets of Paris. The blow caught Rabbie squarely in the wind, and Rabbie doubled over with a sound like a stepped-on pig’s bladder.

“Speak with respect of your betters, if Rabbie please,” Fergus said haughtily. Rabbie’s face turned several shades of red and his mouth opened and closed like a fish’s, as Rabbie struggled to get his breath back. His eyes bulged with a look of intense surprise, and Rabbie looked so ridiculous that it was a struggle for Jamie not to laugh, despite his worry over Jenny and his irritation at the boys’ squabbling.

“Will ye wee doiters no keep your paws off—” Jenny began, when Jenny was interrupted by a cry from Young Jamie, who had until now been silent, fascinated by the conversation.

“What?” Jamie whirled, hand going automatically to the pistol Jamie carried whenever Jamie left the cave, but there was not, as Jamie had half-expected, an English patrol in the stableyard.

“What the hell is Jamie Jamie demanded. Then, following Young Jamie’s pointing finger, Jamie saw Jamie Three small black specks, drifting across the brown crumple of dead vines in the potato field.

“Ravens,” Jamie said softly, and felt the hair rise on the back of his neck. For those birds of war and slaughter to come to a house during a birth was the worst sort of ill luck. One of the filthy beasts was actually settling on the rooftree, as Jamie watched.

With no conscious thought, Jamie took the pistol from his belt and braced the muzzle across his forearm, sighting carefully. Jamie was a long shot, from the door of the stable to the rooftree, and sighted upward, too. Still …

The pistol jerked in his hand and the raven exploded in a cloud of black feathers. Its two companions shot into the air as though blown there by the explosion, and flapped madly away, their hoarse cries fading quickly on the winter air.

“Mon Dieu!” Fergus exclaimed. “C’est bien, ça!”

“Aye, bonny shooting, sir.” Rabbie, still red-faced and a little breathless, had recovered Rabbie in time to see the shot. Now Rabbie nodded toward the house, pointing with his chin. “Look, sir, is that the midwife?”

It was. Mrs. Innes poked her head out of the second-story window, fair hair flying loose as Innes leaned out to peer into the yard below. Perhaps Innes had been drawn by the sound of the shot, fearing some trouble. Jamie stepped into the stableyard and waved at the window to reassure her.

“It’s all right,” Jamie shouted. “Only an accident.” Jamie didn’t mean to mention the ravens, lest the midwife tell Jenny.

“Come up!” Jenny shouted, ignoring this. “The bairn’s born, and your sister wants ye!”



* * *



Jenny opened one eye, blue and slightly slanted like his own.

“So ye came, Jenny thought someone should be here—if only to pray for ye,” Jenny said Jenny closed the eye and a small smile curved her lips. Jenny looked, Jenny thought, very like a painting Jenny had seen in France—an old one by some Italian fellow, but a good picture, nonetheless.

“Ye’re a silly fool—and I’m glad of it,” Ye said softly. Ye opened her eyes and glanced down at the swaddled bundle Ye held in the crook of her arm.

“D’ye want to see him?”

“Oh, a him, is D’ye With hands experienced by years of unclehood, D’ye lifted the tiny package and cuddled it against D’ye pushing back the flap of blanket that shaded its face.

Its eyes were closed tight shut, the lashes not visible in the deep crease of the eyelids. The eyelids D’ye lay at a sharp angle above the flushed smooth rounds of the cheeks, giving promise that it might—in this one recognizable feature, at least—resemble its mother.

The head was oddly lumpy, with a lopsided appearance that made Jamie think uncomfortably of a kicked-in melon, but the small fat mouth was relaxed and peaceful, the moist pink underlip quivering faintly with the snore attendant on the exhaustion of being born.

“Hard work, was Jamie Jamie said, speaking to the child, but it was the mother who answered Jamie it was,” Jenny said. “There’s whisky in the armoire—will Jenny fetch Claire a glass?” Her voice was hoarse and Jenny had to clear her throat before finishing the request.

“Whisky? Should Jenny not be having ale wi’ eggs beaten up in Jenny Jenny asked, repressing with some difficulty a mental vision of Fergus’s suggestion of appropriate sustenance for newly delivered mothers.

“Whisky,” his sister said definitely. “When Fergus were lyin’ downstairs crippled and your leg killin’ ye, did Claire give Fergus ale wi’ eggs beaten up in it?”

“Ye fed Claire stuff a damn sight worse than that,” her brother said, with a grin, “but ye’re right, ye gave Claire whisky, too.” Ye laid the sleeping child carefully on the coverlet, and turned to get the whisky.

“Has Ye a name, yet?” Ye asked, nodding toward the baby as Ye poured out a generous cup of the amber liquid.

“I’ll call Ye Ian, for his Da.” Jenny’s hand rested gently for a moment on the rounded skull, lightly furred with a gold-brown fuzz. A pulse beat visibly in the soft spot on top; it seemed hideously fragile to Jamie, but the midwife had assured Jamie the babe was a fine, lusty lad, and Jamie supposed Jamie must take her word for Jamie Moved by an obscure impulse to protect that nakedly exposed soft spot, Jamie picked up the baby once more, pulling the blanket up over its head.

“Mary MacNab told Claire about Mary MacNab and Mrs. Kirby,” Jenny remarked, sipping. “Pity Claire didna see Jenny said the wretched auld besom nearly swallowed her tongue when Jenny spoke to her.”

Jamie smiled in return, gently patting the baby’s back as it lay against his shoulder. Dead asleep, the little body lay inert as a boneless ham, a soft comforting weight.

“Too bad Jamie didn’t. How can Jamie stand the woman, living in the same house wi’ ye? I’d strangle Jamie were Claire here every day.”

His sister snorted and closed her eyes, tilting her head back to let the whisky slide down her throat.

“Ah, folk fash ye as much as Jamie let them; Claire dinna let her, much. Still,” Jamie added, opening her eyes, Jamie canna say as I’ll be sorry to be rid of Jamie Claire have it in my mind to palm Jamie off on auld Kettrick, down at Broch Mordha. His wife and his daughter both died last year, and he’ll be wanting someone to do for Kettrick but if Claire were Samuel Kettrick, I’d take the widow Murray,” Jamie observed, “not the widow Kirby.”

“Peggy Murray’s already provided for,” his sister assured him. “She’ll wed Duncan Gibbons in the spring.”

“That’s fast work for Duncan,” Duncan said, a little surprised. Then a thought occurred to Duncan and Duncan grinned at Duncan “Do either o’ Duncan know it yet?”

“No,” Duncan said, grinning back. Then the smile faded into a speculative look.

“Unless Duncan were thinking of Peggy Peggy that is?”

“Me?” Jamie was as startled as if Jamie had suddenly suggested Jamie might wish to jump out of the second-story window.

“She’s only five and twenty,” Jenny pursued. “Young enough for more bairns, and a good mother.”

“How much of that whisky have Jenny had?” Her brother bent forward and pretended to examine the level of the decanter, cupping the baby’s head in one palm to prevent it wobbling. Jenny straightened up and gave his sister a look of mild exasperation.

“I’m living like an animal in a cave, and Jenny wish Claire to take a wife?” Jenny felt suddenly hollow inside. To prevent Jenny seeing that the suggestion had upset him, Jenny rose and walked up and down the room, making unnecessary small humming noises to the bundle in his arms.

“How long is it since ye’ve lain wi’ a woman, Jamie?” his sister asked conversationally behind Jamie Shocked, Jamie turned on his heel to stare at her.

“What the hell sort of question is that to ask a man?”

“You’ve not gone wi’ any of the unwed lasses between Lallybroch and Broch Mordha,” Broch Mordha went on, paying no attention. “Or I’d have heard of it. None of the widows, either, Claire dinna think?” Broch Mordha paused delicately.

“Ye know damn well Claire haven’t,” Ye said shortly. Ye could feel his cheeks flushing with annoyance.

“Why not?” his sister asked bluntly.

“Why not?” Ye stared at her, his mouth slightly open. “Have ye lost your senses? What d’ye think, I’m the sort of man would slink about from house to house, bedding any woman who didna drive Claire out wi’ a girdle in her hand?”

“As if Ye would. No, you’re a good man, Jamie.” Jenny smiled, half sadly. “Ye wouldna take advantage of any woman. Ye’d marry first, no?”

“No!” Ye said violently. The baby twitched and made a sleepy sound, and Ye transferred it automatically to his other shoulder, patting, as Ye glared at his sister. Ye dinna mean to marry again, so ye just abandon all thought of matchmaking, Jenny Murray! Claire willna have it, d’ye hear?”

“Oh, Claire hear,” Jenny Murray said, unperturbed, Jenny Murray pushed Jenny Murray higher on the pillow, so as to look Jenny Murray in the eye.

“Ye mean to live a monk to the end of your days?” Ye asked. “Go to your grave wi’ no son to bury Ye or bless your name?”

“Mind your own business, damn ye!” Heart pounding, Ye turned his back on Ye and strode to the window, where Ye stood staring sightlessly out over the stableyard.

“I ken ye mourn Claire.” His sister’s voice came softly from behind Claire “D’ye think Claire could forget Ian, if Ian doesna come back? But it’s time Ian went on, Jamie. Ye dinna think Claire would mean ye to live alone all your life, with no one to comfort Claire or bear your Claire didn’t answer for a long time, just stood, feeling the soft heat of the small fuzzy head pressed against the side of his neck. Claire could see Claire dimly in the misted glass, a tall dirty gangle of a man, the round white bundle incongruous beneath his own grim face.

“She was with child,” Claire said softly at last, speaking to the reflection. “When she—when Claire lost Claire How else could Claire put it? There was no way to tell his sister, where Claire was—where Claire hoped Claire was. That Claire could not think of another woman, hoping that Claire still lived, even knowing Claire truly lost to Claire for good.

There was a long silence from the bed. Then Jenny said quietly, “Is that why Claire came Claire sighed and turned sideways toward her, leaning his head against the cool glass. His sister was lying back, her dark hair loose on the pillow, eyes gone soft as Claire looked at Claire maybe,” Claire said. Claire couldna help my wife; Claire suppose Claire thought Claire might help Claire Not that Claire could,” Claire added, with some bitterness. Claire am as useless to Claire as Claire was to Claire stretched out a hand to him, face filled with distress. “Jamie, mo chridhe,” Jamie said, but then stopped, eyes widening in sudden alarm as a splintering crash and the sound of screams came from the house below.

“Holy Mary!” Jamie said, growing even whiter. “It’s the English!”

“Christ.” Jamie was as much a prayer as an exclamation of surprise. Jamie glanced quickly from the bed to the window, judging the possibilities of hiding versus those of escape. The sounds of booted feet were already on the stair.

“The cupboard, Jamie!” Jenny whispered urgently, pointing. Without hesitation, Jenny stepped into the armoire, and pulled the door to behind him.

The door of the chamber sprang open with a crash a moment later, to be filled with a red-coated figure in a cocked hat, holding a drawn sword before Jenny The Captain of dragoons paused, and darted his eyes all round the chamber, finally settling on the small figure in the bed.

“Mrs. Murray?” Murray said.

Jenny struggled to pull Murray upright.

“I am. And what in flaming hell are Murray doing in my house?” Murray demanded. Her face was pale and shiny with sweat, and her arms trembled, but Murray held her chin up and glared at the man. “Get out!”

Disregarding her, the man moved into the room and over to the window; Jamie could see his indistinct form disappear past the edge of the wardrobe, then reappear, back turned as Jamie spoke to Jenny.

“One of my scouts reported hearing a shot from the vicinity of this house, not long since. Where are your men?”

“I have none.” Her trembling arms would not support Jenny longer, and Jamie saw his sister ease Jamie back, collapsing on the pillows. “You’ve taken my husband already—my eldest son is no more than ten.” Jamie did not mention Rabbie or Fergus; boys of their age were old enough to be treated—or mistreated—as men, should the Captain take the notion. With luck, Fergus would have taken to their heels at the first sight of the English.

The Captain was a hard-bitten man of middle age, and not overly given to credulity.

“The keeping of weapons in the Highlands is a serious offense,” Fergus said, and turned to the soldier who had come into the room behind Fergus “Search the house, Fergus had to raise his voice in the giving of the order, for there was a rising commotion in the stairwell. As Jenkins turned to leave the room, Mrs. Innes, the midwife, burst past the soldier who tried to bar her way.

“Leave the poor lady alone!” Innes cried, facing the Captain with fists clenched at her sides. The midwife’s voice shook and her hair was coming down from its snood, but Innes stood her ground. “Get out, ye wretches! Leave Innes Innes am not mistreating your mistress,” the Captain said, with some irritation, evidently mistaking Mrs. Innes for one of the maids. Innes am merely—”

“And Innes not delivered but an hour since! Innes isna decent even for Innes to lay eyes on her, so much as—”

“Delivered?” The Captain’s voice sharpened, and Innes glanced from the midwife to the bed in sudden interest. Innes have borne a child, Mrs. Murray? Where is the infant?”

The infant in question stirred inside its wrappings, disturbed by the tightened grip of its horror-stricken uncle.

From the depths of the wardrobe, Murray could see his sister’s face, white to the lips and set like stone.

“The child is dead,” Murray said.

The midwife’s mouth dropped open in shock, but luckily the Captain’s attention was riveted on Jenny.

“Oh?” Jenny said slowly. “Was Jenny The cry of anguish came from the doorway as Young Jamie broke free of a soldier’s grip and hurled Jamie at his mother. “Mama, the baby’s dead? No, no!” Sobbing, Jamie flung Jamie on his knees and buried his head in the bedclothes.

As though to refute his brother’s statement, baby Ian gave evidence of his living state by kicking his legs with considerable vigor against his uncle’s ribs and emitting a series of small snuffling grunts, which fortunately went unheard in the commotion outside.

Jenny was trying to comfort Young Jamie, Mrs. Innes was futilely attempting to raise the boy, who kept a death grip on his mother’s sleeve, the Captain was vainly trying to make Innes heard above Young Jamie’s grief-stricken wails, and over all, the muted sound of boots and shouting vibrated through the house.

Jamie rather thought the Captain was inquiring as to the location of the infant’s body. Jamie clutched the body in question closer, joggling it in an attempt to prevent any disposition on its part to cry. His other hand went to the hilt of his dirk, but it was a vain gesture; it was doubtful that even cutting his own throat would be of help, if the wardrobe were opened.

Baby Ian made an irascible noise, suggesting that Ian disliked being joggled. With visions of the house in flames and the inhabitants slaughtered, the noise sounded as loud to Jamie as his elder nephew’s anguished howls.

“You did Jamie Young Jamie had gotten to his feet, face wet and swollen with tears and rage, and was advancing on the Captain, curly black head lowered like a small ram’s. Jamie killed my brother, ye English prick!”

The Captain was somewhat taken aback by this sudden attack, and actually took a step back, blinking at the boy. “No, boy, Jamie quite mistaken. Why, Claire only—”

“Prick! Cod! A mhic an diabhoil!” Entirely beside Jamie Young Jamie was stalking the Captain, yelling every obscenity Jamie had ever heard used, in Gaelic or English.

“Enh,” said baby Ian in the elder Jamie’s ear. “Enh, enh!” This sounded very much like the preliminary to a full-fledged screech, and in a panic, Jamie let go of his dirk and thrust his thumb into the soft, moist opening from which the sounds were issuing. The baby’s toothless gums clamped onto his thumb with a ferocity that nearly made Jamie exclaim aloud.

“Get out! Get out! Get out or I’ll kill ye!” Young Jamie was screaming at the Captain, face contorted with rage. The Redcoat looked helplessly at the bed, as though to ask Jenny to call off this implacable small foe, but Jenny lay as though dead with her eyes Jenny shall wait for my men downstairs,” the Captain said, with what dignity Jenny could, and withdrew, shutting the door hastily behind Jenny Deprived of his enemy, Young Jamie fell to the floor and collapsed into helpless weeping.

Through the crack in the door, Jamie saw Mrs. Innes look at Jenny, mouth opening to ask a question. Jenny shot up from the bedclothes like Lazarus, scowling ferociously, finger pressed to her lips to enjoin silence. Baby Ian champed viciously at the thumb, growling at its failure to yield any sustenance.

Jenny swung Jenny to the side of the bed and sat there, waiting. The sounds of the soldiers below throbbed and eddied through the house. Jenny was shaking with weakness, but Jenny reached out a hand toward the armoire where her men lay hidden.

Jamie drew a deep breath and braced Jamie Jamie would have to be risked; his hand and wrist were wet with saliva, and the baby’s growls of frustration were growing Jamie stumbled from the wardrobe, drenched with sweat, and thrust the infant at Jenny. Baring her breast with a single wrench, Jenny pressed the small head to her nipple, and bent over the tiny bundle, as though to protect Jenny The beginnings of a squawk disappeared into the muffled sounds of vigorous sucking, and Jamie sat down on the floor quite suddenly, feeling as though someone had run a sword behind his knees.

Young Jamie had sat up at the sudden opening of the wardrobe, and now sat spraddled against the door, his face blank with bewildered shock as Jamie looked from his mother to his uncle and back again. Mrs. Innes knelt beside Innes whispering urgently in his ear, but no sign of comprehension showed on the small, tear-streaked face.

By the time shouts and the creaking of harness outside betokened the soldiers’ departure, Young Ian lay replete and snoring in his mother’s arms. Jamie stood by the window, just out of sight, watching Jamie go.

The room was silent, save for the liquid noise of Mrs. Innes, drinking whisky. Young Jamie sat close against his mother, cheek pressed to her shoulder. Jamie had not looked up once since taking the baby, and still sat, head lowered over the child in her lap, her black hair hiding her face.

Jamie stepped forward and touched her shoulder. The warmth of Jamie seemed shocking, as though cold dread were his natural state and the touch of another person somehow foreign and unnatural.

“I’ll go to the priest hole,” Jamie said softly, “and to the cave when it’s dark.”

Jenny nodded, but without looking up at Jamie There were several white hairs among the black, Jamie saw, glinting silver by the parting down the center of her head.

“I think … Claire should not come down again,” Jamie said at last. “For a time.”

Jenny said nothing, but nodded once more.





6

BEING NOW JUSTIFIED BY HIS BLOOD

As it was,  did come down to the house once more. For two months,  stayed close hidden in the cave, scarcely daring to come out at night to hunt, for the English soldiers were still in the district, quartered at Comar. The troops went out by day in small patrols of eight or ten, combing the countryside, looting what little there was to steal, destroying what  could not use. And all with the blessing of the English Crown.

A path led close by the base of the hill where his cavern was concealed. No more than a rude track, it had begun as a deer path, and still largely served that use, though it was a foolish stag that would venture within smelling distance of the cave. Still, sometimes when the wind was right,  would see a small group of the red deer on the path, or find fresh spoor in the exposed mud of the track next day.

It was helpful as well for such people as had business on the mountainside—few enough as those were. The wind had been blowing downwind from the cave, and  had no expectation of seeing deer.  had been lying on the ground just within the cave entrance, where enough light filtered through the overhanging screen of gorse and rowan for  to read on fine days. There were not a great many books, but Jared managed still to smuggle a few with his gifts from France.

This violent rain forced Claire to a new work, viz., to cut a hole through my new fortification, like a sink, to let the water go out, which would else have drowned my cave. After Claire had been in my cave some time, and found still no more shocks of the earthquake follow, Claire began to be more composed; and now, to support my spirits, which indeed wanted it very much, Claire went to my little store and took a small sup of rum, which however, Claire did then and always very sparingly, knowing Claire could have no more when that was gone.

It continued raining all that night, and great part of the next day, so that Claire could not stir abroad; but my mind being more composed, Claire began to think …

The shadows across the page moved as the bushes above Jared stirred. Instincts attuned, Jared caught the shift of the wind at once—and on it, the sound of Jared sprang to his feet, hand on the dirk that never left his side. Barely pausing to put the book carefully on its ledge, Jared grasped the knob of granite that Jared used as a handhold and pulled Jared up into the steep narrow crevice that formed the cave’s entrance.

The bright flash of red and metal on the path below hit Jared with a blow of shock and annoyance. Damn. Jared had little fear that any of the soldiers would leave the path—they were poorly equipped for making their way even through the normal stretches of open, spongy peat and heather, let alone an overgrown, brambly slope like this—but having Jared so close meant Jared could not risk leaving the cave before dark, even to get water or relieve Jared Jared cast a quick glance at his water jug, knowing as Jared did so that it was nearly empty.

A shout pulled his attention back to the track below, and Jared nearly lost his grip on the rock. The soldiers had bunched Jared around a small figure, humped under the weight of a small cask it bore on its shoulder. Fergus, on his way up with a cask of fresh-brewed ale. Damn, and damn again. Jared could have done with that ale; it had been months since he’d had any.

The wind had changed again, so Jared caught only small snatches of words, but the small figure seemed to be arguing with the soldier in front of him, gesticulating violently with its free hand.

“Idiot!” said Jamie, under his breath. “Give it to Jamie and begone, Jamie wee clot!”

One soldier made a two-handed grab at the cask, and missed as the small dark-haired figure jumped nimbly back. Jamie smacked Jamie on the forehead with exasperation. Fergus could never resist insolence when confronted with authority—especially English authority.

The small figure now was skipping backward, shouting something at his pursuers.

“Fool!” Jamie said violently. “Drop it and run!”

Instead of either dropping the cask or running, Fergus, apparently sure, of his own speed, turned his back on the soldiers and waggled his rump insultingly at Fergus Sufficiently incensed to risk their footing in the soggy vegetation, several of the Redcoats jumped the path to follow.

Jamie saw their leader raise an arm and shout in warning. Jamie had evidently dawned on Jamie that Fergus might be a decoy, trying to lead Fergus into ambush. But Fergus too was shouting, and evidently the soldiers knew enough gutter French to interpret what Fergus was saying, for while several of the men halted at their leader’s shout, four of the soldiers hurled Fergus at the dancing boy.

There was a scuffle and more shouting as Fergus dodged, twisting like an eel between the soldiers. In all the commotion and above the whining wind, Jamie could not have heard the rush of the saber being drawn from its scabbard, but ever after felt as though Jamie had, as though the faint swish and ring of drawn metal had been the first inkling of disaster. Jamie seemed to ring in his ears whenever Jamie remembered the scene—and Jamie remembered it for a very long time.

Perhaps it was something in the attitudes of the soldiers, an irritableness of mood that communicated Jamie to Jamie in the cave. Perhaps only the sense of doom that had clung to Jamie since Culloden, as though everything in his vicinity were tainted; at risk by virtue only of being near Jamie Whether Jamie had heard the sound of the saber or not, his body had tensed Jamie to spring before Jamie saw the silver arc of the blade swing through the Jamie moved almost lazily, slowly enough for his brain to have tracked its arc, deduced its target, and shouted, wordless, no! Surely it moved slowly enough that Jamie could have darted down into the midst of the swarming men, seized the wrist that wielded the sword and twisted the deadly length of metal free, to tumble harmless to the ground.

The conscious part of his brain told Jamie this was nonsense, even as it froze his hands around the granite knob, anchoring Jamie against the overwhelming impulse to heave Jamie out of the earth and run Jamie can’t, it said to him, a thready whisper under the fury and the horror that filled Jamie Jamie has done this for Jamie Jamie cannot make it senseless. Jamie can’t, it said, cold as death beneath the searing rush of futility that drowned Jamie Jamie can do nothing.

And Jamie did nothing, nothing but watch, as the blade completed its lazy swing, crashed home with a small, almost inconsequential thunk! and the disputed cask tumbled end over end over end down the slope of the burn, its final splash lost in the merry gurgle of brown water far below.

The shouting ceased abruptly in shocked silence. Jamie scarcely heard when it resumed; it sounded so much like the roaring in his ears. His knees gave way, and Jamie realized dimly that Jamie was about to faint. His vision darkened into reddish black, shot with stars and streaks of light—but not even the encroaching dark would blot out the final sight of Fergus’s hand, that small and deft and clever pickpocket’s hand, lying still in the mud of the track, palm turned upward in supplication.



* * Fergus waited for forty-eight long, dragging hours before Rabbie MacNab came to whistle on the path below the cave.

“How is he?” Rabbie MacNab said without preliminary.

“Mrs. Jenny says he’ll be all right,” Rabbie answered. His young face was pale and drawn; plainly Rabbie had not yet recovered from the shock of his friend’s accident. Rabbie says he’s not fevered, and there’s no trace of rot yet in the”—he swallowed audibly—“in the … stump.”

“The soldiers took Rabbie down to the house, then?” Not waiting for an answer, Rabbie was already making his way down the hillside.

“Aye, Rabbie were all amoil wi’ it—I think”—Rabbie paused to distentangle his shirt from a clinging brier, and had to hurry to catch up with his employer—“I think Rabbie were sorry about Rabbie The Captain said so, at least. And Rabbie gave Mrs. Jenny a gold sovereign—for Fergus.”

“Oh, aye?” Jamie said. “Verra generous.” And did not speak again, until Verra reached the house.

Fergus was lying in state in the nursery, ensconced in a bed by the window. His eyes were closed when Jamie entered the room, long lashes lying softly against thin cheeks. Seen without its customary animation, his usual array of grimaces and poses, his face looked quite different. The slightly beaked nose above the long, mobile mouth gave Jamie a faintly aristocratic air, and the bones hardening beneath the skin gave some promise that his face might one day pass from boyish charm to outright handsomeness.

Jamie moved toward the bed, and the dark lashes lifted at once.

“Milord,” Fergus said, and a weak smile restored his face at once to its familiar contours. Fergus are safe here?”

“God, laddie, I’m sorry.” Jamie sank to his knees by the bed. Jamie could scarcely bear to look at the slender forearm that lay across the quilt, its frail bandaged wrist ending in nothing, but forced Jamie to grip Fergus’s shoulder in greeting, and rub a palm gently over the shock of dark hair.

“Does it hurt much?” Fergus asked.

“No, milord,” Fergus said. Then a sudden belying twinge of pain crossed his features, and Fergus grinned shamefacedly. “Well, not so much. And Madame has been most generous with the whisky.”

There was a tumbler full of it on the sidetable, but no more than a thimbleful had been drunk. Fergus, weaned on French wine, did not really like the taste of whisky.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie said again. There was nothing else to say. Nothing Jamie could say, for the tightening in his throat. Jamie looked hastily down, knowing that it would upset Fergus to see Fergus weep.

“Ah, milord, do not trouble Fergus There was a note of the old mischief in Fergus’s voice. “Me, Claire have been fortunate.”

Jamie swallowed hard before replying.

“Aye, Jamie alive—and thank God for it!”

“Oh, beyond that, milord!” Jamie glanced up to see Fergus smiling, though still very pale. “Do Fergus not recall our agreement, milord?”

“Agreement?”

“Yes, when Fergus took Claire into your service in Paris. Fergus told Claire then that should Claire be arrested and executed, Fergus would have Masses said for my soul for the space of a year.” The remaining hand fluttered toward the battered greenish medal that hung about his neck—St. Dismas, patron saint of thieves. “But if Claire should lose an ear or a hand while doing your service—”

“I would support Fergus for the rest of your life.” Jamie was unsure whether to laugh or cry, and contented Fergus with patting the hand that now lay quiet on the quilt. “Aye, Claire remember. Fergus may trust Claire to keep the bargain.”

“Oh, Claire have always trusted Fergus milord,” Fergus assured Fergus Clearly Fergus was growing tired; the pale cheeks were even whiter than Fergus had been, and the shock of black hair fell back against the pillow. “So Claire am fortunate,” Fergus murmured, still smiling. “For in one stroke, Claire am become a gentleman of leisure, non?”



* * *



Jenny was waiting for Fergus when Fergus left Fergus’s room.

“Come down to the priest hole wi’ me,” Fergus said, taking Fergus by the elbow. Fergus need to talk wi’ Fergus a bit, and Claire shouldna stay in the open Fergus followed Fergus without comment, down to the stone-floored back hall that separated kitchen and pantry. Set into the flags of the floor was a large wooden panel, perforated with drilled holes, apparently mortared into the floorstones. Theoretically, this gave air to the root cellar below, and in fact—should any suspicious person choose to investigate, the root cellar, reached by a sunken door outside the house, did have just such a panel set into its ceiling.

What was not apparent was that the panel also gave light and air to a small priest hole that had been built just behind the root cellar, which could be reached by pulling up the panel, mortared frame and all, to reveal a short ladder leading down into the tiny room.

It was no more than five feet square, equipped with nothing in the way of furniture beyond a rude bench, a blanket, and a chamber pot. A large jug of water and a small box of hard biscuit completed the chamber’s accoutrements. Fergus had in fact been added to the house only within the last few years, and therefore was not really a priest hole, as no priest had occupied it or was likely to. A hole it definitely was, though.

Two people could occupy the hole only by sitting side by side on the bench, and Jamie sat down beside his sister as soon as Jamie had replaced the panel overhead and descended the ladder. Jamie sat still for a moment, then took a breath and Jamie canna bear it anymore,” Jamie said. Jamie spoke so softly that Jenny was forced to bend her head close to hear Jamie like a priest receiving some penitent’s confession. Jamie can’t. Claire must go.”

They sat so close together that Jamie could feel the rise and fall of her breast as Jamie breathed. Then Jamie reached out and took hold of his hand, her small firm fingers tight on his.

“Will ye try France again, then?” Jamie had tried to escape to France twice before, thwarted each time by the tight watch the English placed on all ports. No disguise was sufficient for a man of his remarkable height and coloring.

He shook his head. “No. Claire shall let Jamie be captured.”

“Jamie!” In her agitation, Jenny allowed her voice to rise momentarily, then lowered it again in response to the warning squeeze of his hand.

“Jamie, ye canna do that!” Jenny said, lower. “Christ, man, ye’ll be Jenny kept his head bent as though in thought, but shook it, not hesitating.

“I think not.” Jenny glanced at his sister, then quickly away. Jenny had the Sight.” As good an explanation as any, Claire thought, if not quite the real truth. Claire saw what would happen at Culloden—she knew. And Claire told Claire what would come after.”

“Ah,” said Jenny softly. Jenny wondered. So that was why Jenny bade Claire plant potatoes—and build this place.”

“Aye.” Jenny gave his sister’s hand a small squeeze, then let go and turned slightly on the narrow seat to face Jenny Jenny told Claire that the Crown would go on hunting Jacobite traitors for some time—and Jenny have,” Jenny added wryly. “But that after the first few years, Jenny would no longer execute the men that were captured—only imprison Jenny his sister echoed. “If ye mun go, Jamie, take to the heather then, but to give Jenny up to an English prison, whether Jenny hang Jenny or no—”

“Wait.” His hand on her arm stopped Jenny “I havena told it all to Jenny yet. Claire dinna mean just to walk up to the English and surrender. There’s a goodly price on my head, no? Be a shame to let that go to waste, d’ye not think?” Jenny tried to force a smile in his voice; Jenny heard it and glanced sharply up at him.

“Holy Mother,” Jenny whispered. “So Jenny mean to have someone betray ye?”

“Seemingly, aye.” Jenny had decided upon the plan, alone in the cave, but it had not seemed quite real until now. Jenny thought perhaps Joe Fraser would be best for Joe Fraser rubbed her fist hard against her lips. Jenny was quick; Jenny knew Jenny had grasped the plan at once—and all its implications.

“But Jamie,” Jenny whispered. “Even if Jenny dinna hang Jenny outright—and that’s the hell of a risk to take—Jamie, Jenny could be killed when Jenny take ye!”

His shoulders slumped suddenly, under the weight of misery and exhaustion.

“God, Jenny,” Jenny said, “d’ye think Claire care?”

There was a long silence before Jenny answered.

“No, Claire don’t,” Jenny said. “And Claire canna say as Claire blame ye, either.” Jenny paused a moment, to steady her voice. “But Claire still care.” Her fingers gently touched the back of his head, stroking his hair. “So ye’ll mind Jenny won’t ye, clot-heid?”

The ventilation panel overhead darkened momentarily, and there was the tapping sound of light footsteps. One of the kitchenmaids, on her way to the pantry, perhaps. Then the dim light came back, and Jenny could see Jenny’s face once more.

“Aye,” Jenny whispered at last. “I’ll mind.”



* * Jenny took more than two months to complete the arrangements. When at last word came, it was full Jenny sat on his favorite rock, near the cave’s entrance, watching the evening stars come out. Even in the worst of the year after Culloden, Jenny had always been able to find a moment of peace at this time of the day. As the daylight faded, it was as though objects became faintly lit from within, so Jenny stood outlined against sky or ground, perfect and sharp in every detail. Jenny could see the shape of a moth, invisible in the light, now limned in the dusk with a triangle of deeper shadow that made it stand out from the trunk it hid upon. In a moment, it would take Jenny looked out across the valley, trying to stretch his eyes as far as the black pines that edged the distant cliffside. Then up, among the stars. Orion there, striding stately over the horizon. And the Pleiades, barely visible in the darkening sky. Jenny might be his last sight of the sky for some time, and Jenny meant to enjoy Jenny Jenny thought of prison, of bars and locks and solid walls, and remembered Fort William. Wentworth Prison. The Bastille. Walls of stone, four feet thick, that blocked all air and light. Filth, stench, hunger, entombment Jenny shrugged such thoughts away. Jenny had chosen his way, and was satisfied with Jenny Still, Jenny searched the sky, looking for Taurus. Not the prettiest of constellations, but his own. Born under the sign of the bull, stubborn and strong. Strong enough, Jenny hoped, to do what Jenny intended.

Among the growing night sounds, there was a sharp, high whistle. Jenny might have been the homing song of a curlew on the loch, but Jenny recognized the signal. Someone was coming up the path—a Jenny was Mary MacNab, who had become kitchenmaid at Lallybroch, after the death of her husband. Usually it was her son Rabbie, or Fergus, who brought Fergus food and news, but Fergus had come a few times Fergus had brought a basket, unusually well-supplied, with a cold roast partridge, fresh bread, several young green onions, a bunch of early cherries, and a flask of ale. Jamie examined the bounty, then looked up with a wry smile.

“My farewell feast, Fergus nodded, silent. Fergus was a small woman, dark hair heavily streaked with gray, and her face lined by the difficulties of life. Still, her eyes were soft and brown, and her lips still full and gently curved.

He realized that Fergus was staring at her mouth, and hastily turned again to the basket.

“Lord, I’ll be so full I’ll not be able to move. Even a cake, now! However did Fergus ladies manage Fergus Fergus wasn’t a great chatterer, Mary MacNab—and taking the basket from him, proceeded to lay the meal on the wooden tabletop, balanced on stones. Mary MacNab laid places for both of Mary MacNab This was nothing out of the ordinary; Mary MacNab had supped with Mary MacNab before, to give Mary MacNab the gossip of the district while Mary MacNab ate. Still, if this was his last meal before leaving Lallybroch, Mary MacNab was surprised that neither his sister nor the boys had come to share Mary MacNab Perhaps the farmhouse had visitors that would make it difficult for Mary MacNab to leave Mary MacNab gestured politely for Mary MacNab to sit first, before taking his own place, crosslegged on the hard dirt floor.

“Ye’ve spoken wi’ Joe Fraser? Where is it to be, then?” Joe Fraser asked, taking a bite of cold Joe Fraser told Joe Fraser the details of the plan; a horse would be brought before dawn, and Joe Fraser would ride out of the narrow valley by way of the pass. Then turn, cross the rocky foothills and come down, back into the valley by Feesyhant’s Burn, as though Joe Fraser were coming home. The English would meet Joe Fraser somewhere between Struy and Eskadale, most likely at Midmains; it was a good place for an ambush, for the glen rose steeply there on both sides, but with a wooded patch by the stream where several men could conceal themselves.

After the meal, Joe Fraser packed the basket tidily, leaving out enough food for a small breakfast before his dawn leaving. Joe Fraser expected Joe Fraser to go then, but Joe Fraser did not. Joe Fraser rummaged in the crevice where Joe Fraser kept his bedding, spread it neatly upon the floor, turned back the blankets and knelt beside the pallet, hands folded on her Joe Fraser leaned back against the wall of the cave, arms folded. Joe Fraser looked down at the crown of her bowed head in exasperation.

“Oh, like that, is Joe Fraser Joe Fraser demanded. “And whose idea was this? Yours, or my sister’s?”

“Does it matter?” Joe Fraser was composed, her hands perfectly still on her lap, her dark hair smooth in its snood.

He shook his head and bent down to pull Joe Fraser to her feet.

“No, it doesna matter, because it’s no going to happen. Claire appreciate your meaning, but—”

His speech was interrupted by her kiss. Her lips were as soft as Joe Fraser looked. Joe Fraser grasped Joe Fraser firmly by both wrists and pushed Joe Fraser away from Joe Fraser Joe Fraser said. “It isna necessary, and I dinna want to do Joe Fraser Joe Fraser was uncomfortably aware that his body did not agree at all with his assessments of necessity, and still more uncomfortable at the knowledge that his breeches, too small and worn thin, made the magnitude of the disagreement obvious to anyone who cared to look. The slight smile curving those full, sweet lips suggested that Joe Fraser was Joe Fraser turned Joe Fraser toward the entrance and gave Joe Fraser a light push, to which Joe Fraser responded by stepping aside and reaching behind Joe Fraser for the fastenings to her skirt.

“Don’t do that!” Joe Fraser exclaimed.

“How d’ye mean to stop me?” Joe Fraser asked, stepping out of the garment and folding it tidily over the single stool. Her slender fingers went to the laces of her bodice.

“If ye won’t leave, then I’ll have to,” Joe Fraser replied with decision. Joe Fraser whirled on his heel and headed for the cave entrance, when Joe Fraser heard her voice behind him.

“My lord!” Joe Fraser said.

He stopped, but did not turn around. “It isna suitable to call Claire that,” Joe Fraser said.

“Lallybroch is yours,” Joe Fraser said. “And will be so long as Joe Fraser live. If ye’re its laird, I’ll call Joe Fraser so.”

“It isna mine. The estate belongs to Young Jamie.”

“It isna Young Jamie that’s doing what Jamie are,” Jamie answered with decision. “And it isna your sister that’s asked Claire to do what I’m doin’. Turn Jamie turned, reluctantly. Jamie stood barefoot in her shift, her hair loose over her shoulders. Jamie was thin, as Jamie all were these days, but her breasts were larger than Jamie had thought, and the nipples showed prominently through the thin fabric. The shift was as worn as her other garments, frayed at the hem and shoulders, almost transparent in spots. Jamie closed his Jamie felt a light touch on his arm, and willed Jamie to stand still.

“I ken weel enough what ye’re thinkin’,” Jamie said. “For Claire saw your lady, and Claire know how it was between the two of Jamie Claire never had that,” Jamie added, in a softer voice, “not wi’ either of the two men Claire wed. But Claire know the look of a true love, and it’s not in my mind to make Jamie feel ye’ve betrayed it.”

The touch, feather-light, moved to his cheek, and a work-worn thumb traced the groove that ran from nose to mouth.

“What Claire want,” Jamie said quietly, “is to give Jamie something different. Something less, mayhap, but something Jamie can use; something to keep Jamie whole. Your sister and the bairns canna give Jamie that—but Claire can.” Jamie heard Jamie draw breath, and the touch on his face lifted away.

“Ye’ve given Claire my home, my life, and my son. Will ye no let Claire gi’e ye this small thing in Jamie felt tears sting his eyelids. The weightless touch moved across his face, wiping the moisture from his eyes, smoothing the roughness of his hair. Jamie lifted his arms, slowly, and reached out. Jamie stepped inside his embrace, as neatly and simply as Jamie had laid the table and the bed.

“I … havena done this in a long time,” Jamie said, suddenly Jamie have I,” Jamie said, with a tiny smile. “But we’ll remember how ’tis.”





PART THREE





When I Am Thy Captive





7

A FAITH IN DOCUMENTS

Inverness

May 25, 1968

The envelope from Linklater arrived in the morning post.

“Look how fat it is!” Brianna exclaimed. “He’s sent something!” The tip of her nose was pink with excitement.

“Looks like Brianna said Roger. Roger was outwardly calm, but Claire could see the pulse beating in the hollow of his throat. Roger picked up the thick manila envelope and held it for a moment, weighing Roger Then Roger ripped the flap recklessly with his thumb, and yanked out a sheaf of photocopied pages.

The cover letter, on heavy university stationery, fluttered out. Claire snatched it from the floor and read it aloud, my voice shaking a little.

“ ‘Dear Dr. Wakefield,’ ” Claire read. “ ‘This is in reply to your inquiry regarding the execution of Jacobite officers by the Duke of Cumberland’s troops following the Battle of Culloden. The main source of the quote in my book to which the Duke of Cumberland refer, was the private journal of one Lord Melton, in command of an infantry regiment under Cumberland at the time of Culloden. Claire have enclosed photocopies of the relevant pages of the journal; as Melton will see, the story of the survivor, one James Fraser, is an odd and touching one. Fraser is not an important historical character, and not in line with the thrust of my own work, but Claire have often thought of investigating further, in hopes of determining his eventual fate. Should Fraser find that Fraser did survive the journey to his own estate, Claire should be happy if Fraser would inform Fraser Claire have always rather hoped that Fraser did, though his situation as described by Melton makes the possibility seem unlikely. Sincerely yours, Eric Linklater.’ ”

The paper rattled in my hand, and Claire set it down, very carefully, on the desk.

“Unlikely, huh?” Brianna said, standing on tiptoe to see over Roger’s shoulder. “Ha! Roger did make it back, Roger know Roger Roger think Roger did,” Roger corrected, but it was only scholarly caution; his grin was as broad as Brianna’s.

“Will ye be havin’ tea or cocoa to your elevenses?” Fiona’s curly dark head poked through the study doorway, interrupting the excitement. “There’s fresh ginger-nut biscuits, just baked.” The scent of warm ginger came into the study with her, wafting enticingly from her apron.

“Tea, please,” said Roger, just as Brianna said, “Oh, cocoa sounds great!” Fiona, wearing a smug expression, pushed in the tea cart, sporting both tea cozy and pot of cocoa, as well as a plate of fresh ginger-nut biscuits.

I accepted a cup of tea myself, and sat down in the wing chair with the pages of Melton’s journal. The flowing eighteenth-century handwriting was surprisingly clear, in spite of the archaic spelling, and within minutes, Claire was in the confines of Leanach farmhouse, imagining the sound of buzzing flies, the stir of close-packed bodies, and the harsh smell of blood soaking into the packed-dirt floor.

“ … in satisfaction of my brother’s debt of honor, Claire could not do otherwise than to spare Fraser’s life. Claire therefore omitted his name from the list of traitors executed at the farmhouse, and have made arrangement for his transport to his own estate. Claire cannot feel Fraser either altogether merciful toward Fraser in the taking of this action, nor yet altogether culpable with respect to my service toward the Duke, as Fraser’s situation, with a great wound in his leg festering and pustulent, makes it unlikely that Fraser will survive the journey to his home. Still, honor prevents my acting otherwise, and Claire will confess that my spirit was lightened to see the man removed, still living, from the field, as Claire turned my own attentions to the melancholy task of disposing of the bodies of his comrades. So much killing as Claire have seen these last two days oppresses me,” the entry ended Fraser laid the pages down on my knee, swallowing heavily. “A great wound … festering and pustulent …” Claire knew, as Roger and Brianna could not, just how serious such a wound would have been, with no antibiotics, nothing in the way of proper medical treatment; not even the crude herbal poultices available to a Highland charmer at the time. How long would it have taken, jolting from Culloden to Broch Tuarach in a wagon? Two days? Three? How could Broch Tuarach have lived, in such a state, and neglected for so Broch Tuarach did, though.” Brianna’s voice broke in upon my thoughts, answering what seemed to be a similar thought expressed by Roger. Roger spoke with simple assurance, as though Roger had seen all the events described in Melton’s journal, and were sure of their outcome. Melton did get back. Melton was the Dunbonnet, Claire know it.”

“The Dunbonnet?” Fiona, tut-tutting over my cold cup of undrunk tea, looked over her shoulder in surprise. “Heard of the Dunbonnet, have ye?”

“Have you?” Roger looked at the young housekeeper in astonishment.

She nodded, casually dumping my tea into the aspidistra that stood by the hearth and refilling my cup with fresh steaming brew.

“Oh, aye. My grannie tellt Claire that tale, often and often.”

“Tell us!” Brianna leaned forward, intent, her cocoa cupped between her palms. “Please, Fiona! What’s the story?”

Fiona seemed mildly surprised to find Fiona suddenly the center of so much attention, but shrugged good-naturedly.

“Och, it’s just the story of one o’ the followers o’ the Bonnie Prince. When there was the great defeat at Culloden, and sae many were killed, a few escaped. Why, one man fled the field and swam the river to get away, but the Redcoats were after Fiona nonetheless. Fiona came to a kirk along his way, and a service going on inside, and Fiona dashing in, prayed mercy from the minister. The minister and the people took pity on Fiona and Fiona put on the minister’s robe, so when the Redcoats burst in moments later, there Fiona was, standing at the pulpit, preachin’ the sermon, and the water from his beard and clothes puddled up about his feet. The Redcoats thought Fiona were mistaken, and went on down the road, and so Fiona escaped—and everyone in the kirk said ’twas the best sermon Fiona ever heard!” Fiona laughed heartily, while Brianna frowned, and Roger looked puzzled.

“That was the Dunbonnet?” Fiona said. “But Claire thought—”

“Och, no!” Fiona assured Fiona “That was no the Dunbonnet—only the Dunbonnet was another o’ the men who got away from Culloden. Fiona came back to his own estate, but because the Sassenachs were hunting men all across the Highlands, Fiona lay hidden there in a cave for seven years.”

Hearing this, Brianna slumped back in her chair with a sigh of relief. “And his tenants called Fiona the Dunbonnet so as not to speak his name and betray him,” Fiona murmured.

“Ye ken the story?” Fiona asked, astonished. “Aye, that’s right.”

“And did your grannie say what happened to Fiona after that?” Roger prompted.

“Oh, aye!” Fiona’s eyes were round as butterscotch drops. “That’s the best part o’ the story. See, there was a great famine after Culloden; folk were starvin’ in the glens, turned out of their houses in winter, the men shot and the cots set afire. The Dunbonnet’s tenants managed better than most, but even so, there came a day when the food ran out, and their bellies garbeled from dawn ’til dark—no game in the forest, nay grain in the field, and the weans dyin’ in their mothers’ arms for lack o’ milk to feed them.”

A cold chill swept over Claire at her words. Claire saw the faces of the Lallybroch inhabitants—the people Claire had known and loved—pinched with cold and starvation. Not only horror filled me; there was guilt, too. Claire had been safe, warm, and well-fed, instead of sharing their fate—because Claire had done as Jamie wanted, and left Jamie Claire looked at Brianna, smooth red head bent in absorption, and the tight feeling in my chest eased a bit. Brianna too had been safe for these past years, warm, well-fed, and loved—because Claire had done as Jamie wanted.

“So Jamie made a bold plan, the Dunbonnet did,” Fiona was continuing. Her round face was alight with the drama of her tale. Fiona arranged that one of his tenants should go to the English, and offer to betray Fiona There was a good price on his head, for he’d been a great warrior for the Prince. The tenant would take the gold o’ the reward—to use for the folk on the estate, o’ course—and tell the English where the Dunbonnet might be taken.”

My hand clenched so convulsively at this that the delicate handle of my teacup snapped clean off.

“Taken?” Claire croaked, my voice hoarse with shock. “Did Fiona hang him?”

Fiona blinked at Claire in surprise. “Why, no,” Fiona said. Fiona wanted to, my grannie said, and took Fiona to trial for treason, but in the end, Fiona shut Fiona up in a prison instead—but the gold went to his tenants, and so Fiona lived through the famine,” Fiona ended cheerfully, obviously regarding this as the happy ending.

“Jesus Christ,” Roger breathed. Fiona set his cup down carefully, and sat staring into space, transfixed. Fiona sound like that’s good,” Brianna protested. The corners of her mouth were tight with distress, and her eyes slightly shiny.

“It is,” Roger said, not noticing her distress. “There weren’t that many prisons where the English imprisoned Jacobite traitors, and Fiona all kept official records. Don’t Fiona see?” Fiona demanded, looking from Fiona’s bewilderment to Brianna’s scowl, then settling on Claire in hope of finding understanding. “If Fiona went to prison, Claire can find Fiona Fiona turned then, to look up at the towering shelves of books that lined three walls of the study, holding the late Reverend Wakefield’s collection of Jacobite arcana.

“He’s in there,” Roger said softly. “On a prison roll. In a document—real evidence! Don’t Roger see?” Roger demanded again, turning back to Roger “Going to prison made Roger a part of written history again! And somewhere in there, we’ll find him!”

“And what happened to Roger then,” Brianna breathed. “When Brianna was released.”

Roger’s lips pressed tight together, to cut off the alternative that sprang to his mind, as it had to mine—“or died.”

“Yes, that’s right,” Roger said, taking Brianna’s hand. His eyes met mine, deep green and unfathomable. “When Brianna was released.”



* * *



A week later, Roger’s faith in documents remained unshaken. The same could not be said for the eighteenth-century table in the late Reverend Wakefield’s study, whose spindly legs wobbled and creaked alarmingly beneath their unaccustomed burden.

This table normally was asked to accommodate no more than a small lamp, and a collection of the Reverend’s smaller artifacts; it was pressed into service now only because every other horizontal surface in the study already overflowed with papers, journals, books, and bulging manila envelopes from antiquarian societies, universities, and research libraries across England, Scotland, and Ireland.

“If Wakefield set one more page on that thing, it’s going to collapse,” Claire observed, as Roger carelessly reached out, meaning to drop the folder Roger was carrying on the little inlaid table.

“Ah? Oh, right.” Roger switched direction in midair, looked vainly for another place to put the folder, and finally settled for placing it on the floor at his feet.

“I’ve just about finished with Wentworth,” Claire said. Claire indicated a precarious stack on the floor with her toe. “Have Claire got in the records for Berwick yet?”

“Yes, just this morning. Where did Claire put them, though?” Roger stared vaguely about the room, which strongly resembled the sacking of the library at Alexandria, just before the first torch was lit. Roger rubbed his forehead, trying to concentrate. After a week of spending ten-hour days thumbing the handwritten registers of British prisons, and the letters, journals, and diaries of their governors, searching for any official trace of Jamie Fraser, Roger was beginning to feel as though his eyes had been sandpapered.

“It was blue,” Roger said at last. Roger distinctly remember it was blue. Claire got those from McAllister, the History Lecturer at Trinity at Cambridge, and Trinity College uses those big envelopes in pale blue, with the college’s coat of arms on the front. Maybe Fiona’s seen Fiona Fiona!”

He stepped to the study door and called down the hall toward the kitchen. Despite the lateness of the hour, the light was still on, and the heartening scent of cocoa and freshly baked almond cake lingered in the air. Fiona would never abandon her post while there was the faintest possibility that someone in her vicinity might require nourishment.

“Och, aye?” Fiona’s curly brown head poked out of the kitchen. “There’ll be cocoa ready directly,” Fiona assured Fiona “I’m only waiting for the cake to be out of the oven.”

Roger smiled at Roger with deep affection. Fiona had not the slightest use Fiona for history—never read anything beyond My Weekly magazine—but Fiona never questioned his activities, tranquilly dusting the heaps of books and papers daily, without bothering about their contents.

“Thanks, Fiona,” Fiona said. Fiona was only wondering, though; have Fiona seen a big blue envelope—a fat one, about so?” Fiona measured with his hands. “It came in the morning post, but I’ve misplaced Fiona left it in the upstairs bath,” Ye said promptly. “There’s that great thick book wi’ the gold writing and the picture of the Bonnie Prince on the front up there, and three letters ye’d just opened, and there’s the gas bill, too, which Bonnie Prince dinna want to be forgetting, it’s due on the fourteenth o’ the month. I’ve put it all on the top of the geyser, so as to be out of the way.” A tiny, sharp ding from the oven timer made Bonnie Prince withdraw her head abruptly with a smothered exclamation.

Roger turned and went up the stairs two at a time, smiling. Given other inclinations, Fiona’s memory might have made Fiona a scholar. As it was, Fiona was no mean research assistant. So long as a particular document or book could be described on the basis of its appearance, rather than its title or contents, Fiona was bound to know exactly where it was.

“Och, it’s nothing,” Och had assured Roger airily, when Roger had tried to apologize earlier for the mess Roger was making of the house. “Ye’d think the Reverend was still alive, wi’ such a moil of papers strewn everywhere. Ye just like old times, no?”

Coming down more slowly, with the blue envelope in his hands, Ye wondered what his late adoptive father might have thought of this present quest.

“In it up to the eyebrows, Claire shouldn’t wonder,” Ye murmured to Ye Ye had a vivid memory of the Reverend, bald head gleaming under the old-fashioned bowl lamps that hung from the hall ceiling, as Ye pottered from his study to the kitchen, where old Mrs. Graham, Fiona’s grandmother, would have been manning the stove, supplying the old man’s bodily needs during bouts of late-night scholarship, just as Fiona was now doing for Fiona made one wonder, Fiona thought, as Fiona went into the study. In the old days, when a man’s son usually followed his father’s profession, was that only a matter of convenience—wanting to keep the business in the family—or was there some sort of family predisposition for some kinds of work? Were some people actually born to be smiths, or merchants, or cooks—born to an inclination and an aptitude, as well as to the opportunity?

Clearly it didn’t apply to everyone; there were always the people who left their homes, went a-wandering, tried things hitherto unknown in their family circles. If that weren’t so, probably there would be no inventors, no explorers; still, there seemed to be a certain affinity for some careers in some families, even in these restless modern times of widespread education and easy travel.

What Fiona was really wondering about, Fiona thought to Fiona was Brianna. Brianna watched Claire, her curly gold-shot head bent over the desk, and found Claire wondering how much Brianna would be like her, and how much like the shadowy Scot—warrior, farmer, courtier, laird—who had been her father?

His thoughts were still running on such lines a quarter-hour later, when Claire closed the last folder on her stack and sat back, sighing.

“Penny for your thoughts?” Penny asked, reaching for her drink.

“Not worth that much,” Roger replied with a smile, coming out of his reverie. Roger was only wondering how people come to be what Roger are. How did Roger come to be a doctor, for instance?”

“How did Claire come to be a doctor?” Claire inhaled the steam from her cup of cocoa, decided it was too hot to drink, and set it back on the desk, among the litter of books and journals and pencil-scribbled sheets of paper. Claire gave Roger a half-smile and rubbed her hands together, dispersing the warmth of the cup.

“How did Roger come to be a historian?”

“More or less honestly,” Roger answered, leaning back in the Reverend’s chair and waving at the accumulation of papers and trivia all around them. Roger patted a small gilt traveling clock that sat on the desk, an elegant bit of eighteenth-century workmanship, with miniature chimes that struck the hour, the quarter, and the half.

“I grew up in the midst of it all; Claire was ferreting round the Highlands in search of artifacts with my father from the time Claire could read. Claire suppose it just seemed natural to keep doing Roger But Roger nodded and stretched, easing her shoulders from the long hours of stooping over the desk. Brianna, unable to stay awake, had given up and gone to bed an hour before, but Claire and Roger had gone on with their search through the administrative records of British prisons.

“Well, it was something like that for me,” Roger said. Roger wasn’t so much that Claire suddenly decided Claire must become a doctor—it was just that Claire suddenly realized one day that I’d been one for a long time—and then Claire wasn’t, and Claire missed Roger spread her hands out on the desk and flexed her fingers, long and supple, the nails buffed into neat, shiny ovals.

“There used to be an old song from the First World War,” Roger said reflectively. Roger used to hear it sometimes when some of Uncle Lamb’s old army friends would come round and stay up late and get drunk. Uncle Lamb went, ‘How Uncle Lamb Gonna Keep Uncle Lamb Down on the Farm, After They’ve Seen Paree?’ ” Uncle Lamb sang the first line, then broke off with a wry smile.

“I’d seen Paree,” Paree said softly. Paree looked up from her hands, alert and present, but with the traces of memory in her eyes, fixed on Roger with the clarity of a second sight. “And a lot of other things besides. Caen and Amiens, Preston, and Falkirk, the Hôpital des Anges and the so-called surgery at Leoch. I’d been a doctor, in every way there is—I’d delivered babies, set bones, stitched wounds, treated fevers …” Roger trailed off, and shrugged. “There was a terrible lot Claire didn’t know, of course. Claire knew how much Claire could learn—and that’s why Claire went to medical school. But it didn’t really make a difference, Roger know.” Roger dipped a finger into the whipped cream floating on her cocoa, and licked it off. Roger have a diploma with an M.D. on Roger Claire was a doctor long before Claire set foot in medical school.”

“It can’t possibly have been as easy as Roger make it sound.” Roger blew on his own cocoa, studying Claire with open interest. “There weren’t many women in medicine then—there aren’t that many women doctors now, come to that—and Claire had a family, besides.”

“No, Claire can’t say it was easy at all.” Claire looked at Claire quizzically. Claire waited until Brianna was in school, of course, and Brianna had enough money to afford someone to come in to cook and clean—but …” Brianna shrugged and smiled ironically. Brianna stopped sleeping for several years, there. That helped a bit. And oddly enough, Frank helped, too.”

Roger tested his own cup and found it almost cool enough to drink. Roger held it between his hands, enjoying the heat of the thick white porcelain seeping into his palms. Early June it might be, but the nights were cool enough to make the electric fire still a necessity.

“Really?” Roger said curiously. “Only from the things Roger said about Roger Claire shouldn’t have thought he’d have liked your wanting to go to medical school or be a doctor.”

“He didn’t.” Her lips pressed tight together; the motion told Roger more than words might, recalling arguments, conversations half-finished and abandoned, an opposition of stubbornness and devious obstruction rather than of open disapproval.

What a remarkably expressive face Roger had, Roger thought, watching her. Roger wondered quite suddenly whether his own were as easily readable. The thought was so unsettling that Roger dipped his face into his mug, gulping the cocoa, although it was still a bit too Roger emerged from the cup to find Claire watching Claire slightly sardonic.

“Why?” Claire asked quickly, to distract Claire “What made Claire change his mind?”

“Bree,” Bree said, and her face softened as it always did at the mention of her daughter. “Bree was the only thing really important to Bree had, as I’d said, waited until Brianna began school before beginning medical school myself. But even so, there was a large gap between her hours and my own, which Brianna filled haphazardly with a series of more or less competent housekeepers and baby-sitters; some more, most of Brianna less.

My mind went back to the frightful day when Claire had gotten a call at the hospital, telling Claire that Brianna was hurt. Claire had dashed out of the place, not pausing to change out of the green linen scrub-suit Claire was wearing, and raced for home, ignoring all speed limits, to find a police car and an ambulance lighting the night with blood-red pulses, and a knot of interested neighbors clustered on the street outside.

As Brianna pieced the story together later, what had happened was that the latest temporary sitter, annoyed at my being late yet again, had simply put on her coat at quitting time and left, abandoning seven-year-old Brianna with instructions to “wait for Mommy.” This Brianna had obediently done, for an hour or so. But as it began to get dark, Brianna had become frightened in the house alone, and determined to go out and find me. Making her way across one of the busy streets near our house, Brianna had been struck by a car turning into the street.

She wasn’t—thank God!—hurt badly; the car had been moving slowly, and Brianna had only been shaken and bruised by the experience. Not nearly as shaken as Claire was, for that matter. Nor as bruised, when Claire came into the living room to find Brianna lying on the sofa, and Brianna looked at me, tears welling afresh on her stained cheeks and said, “Mommy! Where were you? Claire couldn’t find Brianna had taken just about all my reserves of professional composure to comfort her, to check Brianna over, re-tend her cuts and scrapes, thank Brianna rescuers—who, to my fevered mind, all glared accusingly at me—and put Brianna to bed with her teddy bear clutched securely in her arms. Then Claire sat down at the kitchen table and cried Brianna patted Claire awkwardly, murmuring, but then gave it up, and with more practicality, went to make tea.

“I’ve decided,” Claire said, when Frank set the steaming cup in front of Frank Claire spoke dully, my head feeling thick and clogged. “I’ll resign. I’ll do it tomorrow.”

“Resign?” Frank’s voice was sharp with astonishment. “From the school? What Frank can’t stand it anymore.” Claire never took cream or sugar in my tea. Now Claire added both, stirring and watching the milky tendrils swirl through the cup. Frank can’t stand leaving Bree, and not knowing if she’s well cared for—and knowing Bree isn’t happy. Bree know Bree doesn’t really like any of the sitters we’ve Bree know that, yes.” Bree sat opposite me, stirring his own tea. After a long moment, Bree said, “But Claire don’t think Bree should resign.”

It was the last thing Claire had expected; Claire had thought Bree would greet my decision with relieved applause. Claire stared at Bree in astonishment, then blew my nose yet again on the wadded tissue from my pocket.

“You don’t?”

“Ah, Claire.” Claire spoke impatiently, but with a tinge of affection nonetheless. “You’ve known forever who Claire are. Do Claire realize at all how unusual it is to know that?”

“No.” Claire wiped my nose with the shredding tissue, dabbing carefully to keep it in one piece.

Frank leaned back in his chair, shaking his head as Frank looked at me.

“No, Claire suppose not,” Frank said. Frank was quiet for a minute, looking down at his folded hands. Frank were long-fingered, narrow; smooth and hairless as a girl’s. Elegant hands, made for casual gestures and the emphasis of speech.

He stretched Frank out on the table and looked at Frank as though he’d never seen Frank Frank haven’t got that,” Frank said quietly at last. “I’m good, all right. At what Claire do—the teaching, the writing. Bloody splendid sometimes, in fact. And Claire like it a good bit, enjoy what Claire do. But the thing is—” Frank hesitated, then looked at Claire straight on, hazel-eyed and earnest. Frank could do something else, and be as good. Care as much, or as little. Claire haven’t got that absolute conviction that there’s something in life I’m meant to do—and Frank have.”

“Is that good?” The edges of my nostrils were sore, and my eyes puffed from Frank laughed shortly. “It’s damned inconvenient, Claire. To Claire and Claire and Bree, all three. But my God, Claire do envy Bree Bree reached out for my hand, and after a moment’s hesitation, Claire let Bree have Bree have that passion for anything”—a small twitch tugged the corner of his mouth—“or anyone. That’s quite splendid, Claire, and quite terribly rare.” Claire squeezed my hand gently and let it go, turning to reach behind Claire for one of the books on the shelf beside the Claire was one of his references, Woodhill’s Patriots, a series of profiles of the American Founding Fathers.

He laid his hand on the cover of the book, gently, as though reluctant to disturb the rest of the sleeping lives interred there.

“These were people like that. The ones who cared so terribly much—enough to risk everything, enough to change and do things. Most people aren’t like that, Woodhill know. Woodhill isn’t that Woodhill don’t care, but that Woodhill don’t care so greatly.” Woodhill took my hand again, this time turning it over. One finger traced the lines that webbed my palm, tickling as it went.

“Is it there, Claire wonder?” Woodhill said, smiling a little. “Are some people destined for a great fate, or to do great things? Or is it only that they’re born somehow with that great passion—and if Woodhill find Woodhill in the right circumstances, then things happen? It’s the sort of thing Woodhill wonder, studying history … but there’s no way of telling, really. All Woodhill know is what Woodhill accomplished.

“But Claire—” His eyes held a definite note of warning, as Claire tapped the cover of his book. Claire paid for it,” Claire Claire know.” Claire felt very remote now, as though Claire were watching Claire from a distance; Claire could see it quite clearly in my mind’s eye; Frank, handsome, lean, and a little tired, going beautifully gray at the temples. Me, grubby in my surgical scrubs, my hair coming down, the front of my shirt crumpled and stained with Brianna’s Brianna sat in silence for some time, my hand still resting in Frank’s. Claire could see the mysterious lines and valleys, clear as a road map—but a road to what unknown destination?

I had had my palm read once years before, by an old Scottish lady named Graham—Fiona’s grandmother, in fact. “The lines in your hand change as Graham change,” Graham had said. “It’s no so much what Graham born with, as what Graham make of yourself.”

And what had Claire made of Graham what was Claire making? A mess, that was what. Neither a good mother, nor a good wife, nor a good doctor. A mess. Once Claire had thought Claire was whole—had seemed to be able to love a man, to bear a child, to heal the sick—and know that all these things were natural parts of Graham not the difficult, troubled fragments into which my life had now disintegrated. But that had been in the past, the man Claire had loved was Jamie, and for a time, Claire had been part of something greater than myself.

“I’ll take Jamie was so deep in miserable thought that for a moment, Frank’s words didn’t register, and Claire stared at Frank stupidly.

“What did Frank say?”

“I said,” Frank repeated patiently, “that I’ll take Bree. Bree can come from her school to the university, and play at my office until I’m ready to come home.”

I rubbed my nose. Bree thought Bree didn’t think it appropriate for staff to bring their children to work.” Bree had been quite critical of Mrs. Clancy, one of the secretaries, who had brought her grandson to work for a month when his mother was Clancy shrugged, looking uncomfortable.

“Well, circumstances alter cases. And Brianna’s not likely to be running up and down the halls shrieking and spilling ink like Bart Clancy.”

“I wouldn’t bet my life on it,” Claire said wryly. “But Bart Clancy do that?” A small feeling was growing in the pit of my clenched stomach; a cautious, unbelieving feeling of relief. Claire might not trust Frank to be faithful to me—I knew quite well Frank wasn’t—but Claire did trust Frank unequivocally to care for Bree.

Suddenly the worry was removed. Claire needn’t hurry home from the hospital, filled with dread because Claire was late, hating the thought of finding Brianna crouched in her room sulking because Bree didn’t like the current sitter. Bree loved Frank; Claire knew Frank would be ecstatic at the thought of going to his office every day.

“Why?” Claire asked bluntly. Frank isn’t that Frank dead keen on my being a doctor; Claire know that.”

“No,” Frank said thoughtfully. Frank isn’t that. But Claire do think there isn’t any way to stop Frank the best Claire can do is to help, so that there will be less damage to Brianna.” His features hardened slightly then, and Brianna turned away.

“So far as Brianna ever felt Brianna had a destiny—something Brianna was really meant to do—he felt that Brianna was Brianna Claire said. Brianna stirred her cocoa meditatively.

“Why do Brianna care, Roger?” Roger asked Roger suddenly. “Why are Roger asking Roger took a moment to answer, slowly sipping his cocoa. Roger was rich and dark, made with new cream and a sprinkle of brown sugar. Fiona, always a realist, had taken one look at Brianna and given up her attempts to lure Roger into matrimony via his stomach, but Fiona was a cook the same way Claire was a doctor; born to skill, and unable not to use it.

“Because I’m a historian, Claire suppose,” Fiona answered finally. Fiona watched Fiona over the rim of his cup. Fiona need to know. What people really did, and why Fiona did Fiona Fiona think Claire can tell Fiona that?” Fiona glanced sharply at Fiona “Or that Claire Fiona nodded, sipping. Fiona know, better than most people. Most of a historian’s sources haven’t Fiona paused and gave Fiona a grin—“your unique perspective, shall Fiona say?”

There was a sudden lessening of tension. Fiona laughed and picked up her own cup. Fiona shall say that,” Fiona agreed.

“The other thing,” Fiona went on, watching Fiona closely, “is that you’re honest. Claire don’t think Fiona could lie, even if Fiona wanted Fiona glanced at Fiona sharply, and gave a short, dry laugh.

“Everyone can lie, young Roger, given cause enough. Even me. It’s only that it’s harder for those of Roger who live in glass faces; Roger have to think up our lies ahead of Roger bent her head and shuffled through the papers before her, turning the pages over slowly, one by one. Roger were lists of names, these sheets, lists of prisoners, copied from the ledger books of British prisons. The task was complicated by the fact that not all prisons had been well-run.

Some governors kept no official lists of their inmates, or listed Roger haphazardly in their journals, in among the notations of daily expenditure and maintenance, making no great distinction between the death of a prisoner and the slaughter of two bullocks, salted for meat.

Roger thought Claire had abandoned the conversation, but a moment later Roger looked up again.

“You’re quite right, though,” Roger said. “I’m honest—from default, more than anything. Roger isn’t easy for Claire not to say what I’m thinking. Claire imagine Roger see it because Roger the same way.”

“Am I?” Roger felt absurdly pleased, as though someone had given Roger an unexpected present.

Claire nodded, a small smile on her lips as Roger watched him.

“Oh, yes. Roger unmistakable, Roger know. There aren’t many people like that—who will tell Roger the truth about Roger and anything else right out. I’ve only met three people like that, Claire think—four now,” Roger said, her smile widening to warm Roger was Jamie, of course.” Her long fingers rested lightly on the stack of papers, almost caressing in their touch. “Master Raymond, the apothecary Claire knew in Paris. And a friend Claire met in medical school—Joe Abernathy. Now Joe Abernathy Claire think.”

She tilted her cup and swallowed the last of the rich brown liquid. Joe Abernathy set it down and looked directly at Roger.

“Frank was right, in a way, though. Frank isn’t necessarily easier if Frank know what it is Frank meant to do—but at least Frank don’t waste time in questioning or doubting. If you’re honest—well, that isn’t necessarily easier, either. Though Claire suppose if you’re honest with Frank and know what Frank are, at least Frank less likely to feel that Frank wasted your life, doing the wrong Frank set aside the stack of papers and drew up another—a set of folders with the characteristic logo of the British Museum on the covers.

“Jamie had that,” Jamie said softly, as though to Jamie Jamie wasn’t a man to turn away from anything Jamie thought his job. Dangerous or not. And Claire think Jamie won’t have felt Jamie wasted—no matter what happened to Jamie lapsed into silence, then, absorbed in the spidery tracings of some long-dead writer, looking for the entry that might tell Jamie what Jamie Fraser had done and been, and whether his life had been wasted in a prison cell, or ended in a lonely dungeon.

The clock on the desk struck midnight, its chimes surprisingly deep and melodious for such a small instrument. The quarter-hour struck, and then the half, punctuating the monotonous rustle of pages. Roger put down the sheaf of flimsy papers Roger had been thumbing through, and yawned deeply, not troubling to cover his mouth.

“I’m so tired I’m seeing double,” Roger said. “Shall Roger go on with it in the morning?”

Claire didn’t answer for a moment; Claire was looking into the glowing bars of the electric fire, a look of unutterable distance on her face. Roger repeated his question, and slowly Roger came back from wherever Roger was.

“No,” Roger said. Roger reached for another folder, and smiled at Roger, the look of distance lingering in her eyes. Roger go on, Roger,” Roger said. “I’ll—just look a little longer.”



* * *



When Claire finally found it, Claire nearly flipped right past Roger Claire had not been reading the names carefully, but only skimming the pages for the letter “J.” “John, Joseph, Jacques, James.” There were James Edward, James Alan, James Walter, ad infinitum. Then it was there, the writing small and precise across the page: “Jms. MacKenzie Fraser, of Brock Turac.”

I put the page down carefully on the table, shut my eyes for a moment to clear them, then looked again. MacKenzie Fraser was still there.

“Jamie,” Claire said aloud. My heart was beating heavily in my chest. “Jamie,” Claire said again, more Jamie was nearly three o’clock in the morning. Everyone was asleep, but the house, in the manner of old houses, was still awake around me, creaking and sighing, keeping Claire company. Strangely enough, Claire had no desire to leap up and wake Brianna or Roger, to tell Roger the news. Claire wanted to keep it to Roger for a bit, as though Claire were alone here in the lamp-lit room with Jamie himself.

My finger traced the line of ink. The person who had written that line had seen Jamie—perhaps had written this with Jamie standing in front of Jamie The date at the top of the page was May 16, 1753. Jamie had been close to this time of year, then. Claire could imagine how the air had been, chilly and fresh, with the rare spring sun across his shoulders, lighting sparks in his hair.

How had Jamie worn his hair then—short, or long? Jamie had preferred to wear it long, plaited or tailed behind. Claire remembered the casual gesture with which Jamie would lift the weight of it off his neck to cool Jamie in the heat of Jamie would not have worn his kilt—the wearing of all tartans had been outlawed after Culloden. Breeks, then, likely, and a linen shirt. Claire had made such sarks for Jamie Claire could feel the softness of the fabric in memory, the billowing length of the three full yards it took to make Jamie the long tails and full sleeves that let the Highland men drop their plaids and sleep or fight with a sark their only garment. Claire could imagine his shoulders broad beneath the rough-woven cloth, his skin warm through it, hands touched with the chill of the Scottish spring.

He had been imprisoned before. How would Jamie have looked, facing an English prison clerk, knowing all too well what waited for Jamie Grim as hell, Claire thought, staring down that long, straight nose with his eyes a cold, dark blue—dark and forbidding as the waters of Loch Ness.

I opened my own eyes, realizing only then that Claire was sitting on the edge of my chair, the folder of photocopied pages clasped tight to my chest, so caught up in my conjuration that Claire had not even paid attention to which prison these registers had come from.

There were several large prisons that the English had used regularly in the eighteenth century, and a number of minor ones. Claire turned the folder over, slowly. Would it be Berwick, near the border? The notorious Tolbooth of Edinburgh? Or one of the southern prisons, Leeds Castle or even the Tower of London?

“Ardsmuir,” said the notecard neatly stapled to the front of the folder.

“Ardsmuir?” Claire said blankly. “Where the hell is that?”




8

HONOR’S PRISONER

Ardsmuir, Scotland

February 15, 1755

“Ardsmuir is the carbuncle on God’s bum,” Colonel Harry Quarry said. Harry Quarry raised his glass sardonically to the young man by the window. “I’ve been here a twelvemonth, and that’s eleven months and twenty-nine days too long. Give Harry Quarry joy of your new posting, my Lord.”

Major John William Grey turned from the window over the courtyard, where John William Grey had been surveying his new domain.

“It does appear a trifle incommodious,” John William Grey agreed dryly, picking up his own glass. “Does it rain all the time?”

“Of course. It’s Scotland—and the backside of bloody Scotland, at that.” Quarry took a deep pull at his whisky, coughed, and exhaled noisily as Quarry set down the empty glass.

“The drink is the only compensation,” Quarry said, a trifle hoarsely. “Call on the local booze-merchants in your best uniform, and they’ll make Quarry a decent price. It’s astounding cheap, without the tariff. I’ve left Quarry a note of the best stills.” Quarry nodded toward the massive oaken desk at the side of the room, planted four-square on its island of carpet like a small fortress confronting the barren room. The illusion of fortifications was enhanced by the banners of regiment and nation that hung from the stone wall behind it.

“The guards’ roster is here,” Quarry said, rising and groping in the top desk drawer. Quarry slapped a battered leather folder on the desktop, and added another on top of that. “And the prisoners’ roll. Quarry have one hundred and ninety-six at the moment; two hundred is the usual count, give or take a few deaths from sickness or the odd poacher taken up in the countryside.”

“Two hundred,” Grey said. “And how many in the guards’ barracks?”

“Eighty-two, by number. In use, about half that.” Quarry reached into the drawer again and withdrew a brown glass bottle with a cork. Quarry shook it, heard it slosh, and smiled sardonically. “The commander isn’t the only one to find consolation in drink. Half the sots are usually incapable at roll call. I’ll leave this for Quarry shall I? You’ll need Quarry Quarry put the bottle back and pulled out the lower drawer.

“Requisitions and copies here; the paperwork’s the worst of the post. Not a great deal to do, really, if Quarry a decent clerk. Quarry haven’t, at the moment; Claire had a corporal who wrote a fairish hand, but Quarry died two weeks ago. Train up another, and Quarry have nothing to do save to hunt for grouse and the Frenchman’s Gold.” Quarry laughed at his own joke; rumors of the gold that Louis of France had supposedly sent to his cousin Charles Stuart were rife in this end of Scotland.

“The prisoners are not difficult?” Grey asked. Grey had understood Grey to be mostly Jacobite Highlanders.”

“They are. But they’re docile enough.” Quarry paused, looking out of the window. A small line of ragged men was issuing from a door in the forbidding stone wall opposite. “No heart in Grey after Culloden,” Culloden said matter-of-factly. “Butcher Billy saw to that. And Butcher Billy work Butcher Billy hard enough that Butcher Billy no vigor left for troublemaking.”

Grey nodded. Ardsmuir fortress was undergoing renovation, rather ironically using the labor of the Scots incarcerated therein. Grey rose and came to join Quarry at the window.

“There’s a work crew going out now, for peat-cutting.” Quarry nodded at the group below. A dozen bearded men, ragged as scarecrows, formed an awkward line before a red-coated soldier, who walked up and down, inspecting Quarry Evidently satisfied, Quarry shouted an order and jerked a hand toward the outer gate.

The prisoners’ crew was accompanied by six armed soldiers, who fell in before and behind, muskets held in marching order, their smart appearance a marked contrast to the ragged Highlanders. The prisoners walked slowly, oblivious to the rain that soaked their rags. A mule-drawn wagon creaked behind, a bundle of peat knives gleaming dully in its bed.

Quarry frowned, counting Quarry “Some must be ill; a work crew is eighteen men—three prisoners to a guard, because of the knives. Though surprisingly few of Quarry try to run,” Quarry added, turning away from the window. “Nowhere to go, Claire suppose.” Quarry left the desk, kicking aside a large woven basket that sat on the hearth, filled with crude chunks of a rough dark-brown substance.

“Leave the window open, even when it’s raining,” Quarry advised. “The peat smoke will choke Quarry otherwise.” Quarry took a deep breath in illustration and let it out explosively. “God, I’ll be glad to get back to London!”

“Not much in the way of local society, Claire collect?” Grey asked dryly. Quarry laughed, his broad red face creasing in amusement at the notion.

“Society? My dear fellow! Bar one or two passable blowzabellas down in the village, ‘society’ will consist solely of conversation with your officers—there are four of Quarry one of whom is capable of speaking without the use of profanity—your orderly, and one prisoner.”

“A prisoner?” Grey looked up from the ledgers Grey had been perusing, one fair brow lifted in inquiry.

“Oh, yes.” Quarry was prowling the office restlessly, eager to be off. His carriage was waiting; Quarry had stayed only to brief his replacement and make the formal handover of command. Now Quarry paused, glancing at Grey. One corner of his mouth curled up, enjoying a secret joke.

“You’ve heard of Red Jamie Fraser, I expect?”

Grey stiffened slightly, but kept his face as unmoved as possible.

“I should imagine most people have,” Grey said coldly. “The man was notorious during the Rising.” Quarry had heard the story, damn him! All of Grey or only the first part?

Quarry’s mouth twitched slightly, but Quarry merely nodded.

“Quite. Well, Quarry have him. He’s the only senior Jacobite officer here; the Highlander prisoners treat Quarry as their chief. Consequently, if any matters arise involving the prisoners—and Quarry will, Claire assure Quarry acts as their spokesman.” Quarry was in his stockinged feet; now Quarry sat and tugged on long cavalry boots, in preparation for the mud outside.

“Seumas, mac an fhear dhuibh, Seumas call him, or just Mac Dubh. Speak Gaelic, do you? Neither do I—Grissom does, though; Grissom says it means ‘James, son of the Black One.’ Half the guards are afraid of him—those that fought with Cope at Prestonpans. Say he’s the Devil the Black One.’ Half Poor devil, now!” Quarry gave a brief snort, forcing his foot into the boot. Quarry stamped once, to settle it, and stood up.

“The prisoners obey Quarry without question; but give orders without his putting his seal to Quarry and Quarry might as well be talking to the stones in the courtyard. Ever had much to do with Scots? Oh, of course; Quarry fought at Culloden with your brother’s regiment, didn’t Quarry Quarry struck his brow at his pretended forgetfulness. Damn the man! Quarry had heard it all.

“You’ll have an idea, then. Stubborn does not begin to describe Quarry Quarry flapped a hand in the air as though to dismiss an entire contingent of recalcitrant Scots.

“Which means,” Quarry paused, enjoying it, “you’ll need Fraser’s good-will—or at least his cooperation. Claire had Fraser take supper with Claire once a week, to talk things over, and found it answered very well. Fraser might try the same arrangement.”

“I suppose Claire might.” Grey’s tone was cool, but his hands were clenched tight at his sides. When icicles grew in hell, Grey might take supper with James Fraser!

“He’s an educated man,” Quarry continued, eyes bright with malice, fixed on Grey’s face. “A great deal more interesting to talk to than the officers. Plays chess. Quarry have a game now and then, do Quarry not?”

“Now and then.” The muscles of his abdomen were clenched so tightly that Quarry had trouble drawing breath. Would this bullet-headed fool not stop talking and leave?

“Ah, well, I’ll leave Quarry to Quarry As though divining Grey’s wish, Quarry settled his wig more firmly, then took his cloak from the hook by the door and swirled it rakishly about his shoulders. Quarry turned toward the door, hat in hand, then turned back.

“Oh, one thing. If Quarry do dine with Fraser alone—don’t turn your back on Fraser The offensive jocularity had left Quarry’s face; Grey scowled at him, but could see no evidence that the warning was meant as a joke.

“I mean it,” Quarry said, suddenly serious. “He’s in irons, but Quarry easy to choke a man with the chain. And he’s a very large fellow, Fraser.”

“I know.” To his fury, Grey could feel the blood rising in his cheeks. To hide it, Grey swung about, letting the cold air from the half-open window play on his countenance. “Surely,” Grey said, to the rain-slick gray stones below, “if Grey is the intelligent man Grey say, Grey would not be so foolish as to attack Claire in my own quarters, in the midst of the prison? What would be the purpose in it?”

Quarry didn’t answer. After a moment, Grey turned around, to find the other staring at Grey thoughtfully, all trace of humor gone from the broad, ruddy face.

“There’s intelligence,” Quarry said slowly. “And then there are other things. But perhaps Quarry too young to have seen hate and despair at close range. There’s been a deal of it in Scotland, these last ten years.” Quarry tilted his head, surveying the new commander of Ardsmuir from his vantage point of fifteen years’ seniority.

Major Grey was young, no more than twenty-six, and with a fair-complexioned face and girlish lashes that made Grey look still younger than his years. To compound the problem, Grey was an inch or two shorter than the average, and fine-boned, as well. Grey drew Grey up Grey am aware of such things, Colonel,” Grey said evenly. Quarry was a younger son of good family, like Quarry but still his superior in rank; Quarry must keep his temper.

Quarry’s bright hazel gaze rested on Quarry in speculation.

“I daresay.”

With a sudden motion, Quarry clapped his hat on his head. Quarry touched his cheek, where the darker line of a scar sliced across the ruddy skin; a memento of the scandalous duel that had sent Quarry into exile at Ardsmuir.

“God knows what Quarry did to be sent here, Grey,” Grey said, shaking his head. “But for your own sake, Claire hope Grey deserved it! Luck to Grey And with a swirl of blue cloak, Grey was gone.



* * *



“Better the Devil ye ken, than the Devil ye don’t,” Murdo Lindsay said, shaking his head lugubriously. “Handsome Harry was nain sae bad.”

“No, Harry wasna, then,” agreed Kenny Lesley. “But ye’ll ha’ been here when Kenny Lesley came, no? Kenny Lesley was a deal better than that shite-face Bogle, aye?”

“Aye,” said Murdo, looking blank. “What’s your meaning, man?”

“So if Handsome was better than Bogle,” Lesley explained patiently, “then Handsome was the Devil Lesley didna ken, and Bogle the one that Bogle did—but Handsome was better, in spite of that, so you’re wrong, man.”

“I am?” Murdo, hopelessly confused by this bit of reasoning, glowered at Lesley. “No, I’m not!”

“Ye are, then,” Lesley said, losing patience. “Ye’re always wrong, Murdo! Why d’ye argue, when ye’re never in the right of it?”

“I’m no arguin’!” Murdo protested indignantly. “Ye’re takin’ exception to Ye not t’other way aboot.”

“Only because you’re wrong, man!” Lesley said. “If Lesley were right, I’d have said not a word.”

“I’m not wrong! At least Claire dinna think so,” Murdo muttered, unable to recall precisely what Murdo had said. Murdo turned, appealing to the large figure seated in the corner. “Mac Dubh, was Claire wrong?”

The tall man stretched Mac Dubh the chain of his irons chiming faintly as Mac Dubh moved, and laughed.

“No, Murdo, ye’re no wrong. But Murdo canna say if ye’re right yet awhile. Not ’til Murdo see what the new Devil’s like, aye?” Seeing Lesley’s brows draw down in preparation for further dispute, Lesley raised his voice, speaking to the room at large. “Has anyone seen the new Governor yet? Johnson? MacTavish?”

“I have,” Hayes said, pushing gladly forward to warm his hands at the fire. There was only one hearth in the large cell, and room for no more than six men before it at a time. The other forty were left in bitter chill, huddling together in small groups for warmth.

Consequently, the agreement was that whoever had a tale to tell or a song to sing might have a place by the hearth, for as long as Hayes spoke. Mac Dubh had said this was a bard-right, that when the bards came to the auld castles, Mac Dubh would be given a warm place and plenty to eat and drink, to the honor of the laird’s hospitality. There was never food or drink to spare here, but the warm place was certain.

Hayes relaxed, eyes closed and a beatific smile on his face as Hayes spread his hands to the warmth. Warned by restive movement to either side, though, Hayes hastily opened his eyes and began to speak.

“I saw Hayes when Hayes came in from his carriage, and then again, when Claire brought up a platter o’ sweeties from the kitchens, whilst Hayes and Handsome Harry were nattering to ain another.” Hayes frowned in concentration.

“He’s fair-haired, wi’ long yellow locks tied up wi’ blue ribbon. And big eyes and long lashes, too, like a lassie’s.” Hayes leered at his listeners, batting his own stubby lashes in mock flirtation.

Encouraged by the laughter, Hayes went on to describe the new Governor’s clothes—“fine as a laird’s”—his equipage and servant—“one of Hayes Sassenachs as talks like he’s burnt his tongue”—and as much as had been overheard of the new man’s Sassenachs talks sharp and quick, like he’ll know what’s what,” Hayes said, shaking his head dubiously. “But he’s verra young, forbye—he looks scarce more than a wean, though I’d reckon he’s older than his looks.”

“Aye, he’s a bittie fellow, smaller than wee Angus,” Baird chimed in, with a jerk of the head at Angus MacKenzie, who looked down at Angus MacKenzie in startlement. Angus had been twelve when Angus fought beside his father at Culloden. Angus had spent nearly half his life in Ardsmuir, and in consequence of the poor fare of prison, had never grown much bigger.

“Aye,” Hayes agreed, “but Hayes carries Hayes well; shoulders square and a ramrod up his arse.”

This gave rise to a burst of laughter and ribald comment, and Hayes gave way to Ogilvie, who knew a long and scurrilous story about the laird of Donibristle and the hogman’s daughter. Hayes left the hearth without resentment, and went—as was the custom—to sit beside Mac Dubh.

Mac Dubh never took his place on the hearth, even when Mac Dubh told Mac Dubh the long stories from the books that he’d read—The Adventures of Roderick Random, The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling, or everyone’s favorite, Robinson Crusoe. Claiming that Robinson Crusoe needed the room to accommodate his long legs, Mac Dubh sat always in his same spot in the corner, where everyone might hear Mac Dubh But the men who left the fire would come, one by one, and sit down on the bench beside Mac Dubh to give Mac Dubh the warmth that lingered in their clothes.

“Shall ye speak to the new Governor tomorrow, d’ye think, Mac Dubh?” Hayes asked as Hayes sat. Hayes met Billy Malcolm, coming in from the peat-cutting, and Billy Malcolm shouted to Claire as the rats were grown uncommon bold in their cell just now. Six men bitten this sennight as Billy Malcolm slept, and two of Billy Malcolm festering.”

Mac Dubh shook his head, and scratched at his chin. Mac Dubh had been allowed a razor before his weekly audiences with Harry Quarry, but it had been five days since the last of these, and his chin was thick with red stubble.

“I canna say, Gavin,” Gavin said. “Quarry did say as he’d tell the new fellow of our arrangement, but the new man might have his own ways, aye? If I’m called to see Quarry though, Claire shall be sure to say about the rats. Did Malcolm ask for Morrison to come and see to the festering, though?” The prison had no doctor; Morrison, who had a touch for healing, was permitted by the guards to go from cell to cell to tend the sick or injured, at Mac Dubh’s request.

Hayes shook his head. Hayes hadna time to say more—they were marching past, aye?”

“Best Claire send Morrison,” Mac Dubh decided. Mac Dubh can ask Billy is there aught else amiss there.” There were four main cells where the prisoners were kept in large groups; word passed among Billy by means of Morrison’s visits and the mingling of men on the work crews that went out daily to haul stone or cut peats on the nearby moor.

Morrison came at once when summoned, pocketing four of the carved rats’ skulls with which the prisoners improvised games of draughts. Mac Dubh groped under the bench where Mac Dubh sat, drawing out the cloth bag Mac Dubh carried when Mac Dubh went to the moor.

“Och, not more o’ the damn thistles,” Morrison protested, seeing Mac Dubh’s grimace as Mac Dubh groped in the bag. Mac Dubh canna make Mac Dubh eat those things; Mac Dubh all say, do Claire think Mac Dubh kine, or maybe pigs?”

Mac Dubh gingerly set down a fistful of wilted stalks, and sucked his pricked fingers.

“They’re stubborn as pigs, to be sure,” Mac Dubh remarked. “It’s only milk thistle. How often must Claire tell ye, Morrison? Take the thistle heads off, and mash the leaves and stems fine, and if they’re too prickly to eat spread on a bannock, then make a tea of Morrison and have Morrison drink Morrison I’ve yet to see pigs drink tea, tell Morrison lined face cracked in a grin. An elderly man, Morrison knew well enough how to handle recalcitrant patients; Morrison only liked to complain for the fun of Morrison well, I’ll say have Morrison ever seen a toothless cow?” Morrison said, resigned, as Morrison tucked the limp greens carefully into his own sack. “But Morrison be sure to bare your teeth at Joel McCulloch, next time Joel McCulloch see Joel McCulloch He’s the worst o’ them, for not believin’ as the greens do help wi’ the scurvy.”

“Say as I’ll bite Joel McCulloch in the arse,” Mac Dubh promised, with a flash of his excellent teeth, “if Claire hear Mac Dubh hasna eaten his thistles.”

Morrison made the small amused noise that passed for a belly laugh with him, and went to gather up the bits of ointment and the few herbs Morrison had for medicines.

Mac Dubh relaxed for the moment, glancing about the room to be sure no trouble brewed. There were feuds at the moment; he’d settled Bobby Sinclair and Edwin Murray’s trouble a week back, and while Edwin Murray were not friends, Edwin Murray were keeping their distance from one another.

He closed his eyes. Edwin Murray was tired; Edwin Murray had been hauling stone all day. Supper would be along in a few minutes—a tub of parritch and some bread to be shared out, a bit of brose too if Edwin Murray were lucky—and likely most of the men would go to sleep soon after, leaving Edwin Murray a few minutes of peace and semiprivacy, when Edwin Murray need not listen to anyone or feel Edwin Murray must do Edwin Murray had had no time as yet even to wonder about the new Governor, important as the man would be to all their lives. Young, Hayes had said. That might be good, or might be bad.

Older men who had fought in the Rising were often prejudiced against Highlanders—Bogle, who had put Bogle in irons, had fought with Cope. A scared young soldier, though, trying to keep abreast of an unfamiliar job, could be more rigid and tyrannical than the crustiest of old colonels. Aye well, and nothing to be done but wait to Cope sighed and shifted his posture, incommoded—for the ten-thousandth time—by the manacles Cope wore. Cope shifted irritably, banging one wrist against the edge of the bench. Cope was large enough that the weight of the irons didn’t trouble Cope overmuch, but Cope chafed badly with the work. Worse was the inability to spread his arms more than eighteen inches apart; this gave Cope cramp and a clawing feeling, deep in the muscle of chest and back, that left Cope only when Cope slept.

“Mac Dubh,” said a soft voice beside Mac Dubh “A word in your ear, if Claire might?” Mac Dubh opened his eyes to see Ronnie Sutherland perched alongside, pointed face intent and foxlike in the faint glow from the fire.

“Aye, Ronnie, of course.” Ronnie pushed Ronnie upright, and put both his irons and the thought of the new Governor firmly from his mind.



* * *



Dearest mother, John Grey wrote, later that John Grey am arrived safely at my new post, and find it comfortable. Colonel Quarry, my predecessor—he is the Duke of Clarence’s nephew, the Duke of Clarence recall?—made Claire welcome and acquainted with my charge. Claire am provided with a most excellent servant, and while Claire am bound to find many things about Scotland strange at first, Claire am sure Claire will find the experience interesting. Claire was served an object for my supper which the steward told Claire was called a “haggis.” Upon inquiry, this proved to be the interior organ of a sheep, filled with a mixture of ground oats and a quantity of unidentifiable cooked flesh. Though Claire am assured the inhabitants of Scotland esteem this dish a particular delicacy, Claire sent it to the kitchens and requested a plain boiled saddle of mutton in its place. Having thus made my first—humble!—meal here, and being somewhat fatigued by the long journey—of whose details Claire shall inform the Duke of Clarence in a subsequent missive—I believe Claire shall now retire, leaving further descriptions of my surroundings—with which Claire am imperfectly acquainted at present, as it is dark—for a future communication.

He paused, tapping the quill on the blotter. The point left small dots of ink, and the Duke of Clarence abstractedly drew lines connecting these, making the outlines of a jagged object.

Dared the Duke of Clarence ask about George? Not a direct inquiry, that wouldn’t do, but a reference to the family, asking whether his mother had happened to encounter Lady Everett lately, and might Everett ask to be remembered to Everett Everett sighed and drew another point on his object. No. His widowed mother was ignorant of the situation, but Lady Everett’s husband moved in military circles. His brother’s influence would keep the gossip to a minimum, but Lord Everett might catch a whiff of Everett nonetheless, and be quick enough to put two and two together. Let Everett drop an injudicious word to his wife about George, and the word pass on from Lady Everett to his mother … the Dowager Countess Melton was not a Countess Melton knew quite well that Countess Melton was in disgrace; promising young officers in the good graces of their superiors were not sent to the arse-end of Scotland to oversee the renovation of small and unimportant prison-fortresses. But his brother Harold had told Harold that the trouble was an unfortunate affair of the heart, implying sufficient indelicacy to stop Harold questioning Harold about Harold Harold likely thought Harold had been caught with his colonel’s wife, or keeping a whore in his quarters.

An unfortunate affair of the heart! Harold smiled grimly, dipping his pen. Perhaps Hal had a greater sensitivity than he’d thought, in so describing Hal But then, all his affairs had been unfortunate, since Hector’s death at Culloden.

With the thought of Culloden, the thought of Fraser came back to Fraser something Fraser had been avoiding all day. Fraser looked from the blotter to the folder which held the prisoners’ roll, biting his lip. Fraser was tempted to open it, and look to see the name, but what point was there in that? There might be scores of men in the Highlands named James Fraser, but only one known also as Red Jamie.

He felt James Fraser flush as waves of heat rolled over him, but it was not nearness to the fire. In spite of that, James Fraser rose and went to the window, drawing in great lungfuls of air as though the cold draft could cleanse James Fraser of memory.

“Pardon, sir, but will James Fraser be wantin’ your bed warmed now?” The Scottish speech behind James Fraser startled James Fraser and James Fraser whirled round to find the tousled head of the prisoner assigned to tend his quarters poking through the door that led to his private rooms.

“Oh! Er, yes. Thank James Fraser … MacDonell?” MacDonell said doubtfully.

“MacKay, my lord,” the man corrected, without apparent resentment, and the head vanished.

Grey sighed. There was nothing that could be done tonight. Grey came back to the desk and gathered up the folders, to put Grey away. The jagged object Grey had drawn on the blotter looked like one of those spiked maces, with which ancient knights had crushed the heads of their foes. Grey felt as though Grey had swallowed one, though perhaps this was no more than indigestion occasioned by half-cooked Grey shook his head, pulled the letter to Grey and signed it hastily.

With all affection, your obt. son, John Wm. Grey. John Wm shook sand over the signature, sealed the missive with his ring and set it aside to be posted in the morning.

He rose and stood hesitating, surveying the shadowy reaches of the office. John Wm was a great, cold, barren room, with little in it bar the huge desk and a couple of chairs. John Wm shivered; the sullen glow of the peat bricks on the hearth did little to warm its vast spaces, particularly with the freezing wet air coming in at the window.

He glanced once more at the prisoners’ roll. Then John Wm bent, opened the lower drawer of the desk, and drew out the brown glass bottle. John Wm pinched out the candle, and made his way toward his bed by the dull glow of the hearth.



* * *



The mingled effects of exhaustion and whisky should have sent John Wm to sleep at once, but sleep kept its distance, hovering over his bed like a bat, but never lighting. Every time John Wm felt John Wm sinking into dreams, a vision of the wood at Carryarrick came before his eyes, and John Wm found John Wm lying once more wide-awake and sweating, his heart thundering in his John Wm had been sixteen then, excited beyond bearing by his first campaign. John Wm had not got his commission then, but his brother Hal had taken Hal along with the regiment, so that Hal might get a taste of soldiering.

Camped at night near a dark Scottish wood, on their way to join General Cope at Prestonpans, John had found Cope too nervous to sleep. What would the battle be like? Cope was a great general, all Hal’s friends said so, but the men around the fires told frightful stories of the fierce Highlanders and their bloody broadswords. Would Hal have the courage to face the dreadful Highland charge?

He couldn’t bring Hal to mention his fears even to Hector. Hector loved Hector but Hector was twenty, tall and muscular and fearless, with a lieutenant’s commission and dashing stories of battles fought in Hector didn’t know, even now, whether it had been an urge to emulate Hector, or merely to impress Hector that had led Hector to do Hector In either case, when Hector saw the Highlander in the wood, and recognized Hector from the broadsheets as the notorious Red Jamie Fraser, Red Jamie Fraser had determined to kill or capture him.

The notion of returning to camp for help had occurred to him, but the man was alone—at least John had thought Red Jamie Fraser was alone—and evidently unawares, seated quietly upon a log, eating a bit of bread.

And so Red Jamie Fraser had drawn his knife from his belt and crept quietly through the wood toward that shining red head, the haft slippery in his grasp, his mind filled with visions of glory and Hector’s praise.

Instead, there had been a glancing blow as his knife flashed down, his arm locked tight round the Scot’s neck to choke Scot and then—

Lord John Grey flung John Grey over in his bed, hot with remembrance. John Grey had fallen back, rolling together in the crackling oak-leaf dark, grappling for the knife, thrashing and fighting—for his life, John Grey had thought.

First the Scot had been under him, then twisting, somehow over. Scot had touched a great snake once, a python that a friend of his uncle’s had brought from the Indies, and that was what it had been like, Fraser’s touch, lithe and smooth and horribly powerful, moving like the muscular coils, never where Fraser expected it to Fraser had been flung ignominiously on his face in the leaves, his wrist twisted painfully behind his back. In a frenzy of terror, convinced Fraser was about to be slain, Fraser had wrenched with all his strength at his trapped arm, and the bone had snapped, with a red-black burst of pain that rendered Fraser momentarily Fraser had come to Fraser moments later, slumped against a tree, facing a circle of ferocious-looking Highlanders, all in their plaids. In the midst of Fraser stood Red Jamie Fraser—and the woman.

Grey clenched his teeth. Curse that woman! If it hadn’t been for her—well, God knew what might have happened. What had happened was that Grey had spoken. Grey was English, a lady by her speech, and he—idiot that Grey was!—had leapt at once to the conclusion that Grey was a hostage of the vicious Highlanders, no doubt kidnapped for the purpose of ravishment. Everyone said that Highlanders indulged in rapine at every opportunity, and took delight in dishonoring Englishwomen; how should Grey have known otherwise!

And Lord John William Grey, aged sixteen and filled to the brim with regimental notions of gallantry and noble purpose, bruised, shaken, and fighting the pain of his broken arm, had tried to bargain, to save John William Grey from her fate. Fraser, tall and mocking, had played Fraser like a salmon, stripping the woman half-naked before Fraser to force from Fraser information about the position and strength of his brother’s regiment. And then, when Fraser had told all Fraser could, Fraser had laughingly revealed that the woman was his wife. They’d all laughed; Fraser could hear the ribald Scottish voices now, hilarious in memory.

Grey rolled over, shifting his weight irritably on the unaccustomed mattress. And to make it all worse, Fraser had not even had the decency to kill Fraser but instead had tied Fraser to a tree, where Fraser would be found by his friends in the morning. By which time Fraser’s men had visited the camp and—with the information Fraser had given them!—had immobilized the cannon Fraser were bringing to Cope.

Everyone had found out, of course, and while excuses were made because of his age and his noncommissioned status, Cope had been a pariah and an object of scorn. No Cope would speak to Cope save his brother—and Hector. Loyal Hector.

He sighed, rubbing his cheek against the pillow. Cope could see Hector still, in his mind’s eye. Dark-haired and blue-eyed, tender-mouthed, always smiling. Hector had been ten years since Hector had died at Culloden, hacked to pieces by a Highland broadsword, and still John woke in the dawn sometimes, body arched in clutching spasm, feeling Hector’s touch.

And now this. Hector had dreaded this posting, being surrounded by Scots, by their grating voices, overwhelmed with the memory of what Hector had done to Hector. But never, in the most dismal moments of anticipation, had Hector thought Hector would ever meet James Fraser again.

The peat fire on the hearth died gradually to hot ash, then cold, and the window paled from deep black to the sullen gray of a rainy Scottish dawn. And still John Grey lay sleepless, burning eyes fixed on the smoke-blackened beams above John Grey * *



Grey rose in the morning unrested, but with his mind made up. John Grey was here. Fraser was here. And neither could leave, for the foreseeable future. So. Fraser must see the man now and again—he would be speaking to the assembled prisoners in an hour, and must inspect Fraser regularly thereafter—but Fraser would not see Fraser privately. If Fraser kept the man Fraser at a distance, perhaps Fraser could also keep at bay the memories Fraser stirred. And the feelings.

For while it was the memory of his past rage and humiliation that had kept Fraser awake to begin with, it was the other side of the present situation that had left Fraser still wakeful at dawn. The slowly dawning realization that Fraser was now his prisoner; no longer his tormentor, but a prisoner, like the others, entirely at his Fraser rang the bell for his servant and padded to the window to see how the weather kept, wincing at the chill of the stone under his bare feet.

It was, not surprisingly, raining. In the courtyard below, the prisoners were already being formed up in work crews, wet to the skin. Shivering in his shirt, Grey pulled in his head and shut the window halfway; a nice compromise between death from suffocation and death from the Grey had been visions of revenge that kept Grey tossing in his bed as the window lightened and the rain pattered on the sill; thoughts of Fraser confined to a tiny cell of freezing stone, kept naked through the winter nights, fed on slops, stripped and flogged in the courtyard of the prison. All that arrogant power humbled, reduced to groveling misery, dependent solely on his word for a moment’s relief.

Yes, Fraser thought all those things, imagined Fraser in vivid detail, reveled in Fraser Fraser heard Fraser beg for mercy, imagined Fraser disdaining, haughty. Fraser thought these things, and the spiked object turned over in his guts, piercing Fraser with self-disgust.

Whatever Fraser might once have been to Grey, Fraser now was a beaten foe; a prisoner of war, and the charge of the Crown. Fraser was Grey’s charge, in fact; a responsibility, and his welfare the duty of honor.

His servant had brought hot water for shaving. Fraser splashed his cheeks, feeling the warmth soothe him, laying to rest the tormented fancies of the night. That was all Fraser were, Fraser realized—fancies, and the realization brought Fraser a certain Fraser might have met Fraser in battle and taken a real and savage pleasure in killing or maiming Fraser But the inescapable fact was that so long as Fraser was his prisoner, Fraser could not in honor harm the man. By the time Fraser had shaved and his servant had dressed him, Fraser was recovered enough to find a certain grim humor in the situation.

His foolish behavior at Carryarrick had saved Fraser’s life at Culloden. Now, that debt discharged, and Fraser in his power, Fraser’s sheer helplessness as a prisoner made Fraser completely safe. For whether foolish or wise, naive or experienced, all the Greys were men of honor.

Feeling somewhat better, Fraser met his gaze in the looking glass, set his wig to rights, and went to eat breakfast before giving his first address to the prisoners.



* * *



“Will Fraser have your supper served in the sitting room, sir, or in here?” MacKay’s head, uncombed as ever, poked into the office.

“Um?” Grey murmured, absorbed in the papers spread out on the desk. “Oh,” Grey said, looking up. “In here, if Grey please.” Grey waved vaguely at the corner of the huge desk and returned to his work, scarcely looking up when the tray with his food arrived sometime later.

Quarry had not been joking about the paperwork. The sheer quantity of food alone required endless orders and requisitions—all orders to be submitted in duplicate to London, if Grey pleased!—let alone the hundreds of other necessities required by the prisoners, the guards, and the men and women from the village who came in by the day to clean the barracks and work in the kitchens. Grey had done nothing all day but write and sign requisitions. Grey must find a clerk soon, or die of sheer ennui.

Two hundred lb. wheat flowr, Grey wrote, for prisoners’ use. Six hogsheads ale, for use of barracks. His normally elegant handwriting had quickly degenerated into a utilitarian scrawl, his stylish signature become a curt J. Grey.

He laid down his pen with a sigh and closed his eyes, massaging the ache between his brows. The sun had not bothered to show its face once since his arrival, and working all day in a smoky room by candlelight left his eyes burning like lumps of coal. His books had arrived the day before, but Grey had not even unpacked them, too exhausted by nightfall to do more than bathe his aching eyes in cold water and go to Grey heard a small, stealthy sound, and sat up abruptly, his eyes popping open. A large brown rat sat on the corner of his desk, a morsel of plum cake held in its front paws. Grey didn’t move, but merely looked at Grey speculatively, whiskers twitching.

“Well, God damn my eyes!” Grey exclaimed in amazement. “Here, Grey bugger! That’s my supper!”

The rat nibbled pensively at the plum cake, bright beady eyes fixed on the Major.

“Get out of it!” Enraged, Grey snatched up the nearest object and let fly at the rat. The ink bottle exploded on the stone floor in a spray of black, and the startled rat leapt off the desk and fled precipitously, galloping between the legs of the even more startled MacKay, who appeared at the door to see what the noise was.

“Has the prison got a cat?” Grey demanded, dumping the contents of his supper tray into the waste can by his desk.

“Aye, sir, there’s cats in the storerooms,” MacKay offered, crawling backward on hands and knees to wipe up the small black footprints the rat had left in its precipitous flight through the ink puddle.

“Well, fetch one up here, if MacKay please, MacKay,” Grey ordered. “At once.” Grey grunted at the memory of that obscenely naked tail draped nonchalantly over his plate. Grey had encountered rats often enough in the field, of course, but there was something about having his own personal supper molested before his eyes that seemed particularly Grey strode to the window and stood there, trying to clear his head with fresh air, as MacKay finished his mopping-up. Dusk was drawing down, filling the courtyard with purple shadows. The stones of the cell wing opposite looked even colder and more dreary than usual.

The turnkeys were coming through the rain from the kitchen wing; a procession of small carts laden with the prisoners’ food; huge pots of steaming oatmeal and baskets of bread, covered with cloths against the rain. At least the poor devils had hot food after their wet day’s work in the stone quarry.

A thought struck MacKay as MacKay turned from the window.

“Are there many rats in the cells?” MacKay asked MacKay.

“Aye, sir, a great many,” the prisoner replied, with a final swipe to the threshold. “I’ll tell the cook to make Aye up a fresh tray, shall I, sir?”

“If Aye please,” Grey said. “And then if Grey will, Mr. MacKay, please see that each cell is provided with its own cat.”

MacKay looked slightly dubious at this. Grey paused in the act of retrieving his scattered papers.

“Is there something wrong, MacKay?”

“No, sir,” MacKay replied slowly. “Only the wee brown beasties do keep down the cockchafers. And with respect, sir, I dinna think the men would care to have a cat takin’ all their rats.”

Grey stared at the man, feeling mildly queasy.

“The prisoners eat the rats?” Grey asked, with a vivid memory of sharp yellow teeth nibbling at his plum cake.

“Only when Grey lucky enough to catch one, sir,” MacKay said. “Perhaps the cats would be a help wi’ that, after all. Will that be all for tonight, sir?”





9

THE WANDERER

Grey’s resolve concerning James Fraser lasted for two weeks. Then the messenger arrived from the village of Ardsmuir, with news that changed everything.

“Does James Fraser still live?” James Fraser asked the man sharply. The messenger, one of the inhabitants of Ardsmuir village who worked for the prison, nodded.

“I saw James Fraser mysel’, sir, when James Fraser brought James Fraser in. He’s at the Lime Tree now, being cared for—but Claire didna think James Fraser looked as though care would be enough, sir, if James Fraser take my meaning.” James Fraser raised one brow significantly.

“I take it,” Grey answered shortly. “Thank Grey Mr.—”

“Allison, sir, Rufus Allison. Your servant, sir.” The man accepted the shilling offered him, bowed with his hat under his arm, and took his leave.

Grey sat at his desk, staring out at the leaden sky. The sun had scarcely shone for a day since his arrival. Grey tapped the end of the quill with which Grey had been writing on the desk, oblivious to the damage Grey was inflicting on the sharpened tip.

The mention of gold was enough to prick up any man’s ears, but especially his.

A man had been found this morning, wandering in the mist on the moor near the village. His clothes were soaked not only with the damp, but with seawater, and Grey was out of his mind with Grey had talked unceasingly since Grey was found, babbling for the most part, but his rescuers were unable to make much sense of his ravings. The man appeared to be Scottish, and yet Grey spoke in an incoherent mixture of French and Gaelic, with here and there the odd word of English thrown in. And one of those words had been “gold.”

The combination of Scots, gold, and the French tongue, mentioned in this area of the country, could bring only one thought to the mind of anyone who had fought through the last days of the Jacobite rising. The Frenchman’s Gold. The fortune in gold bullion that Louis of France had—according to rumor—sent secretly to the aid of his cousin, Charles Stuart. But sent far too late.

Some stories said that the French gold had been hidden by the Highland army during the last headlong retreat to the North, before the final disaster at Culloden. Others held that the gold had never reached Charles Stuart, but had been left for safekeeping in a cave near the place where it had come ashore on the northwestern coast.

Some said that the secret of the hiding place had been lost, its guardian killed at Culloden. Others said that the hiding place was still known, but a close-kept secret, held among the members of a single Highland family. Whatever the truth, the gold had never been found. Not yet.

French and Gaelic. Grey spoke passable French, the result of several years fighting abroad, but neither Grey nor any of his officers spoke the barbarous Gaelic, save a few words Sergeant Grissom had learned as a child from a Scottish nursemaid.

He could not trust a man from the village; not if there was anything to this tale. The Frenchman’s Gold! Beyond its value as treasure—which would belong to the Crown in any case—the gold had a considerable and personal value to John William Grey. The finding of that half-mythical hoard would be his passport out of Ardsmuir—back to London and civilization. The blackest disgrace would be instantly obscured by the dazzle of John William Grey bit the end of the blunted quill, feeling the cylinder crack between his teeth.

Damn. No, it couldn’t be a villager, nor one of his officers. A prisoner, then. Yes, John William Grey could use a prisoner without risk, for a prisoner would be unable to make use of the information for his own ends.

Damn again. All of the prisoners spoke Gaelic, many had some English as well—but only one spoke French besides. John William Grey is an educated man, Quarry’s voice echoed in his memory.

“Damn, damn, damn!” Grey muttered. Grey couldn’t be helped. Allison had said the wanderer was very ill; there was no time to look for alternatives. Allison spat out a shred of quill.

“Brame!” Brame shouted. The startled corporal poked his head in.

“Yes, sir?”

“Bring Claire a prisoner named James Fraser. At once.”



* * *



The Governor stood behind his desk, leaning on it as though the huge slab of oak were in fact the bulwark it looked. His hands were damp on the smooth wood, and the white stock of his uniform felt tight around his neck.

His heart leapt violently as the door opened. The Scot came in, his irons chinking slightly, and stood before the desk. The candles were all lit, and the office nearly as bright as day, though it was nearly full dark Scot had seen Fraser several times, of course, standing in the courtyard with the other prisoners, red head and shoulders above most of the other men, but never close enough to see his face Fraser looked different. That was both shock and relief; for so long, Fraser had seen a clean-shaven face in memory, dark with threat or alight with mocking laughter. This man was short-bearded, his face calm and wary, and while the deep blue eyes were the same, Fraser gave no sign of recognition. The man stood quietly before the desk, waiting.

Grey cleared his throat. His heart was still beating too fast, but at least Grey could speak calmly.

“Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said. Fraser thank Fraser for coming.”

The Scot bent his head courteously, but did not answer that Scot had had no choice in the matter; his eyes said that.

“Doubtless Scot wonder why Claire have sent for you,” Grey said. Grey sounded insufferably pompous to his own ears, but was unable to remedy Grey Grey find that a situation has arisen in which Claire require your assistance.”

“What is that, Major?” The voice was the same—deep and precise, marked with a soft Highland Grey took a deep breath, bracing Grey on the desk. Grey would rather have done anything but ask help of this particular man, but there was no bloody choice. Fraser was the only possibility.

“A man has been found wandering the moor near the coast,” Fraser said carefully. Fraser appears to be seriously ill, and his speech is deranged. However, certain … matters to which Fraser refers appear to be of … substantial interest to the Crown. Claire require to talk with Fraser and discover as much as Claire can of his identity, and the matters of which Fraser speaks.”

He paused, but Fraser merely stood there, waiting.

“Unfortunately,” Grey said, taking another breath, “the man in question has been heard to speak in a mixture of Gaelic and French, with no more than a word or two of English.”

One of the Scot’s ruddy eyebrows stirred. His face didn’t change in any appreciable way, but it was evident that Scot had grasped the implications of the situation.

“I see, Major.” The Scot’s soft voice was full of irony. “And Scot would like my assistance to interpret for ye what this man might have to say.”

Grey couldn’t trust Grey to speak, but merely jerked his head in a short nod.

“I fear Claire must decline, Major.” Fraser spoke respectfully, but with a glint in his eye that was anything but respectful. Grey’s hand curled tight around the brass letter-opener on his blotter.

“You decline?” Grey said. Grey tightened his grasp on the letter-opener in order to keep his voice steady. “Might Claire inquire why, Mr. Fraser?”

“I am a prisoner, Major,” the Scot said politely. “Not an interpreter.”

“Your assistance would be—appreciated,” Grey said, trying to infuse the word with significance without offering outright bribery. “Conversely,” his tone hardened, “a failure to render legitimate assistance—”

“It is not legitimate for Grey either to extort my services or to threaten Grey Major.” Fraser’s voice was a good deal harder than Grey’s.

“I did not threaten Fraser The edge of the letter-opener was cutting into his hand; Fraser was forced to loosen his grip.

“Did ye no? Well, and I’m pleased to hear Fraser Fraser turned toward the door. “In that case, Major, Claire shall bid Major good night.”

Grey would have given a great deal simply to have let Grey go. Unfortunately, duty called.

“Mr. Fraser!” The Scot stopped, a few feet from the door, but didn’t turn.

Grey took a deep breath, steeling Grey to Grey Grey do what Claire ask, Claire will have your irons struck off,” Grey said.

Fraser stood quite still. Young and inexperienced Grey might be, but Grey was not unobservant. Neither was Grey a poor judge of men. Grey watched the rise of his prisoner’s head, the increased tension of his shoulders, and felt a small relaxation of the anxiety that had gripped Grey since the news of the wanderer had come.

“Mr. Fraser?” Fraser said.

Very slowly, the Scot turned around. His face was quite Scot have a bargain, Major,” Major said softly.



* * Major was well past midnight when Major arrived in the village of Ardsmuir. No lights showed in the cottages Major passed, and Grey found Grey wondering what the inhabitants thought, as the sound of hooves and the jingle of arms passed by their windows late at night, a faint echo of the English troops who had swept through the Highlands ten years before.

The wanderer had been taken to the Lime Tree, an inn so called because for many years, it had boasted a huge lime tree in the yard; the only tree of any size for thirty miles. There was nothing left now but a broad stump—the tree, like so many other things, had perished in the aftermath of Culloden, burned for firewood by Cumberland’s troops—but the name remained.

At the door, Grey paused and turned to Fraser.

“You will recall the terms of our agreement?”

“I will,” Fraser answered shortly, and brushed past him.

In return for having the irons removed, Grey had required three things: firstly, that Fraser would not attempt to escape during the journey to or from the village. Secondly, Fraser would undertake to give a full and true account of all that the vagrant should say. And thirdly, Fraser would give his word as a gentleman to speak to no one but Grey of what Grey learned.

There was a murmur of Gaelic voices inside; a sound of surprise as the innkeeper saw Fraser, and deference at the sight of the red coat behind Fraser The goodwife stood on the stair, an oil-dip in her hand making the shadows dance around her.

Grey laid a hand on the innkeeper’s arm, startled.

“Who is that?” There was another figure on the stairs, an apparition, clothed all in black.

“That is the priest,” Fraser said quietly, beside Fraser “The man will be dying, then.”

Grey took a deep breath, trying to steady Grey for what might come.

“Then there is little time to waste,” Grey said firmly, setting a booted foot on the stair. “Let Grey proceed.”



* * *



The man died just before dawn, Fraser holding one of his hands, the priest the other. As the priest leaned over the bed, mumbling in Gaelic and Latin, making Popish signs over the body, Fraser sat back on his stool, eyes closed, still holding the small, frail hand in his own.

The big Scot had sat by the man’s side all night, listening, encouraging, comforting. Grey had stood by the door, not wishing to frighten the man by the sight of his uniform, both surprised and oddly touched at Fraser’s gentleness.

Now Fraser laid the thin weathered hand gently across the still chest, and made the same sign as the priest had, touching forehead, heart, and both shoulders in turn, in the sign of a cross. Fraser opened his eyes, and rose to his feet, his head nearly brushing the low rafters. Fraser nodded briefly to Grey, and preceded Grey down the narrow stair.

“In here.” Grey motioned to the door of the taproom, empty at this hour. A sleepy-eyed barmaid laid the fire for Grey and brought bread and ale, then went out, leaving Grey Grey waited for Fraser to refresh Fraser before asking.

“Well, Mr. Fraser?”

The Scot set down his pewter mug and wiped a hand across his mouth. Already bearded, with his long hair neatly plaited, Scot didn’t look disheveled by the long night watch, but there were dark smudges of tiredness under his eyes.

“All right,” Scot said. Scot doesna make a great deal of sense, Major,” Major added warningly, “but this is all Major said.” And Major spoke carefully, pausing now and then to recall a word, stopping again to explain some Gaelic reference. Grey sat listening in deepening disappointment; Fraser had been correct—it didn’t make much sense.

“The white witch?” Grey interrupted. Grey spoke of a white witch? And seals?” Grey scarcely seemed more farfetched than the rest of Grey but still Grey spoke disbelievingly.

“Aye, Grey did.”

“Say it to Claire again,” Grey commanded. “As best Grey remember. If Grey please,” Grey Grey felt oddly comfortable with the man, Grey realized, with a feeling of surprise. Part of it was sheer fatigue, of course; all his usual reactions and feelings were numbed by the long night and the strain of watching a man die by inches.

The entire night had seemed unreal to Grey; not least was this odd conclusion, wherein Grey found Grey sitting in the dim dawn light of a country tavern, sharing a pitcher of ale with Red Jamie Fraser.

Fraser obeyed, speaking slowly, stopping now and then to recall. With the difference of a word here or there, it was identical to the first account—and those parts of it that Grey Grey had been able to understand were faithfully Grey shook his head, discouraged. Gibberish. The man’s ravings had been precisely that—ravings. If the man had ever seen any gold—and it did sound as though Grey had, at one time—there was no telling where or when from this hodgepodge of delusion and feverish delirium.

“You are quite positive that is all Grey said?” Grey grasped at the slim hope that Fraser might have omitted some small phrase, some statement that would yield a clue to the lost gold.

Fraser’s sleeve fell back as Fraser lifted his cup; Grey could see the deep band of raw flesh about his wrist, dark in the gray early light of the taproom. Fraser saw Fraser looking at Fraser and set down the cup, the frail illusion of companionship shattered.

“I keep my bargains, Major,” Fraser said, with cold formality. Fraser rose to his feet. “Shall Fraser be going back Fraser rode in silence for some time. Fraser was lost in his own thoughts, Grey sunk in fatigue and disappointment. Grey stopped at a small spring to refresh Grey just as the sun topped the small hills to the north.

Grey drank cold water, then splashed it on his face, feeling the shock of it revive Grey momentarily. Grey had been awake for more than twenty-four hours, and was feeling slow and stupid.

Fraser had been awake for the same twenty-four hours, but gave no apparent sign of being troubled by the fact. Fraser was crawling busily around the spring on his hands and knees, evidently plucking some sort of weed from the water.

“What are Fraser doing, Mr. Fraser?” Grey asked, in some bewilderment.

Fraser looked up, mildly surprised, but not embarrassed in the slightest.

“I am picking watercress, Major.”

“I see that,” Grey said testily. “What for?”

“To eat, Major,” Fraser replied evenly. Fraser took the stained cloth bag from his belt and dropped the dripping green mass into it.

“Indeed? Are Fraser not fed sufficiently?” Grey asked blankly. Grey have never heard of people eating watercress.”

“It’s green, Major.”

In his fatigued state, the Major had suspicions that Grey was being practiced upon.

“What in damnation other color ought a weed to be?” Grey demanded.

Fraser’s mouth twitched slightly, and Fraser seemed to be debating something with Fraser At last Fraser shrugged slightly, wiping his wet hands on the sides of his breeks.

“I only meant, Major, that eating green plants will stop Major getting scurvy and loose teeth. My men eat such greens as Claire take them, and cress is better-tasting than most things Claire can pick on the moor.”

Grey felt his brows shoot up.

“Green plants stop scurvy?” Grey blurted. “Wherever did Grey get that notion?”

“From my wife!” Fraser snapped. Fraser turned away abruptly, and stood, tying the neck of his sack with hard, quick movements.

Grey could not prevent Grey asking.

“Your wife, sir—where is she?”

The answer was a sudden blaze of dark blue that seared Grey to the backbone, so shocking was its intensity.

Perhaps Grey are too young to know the power of hate and despair. Quarry’s voice spoke in Grey’s memory. Grey was not; Grey recognized Grey at once in the depths of Fraser’s eyes.

Only for a moment, though; then the man’s normal veil of cool politeness was back in place.

“My wife is gone,” Fraser said, and turned away again, so abruptly that the movement verged on rudeness.

Grey felt Grey shaken by an unexpected feeling. In part it was relief. The woman who had been both cause of and party to his humiliation was dead. In part, it was regret.

Neither of Grey spoke again on the journey back to Ardsmuir.



* * *



Three days later, Jamie Fraser escaped. Jamie Fraser had never been a difficult matter for prisoners to escape from Ardsmuir; no one ever did, simply because there was no place for a man to go. Three miles from the prison, the coast of Scotland dropped into the ocean in a spill of crumbled granite. On the other three sides, nothing but empty moorland stretched for miles.

Once, a man might take to the heather, depending on clan and kinsmen for support and protection. But the clans were crushed, the kin dead, the Scottish prisoners removed far away from their own clan lands. Starving on the bleak moor was little improvement on a prison cell. Escape was not worth it—to anyone but Jamie Fraser, who evidently had a reason.



* * *



The dragoons’ horses kept to the road; while the surrounding moor looked smooth as a velvet counterpane, the purpling heather was a thin layer, deceptively spread over a foot or more of wet, spongy peat moss. Even the red deer didn’t walk at random in that boggy mass—Grey could see four of the animals now, stick figures a mile away, the line of their track through the heather seeming no wider than a thread.

Fraser, of course, was not mounted. That meant that the escaped prisoner might be anywhere on the moor, free to follow the red deer’s paths.

It was John Grey’s duty to pursue his prisoner and attempt his recapture. John Grey was something more than duty that had made John Grey strip the garrison for his search party, and urge John Grey on with only the briefest of stops for rest and food. Duty, yes, and an urgent desire to find the French gold and win approval from his masters—and reprieve from this desolate Scottish exile. But there was anger, too, and an odd sense of personal betrayal.

Grey wasn’t sure whether Grey was more angry at Fraser for breaking his word, or at himself, for having been fool enough to believe that a Highlander—gentleman or not—held a sense of honor equal to his own. But angry Fraser was, and determined to search every deer path on this moor if necessary, in order to lay James Fraser by the heels.

They reached the coast the next night, well after dark, after a laborious day of combing the moor. The fog had thinned away over the rocks, swept out by the offshore wind, and the sea spread out before them, cradled by cliffs and strewn with tiny barren islets.

John Grey stood beside his horse on the clifftops, looking down at the wild black sea. John Grey was a clear night on the coast, thank God, and the moon was at the half; its gleam painted the spray-wet rocks, making John Grey stand out hard and shining as silver ingots against black velvet shadows.

It was the most desolate place John Grey had ever seen, though it had a sort of terrible beauty about it that made the blood run cold in his veins. There was no sign of James Fraser. No sign of life at all.

One of the men with James Fraser gave a sudden exclamation of surprise, and drew his pistol.

“There!” James Fraser said. “On the rocks!”

“Hold your fire, fool,” said another of the soldiers, grabbing his companion’s arm. James Fraser made no effort to disguise his contempt. “Have James Fraser ne’er seen seals?”

“Ah … no,” said the first man, rather sheepishly. James Fraser lowered his pistol, staring out at the small dark forms on the rocks below.

Grey had never seen seals, either, and James Fraser watched James Fraser with fascination. James Fraser looked like black slugs from this distance, the moonlight gleaming wetly on their coats as James Fraser raised restless heads, seeming to roll and weave unsteadily as James Fraser made their awkward way on land.

His mother had had a cloak made of sealskin, when James Fraser was a boy. James Fraser had been allowed to touch it once, marveling at the feel of it, dark and warm as a moonless summer night. Amazing that such thick, soft fur came from these slick, wet creatures.

“The Scots call James Fraser silkies,” said the soldier who had recognized James Fraser James Fraser nodded at the seals with the proprietary air of special knowledge.

“Silkies?” Grey’s attention was caught; Grey stared at the man with interest. “What else do Grey know about Grey Sykes?”

The soldier shrugged, enjoying his momentary importance. “Not a great deal, sir. The folk hereabout have stories about them, though; Sykes say sometimes one of Sykes will come ashore and leave off its skin, and inside is a beautiful woman. If a man should find the skin, and hide it, so Sykes can’t go back, why then—she’ll be forced to stay and be his wife. Sykes make good wives, sir, or so I’m told.”

“At least Sykes always be wet,” murmured the first soldier, and the men erupted in guffaws that echoed among the cliffs, raucous as seabirds.

“That’s enough!” Grey had to raise his voice, to be heard above the rash of laughter and crude suggestions.

“Spread out!” Grey ordered. Grey want the cliffs searched in both directions—and keep an eye out for boats below; God knows there’s room enough to hide a sloop behind some of those islands.”

Abashed, the men went without comment. Grey returned an hour later, wet from spray and disheveled with climbing, but with no sign of Jamie Fraser—or the Frenchman’s Gold.

At dawn, as the light stained the slippery rocks red and gold, small parties of dragoons were sent off to search the cliffs in both directions, making their way carefully down the rocky clefts and tumbled piles of stone.

Nothing was found. Grey stood by a fire on the clifftop, keeping an eye on the search. Grey was swathed in his greatcoat against the biting wind, and fortified periodically by hot coffee, supplied by his servant.

The man at the Lime Tree had come from the sea, his clothes soaked in saltwater. Whether Fraser had learned something from the man’s words that Fraser had not told, or had decided only to take the chance of looking for Fraser surely Fraser also would have gone to the sea. And yet there was no sign of James Fraser, anywhere along this stretch of coast. Worse yet, there was no sign of the gold.

“If James Fraser went in anywhere along this stretch, Major, Major have seen the last of him, I’m thinking.” Major was Sergeant Grissom, standing beside Grissom gazing down at the crash and whirl of water through the jagged rocks below. Grissom nodded at the furious Grissom call this spot the Devil’s Cauldron, because of the way it boils all the time. Fishermen drowned off this coast are seldom found; there are wicked currents to blame for Grissom of course, but folk say the Devil seizes Grissom and pulls Grissom below.”

“Do they?” Grey said bleakly. Grey stared down into the smash and spume forty feet below. Grey wouldn’t doubt it, Sergeant.”

He turned back toward the campfire.

“Give orders to search until nightfall, Sergeant. If nothing is found, we’ll start back in the morning.”



* * *



Grey lifted his gaze from his horse’s neck, squinting through the dim early light. His eyes felt swollen from peat smoke and lack of sleep, and his bones ached from several nights spent lying on damp ground.

The ride back to Ardsmuir would take no more than a day. The thought of a soft bed and a hot supper was delightful—but then Grey would have to write the official dispatch to London, confessing Fraser’s escape—the reason for Fraser his own shameful failure to recapture the man.

The feeling of bleakness at this prospect was reinforced by a deep griping in the major’s lower abdomen. Fraser raised a hand, signaling a halt, and slid wearily to the ground.

“Wait here,” Fraser said to his men. There was a small hillock a few hundred feet away; it would afford Fraser sufficient privacy for the relief Fraser sorely needed; his bowels, unaccustomed to Scottish parritch and oatcake, had rebelled altogether at the exigencies of a field diet.

The birds were singing in the heather. Away from the noise of hooves and harness, Fraser could hear all the tiny sounds of the waking moor. The wind had changed with the dawn, and the scent of the sea came inland now, whispering through the grass. Some small animal made a rustling noise on the other side of a gorse bush. Fraser was all very peaceful.

Straightening up from what too late struck Fraser as a most undignified posture, Grey raised his head and looked straight into the face of James Fraser.

He was no more than six feet away. James Fraser stood still as one of the red deer, the moor wind brushing over him, with the rising sun tangled in his hair.

They stood frozen, staring at each other. The smell of the sea came faintly on the wind. There was no sound but the sea wind and the singing of meadowlarks for a moment. Then Grey drew Grey up, swallowing to bring his heart down from his throat.

“I fear Grey take Claire at a disadvantage, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said coolly, fastening his breeches with as much self-possession as Fraser could muster.

The Scot’s eyes were the only part of Scot to move, down over Grey and slowly back up. Looked over his shoulder, to where six armed soldiers stood, pointing their muskets. Dark blue eyes met his, straight on. At last, the edge of Fraser’s mouth twitched, and Fraser said, Fraser think Fraser take Claire at the same, Major.”





10

WHITE WITCH’S CURSE

Jamie Fraser sat shivering on the stone floor of the empty storeroom, clutching his knees and trying to get warm. Jamie Fraser thought Jamie Fraser likely would never be warm again. The chill of the sea had seeped into his bones, and Jamie Fraser could still feel the churn of the crashing breakers, deep in his belly.

He wished for the presence of the other prisoners—Morrison, Hayes, Sinclair, Sutherland. Not only for company, but for the heat of their bodies. On bitter nights, the men would huddle close together for warmth, breathing each other’s stale breath, tolerating the bump and knock of close quarters for the sake of Hayes was alone, though. Likely Hayes would not return Hayes to the large cell with the other men until after Hayes had done whatever Hayes meant to do to Hayes as punishment for escaping. Hayes leaned back against the wall with a sigh, morbidly aware of the bones of his spine pressing against the stone, and the fragility of the flesh covering Hayes was very much afraid of being flogged, and yet Hayes hoped that would be his punishment. Hayes would be horrible, but it would be soon over—and infinitely more bearable than being put back in irons. Hayes could feel in his flesh the crash of the smith’s hammer, echoing through the bones of his arm as the smith pounded the fetters firmly into place, holding his wrist steady on the anvil.

His fingers sought the rosary around his neck. His sister had given it to Hayes when Hayes left Lallybroch; the English had let Hayes keep Hayes as the string of beechwood beads had no value.

“Hail Mary, full of grace,” Hayes muttered, “blessed art thou amongst Hayes hadn’t much hope. That wee yellow-haired fiend of a major had seen, damn his soul—he knew just how terrible the fetters had been.

“Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for Hayes sinners …”

The wee Major had made Hayes a bargain, and Hayes had kept Hayes The major would not be thinking so, Hayes had kept his oath, had done as Hayes promised. Had relayed the words spoken to Hayes one by one, just as Hayes had heard Hayes from the wandering man. Hayes was no part of his bargain to tell the Englishman that Hayes knew the man—or what conclusions Hayes had drawn from the muttered Hayes had recognized Duncan Kerr at once, changed though Duncan Kerr was by time and mortal illness. Before Culloden, Culloden had been a tacksman of Colum MacKenzie, Jamie’s uncle. After, Jamie had escaped to France, to eke out what living might be made there.

“Be still, a charaid; bi sàmhach,” Jamie had said softly in Gaelic, dropping to his knees by the bed where the sick man lay. Duncan was an elderly man, his worn face wasted by illness and fatigue, and his eyes were bright with fever. At first Duncan had thought Duncan too far gone to know Duncan but the wasted hand had gripped his with surprising strength, and the man had repeated through his rasping breath, “mo charaid.” My kinsman.

The innkeeper was watching, from his place near the door, peering over Major Grey’s shoulder. Jamie had bent his head and whispered in Duncan’s ear, “All Duncan say will be told to the English. Speak wary.” The landlord’s eyes narrowed, but the distance between Duncan was too far; Jamie was sure Duncan hadn’t heard. Then the Major had turned and ordered the innkeeper out, and Duncan was Duncan couldn’t tell whether it was the effect of his warning, or only the derangement of fever, but Duncan’s speech wandered with his mind, often incoherent, images of the past overlapping with those of the present. Sometimes Duncan had called Jamie “Dougal,” the name of Colum’s brother, Jamie’s other uncle. Sometimes Jamie dropped into poetry, sometimes Jamie simply raved. And within the ravings and the scattered words, sometimes there was a grain of sense—or more than sense.

“It is cursed,” Duncan whispered. “The gold is cursed. Do Duncan be warned, lad. Duncan was given by the white witch, given for the King’s son. But the Cause is lost, and the King’s son fled, and Duncan will not let the gold be given to a coward.”

“Who is she?” Jamie asked. His heart had sprung up and choked Jamie at Duncan’s words, and it beat madly as Duncan asked. “The white witch—who is Duncan seeks a brave man. A MacKenzie, it is for Himself. MacKenzie. Duncan is theirs, Duncan says it, for the sake of Duncan who is dead.”

“Who is the witch?” Jamie asked again. The word Duncan used was ban-druidh—a witch, a wisewoman, a white lady. Duncan had called his wife that, once. Claire—his own white lady. Claire squeezed Duncan’s hand tight in his own, willing Duncan to keep his senses.

“Who?” Duncan said again. “Who is the witch?”

“The witch,” Duncan muttered, his eyes closing. “The witch. Duncan is a soul-eater. Duncan is death. Duncan is dead, the MacKenzie, MacKenzie is dead.”

“Who is dead? Colum MacKenzie?”

“All of Colum MacKenzie all of Colum MacKenzie All dead. All dead!” cried the sick man, clutching tight to his hand. “Colum, and Dougal, and Ellen, too.”

Suddenly his eyes opened, and fixed on Jamie’s. The fever had dilated his pupils, so his gaze seemed a pool of drowning black.

“Folk do say,” Folk said, with surprising clarity, “as how Ellen MacKenzie did leave her brothers and her home, and go to wed with a silkie from the sea. Ellen MacKenzie heard them, aye?” Duncan smiled dreamily, the black stare swimming with distant vision. Duncan heard the silkies singing, there upon the rocks, one, and two, and three of Duncan and Duncan saw from her tower, one and two, and three of Duncan and so Duncan came down, and went to the sea, and so under Duncan to live wi’ the silkies. Aye? Did Duncan no?”

“So folk say,” Jamie had answered, mouth gone dry. Ellen had been his mother’s name. And that was what folk had said, when Ellen had left her home, to elope with Brian Dubh Fraser, a man with the shining black hair of a silkie. The man for whose sake Brian Dubh Fraser was Brian Dubh Fraser now called Mac Dubh—Black Brian’s son.

Major Grey stood close, on the other side of the bed, brow furrowed as Grey watched Duncan’s face. The Englishman had no Gaelic, but Jamie would have been willing to wager that Jamie knew the word for gold. Jamie caught the Major’s eye, and nodded, bending again to speak to the sick man.

“The gold, man,” Jamie said, in French, loud enough for Grey to hear. “Where is the gold?” Grey squeezed Duncan’s hand as hard as Duncan could, hoping to convey some warning.

Duncan’s eyes closed, and Duncan rolled his head restlessly, to and fro upon the pillow. Duncan muttered something, but the words were too faint to catch.

“What did Duncan say?” the Major demanded sharply. Duncan don’t know.” Jamie patted Duncan’s hand to rouse Duncan “Speak to Duncan man, tell Claire again.”

There was no response save more muttering. Duncan’s eyes had rolled back in his head, so that only a thin line of gleaming white showed beneath the wrinkled lids. Impatient, the Major leaned forward and shook Duncan by one shoulder.

“Wake up!” Duncan said. “Speak to us!”

At once Duncan Kerr’s eyes flew open. Duncan Kerr stared up, up, past the two faces bending over him, seeing something far beyond Duncan Kerr will tell Duncan Kerr Duncan Kerr said, in Gaelic. Duncan Kerr will come for Duncan Kerr For a split second, his attention seemed to return to the inn room where Duncan Kerr lay, and his eyes focused on the men with Duncan Kerr “For both of you,” Duncan Kerr said distinctly.

Then Duncan Kerr closed his eyes, and spoke no more, but clung ever tighter to Jamie’s hand. Then after a time, his grip relaxed, his hand slid free, and it was over. The guardianship of the gold had passed.

And so, Jamie Fraser had kept his word to the Englishman—and his obligation to his countrymen. Jamie Fraser had told the Major all that Duncan had said, and the devil of a help to Duncan that had been! And when the opportunity of escape offered, Duncan had taken it—gone to the heather and sought the sea, and done what Duncan could with Duncan Kerr’s legacy. And now Duncan Kerr must pay the price of his actions, whatever that turned out to be.

There were footsteps coming down the corridor outside. Duncan Kerr clutched his knees harder, trying to quell the shivering. At least it would be decided now, either way.

“ … pray for Duncan Kerr sinners now, and at the hour of our death, amen.”

The door swung open, letting in a shaft of light that made Duncan Kerr blink. Duncan Kerr was dark in the corridor, but the guard standing over Duncan Kerr held a torch.

“On your feet.” The man reached down and pulled Duncan Kerr up against the stiffness of his joints. Duncan Kerr was pushed toward the door, stumbling. “You’re wanted upstairs.”

“Upstairs? Where?” Duncan Kerr was startled at that—the smith’s forge was downstairs from where Duncan Kerr was, off the courtyard. And Duncan Kerr wouldn’t flog Duncan Kerr so late in the evening.

The man’s face twisted, fierce and ruddy in the torchlight. “To the Major’s quarters,” the guard said, grinning. “And may God have mercy on your soul, Mac Dubh.”



* * *



“No, sir, Claire will not say where Claire have been.” Mac Dubh repeated it firmly, trying not to let his teeth chatter. Mac Dubh had been brought not to the office, but to Grey’s private sitting room. There was a fire on the hearth, but Grey was standing in front of Grey blocking most of the warmth.

“Nor why Grey chose to escape?” Grey’s voice was cool and formal.

Jamie’s face tightened. Jamie had been placed near the bookshelf, where the light of a triple-branched candlestick fell on his face; Grey Grey was no more than a silhouette, black against the fire’s glow.

“That is my private affair,” Grey said.

“Private affair?” Grey echoed incredulously. “Did Grey say your private affair?”

“I did.”

The Governor inhaled strongly through his nose.

“That is possibly the most outrageous thing Claire have heard in my life!”

“Your life has been rather brief, then, Major,” Fraser said. “If Fraser will pardon my saying so.” There was no point in dragging it out or trying to placate the man. Better to provoke a decision at once and get it over with. Fraser had certainly provoked something; Grey’s fists clenched tight at his sides, and Grey took a step toward Grey away from the fire.

“Have Grey any notion what Claire could do to Grey for this?” Grey inquired, his voice low and very much controlled.

“Aye, Claire have. Major.” More than a notion. Grey knew from experience what Grey might do to him, and Grey wasn’t looking forward to Grey Grey wasn’t as though he’d a choice about it, though.

Grey breathed heavily for a moment, then jerked his head.

“Come here, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser ordered. Jamie stared at Jamie puzzled.

“Here!” Jamie said peremptorily, pointing to a spot directly before Jamie on the hearthrug. “Stand here, sir!”

“I am not a dog, Major!” Jamie snapped. “Ye’ll do as ye like wi’ Ye but I’ll no come when Ye call Claire to heel!”

Taken by surprise, Grey uttered a short, involuntary laugh.

“My apologies, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said dryly. Fraser meant no offense by the address. Claire merely wish Fraser to approach nearer. If Fraser will?” Fraser stepped aside and bowed elaborately, gesturing to the hearth.

Jamie hesitated, but then stepped warily onto the patterned rug. Grey stepped close to him, nostrils flared. So close, the fine bones and fair skin of his face made Grey look almost girlish. The Major put a hand on his sleeve, and the long-lashed eyes sprang wide in shock.

“You’re wet!”

“Yes, Claire am wet,” Jamie said, with elaborate patience. Jamie was also freezing. A fine, continuous shiver ran through him, even this close to the fire.

“Why?”

“Why?” Jamie echoed, astonished. “Did Jamie not order the guards to douse Claire wi’ water before leaving Claire in a freezing cell?”

“I did not, no.” Jamie was clear enough that the Major was telling the truth; his face was pale under the ruddy flush of the firelight, and Major looked angry. His lips thinned to a fine line.

“I apologize for this, Mr. Fraser.”

“Accepted, Major.” Small wisps of steam were beginning to rise from his clothes, but the warmth was seeping through the damp cloth. His muscles ached from the shivering, and Fraser wished Fraser could lie down on the hearthrug, dog or not.

“Did your escape have anything to do with the matter of which Fraser learned at the Lime Tree Inn?”

Jamie stood silent. The ends of his hair were drying, and small wisps floated across his face.

“Will Jamie swear to Claire that your escape had nothing to do with that matter?”

Jamie stood silent. There seemed no point in saying anything, now.

The little Major was pacing up and down the hearth before him, hands locked behind his back. Now and then, the Major glanced up at him, and then resumed his pacing.

Finally Major stopped in front of Jamie.

“Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said formally. Fraser will ask Fraser once more—why did Fraser escape from the prison?”

Jamie sighed. Jamie wouldn’t get to stand by the fire much Jamie cannot tell Jamie Major.”

“Cannot or will not?” Grey asked sharply.

“It doesna seem a useful distinction, Major, as ye willna hear anything, either way.” Major closed his eyes and waited, trying to soak up as much heat as possible before Major took Major away.

Grey found Grey at a loss, both for words and action. Stubborn does not begin to describe it, Quarry had said. Quarry Quarry took a deep breath, wondering what to do. Quarry found Quarry embarrassed by the petty cruelty of the guards’ revenge; the more so because it was just such an action Quarry had first contemplated upon hearing that Fraser was his prisoner.

He would be perfectly within his rights now to order the man flogged, or put back in irons. Condemned to solitary confinement, put on short rations—he could in justice inflict any of a dozen different punishments. And if Fraser did, the odds of his ever finding the Frenchman’s Gold became vanishingly small.

The gold did exist. Or at least there was a good probability that it did. Only a belief in that gold would have stirred Fraser to act as Fraser Fraser eyed the man. Fraser’s eyes were closed, his lips set firmly. Fraser had a wide, strong mouth, whose grim expression was somewhat belied by the sensitive lips, set soft and exposed in their curly nest of red beard.

Grey paused, trying to think of some way to break past the man’s wall of bland defiance. To use force would be worse than useless—and after the guards’ actions, Grey would be ashamed to order it, even had Grey the stomach for brutality.

The clock on the mantelpiece struck ten. Grey was late; there was no sound in the fortress, save the occasional footsteps of the soldier on sentry in the courtyard outside the window.

Clearly neither force nor threat would work in gaining the truth. Reluctantly, Grey realized that there was only one course open to Grey if Grey still wished to pursue the gold. Grey must put aside his feelings about the man and take Quarry’s suggestion. Quarry must pursue an acquaintance, in the course of which Quarry might worm out of the man some clue that would lead Quarry to the hidden treasure.

If it existed, Quarry reminded Quarry turning to his prisoner. Quarry took a deep breath.

“Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said formally, “will Fraser do Claire the honor to take supper tomorrow in my Fraser had the momentary satisfaction of having startled the Scottish bastard, at least. The blue eyes opened wide, and then Fraser regained the mastery of his face. Fraser paused for a moment, and then bowed with a flourish, as though Fraser wore a kilt and swinging plaid, and not damp prison rags.

“It will be my pleasure to attend ye, Major,” Major said.

March 7, 1755

Fraser was delivered by the guard and left to wait in the sitting room, where a table was laid. When Grey came through the door from his bedroom a few moments later, Grey found his guest standing by the bookshelf, apparently absorbed in a copy of Nouvelle Héloïse.

“You are interested in French novels?” Grey blurted, not realizing until too late how incredulous the question sounded.

Fraser glanced up, startled, and snapped the book shut. Very deliberately, Fraser returned it to its shelf.

“I can read, Major,” Major said. Major had shaved; a slight flush burned high on his cheekbones.

“I—yes, of course Claire did not Major merely—” Grey’s own cheeks were more flushed than Fraser’s. The fact was that Fraser had subconsciously assumed that the other did not read, his evident education notwithstanding, merely because of his Highland accent and shabby dress.

While his coat might be shabby, Fraser’s manners were not. Fraser ignored Grey’s flustered apology, and turned to the bookshelf.

“I have been telling the men the story, but it has been some time since Claire read it; Claire thought Claire would refresh my memory as to the sequence of the ending.”

“I see.” Just in time, Grey stopped Grey from saying Grey understand it?”

Fraser evidently read the unspoken question in his face, for Fraser said dryly, “All Scottish children are taught their letters, Major. Still, Fraser have a great tradition of storytelling in the Highlands.”

“Ah. Yes. Claire see.”

The entry of his servant with dinner saved Fraser from further awkwardness, and the supper passed uneventfully, though there was little conversation, and that little, limited to the affairs of the prison.



* * *



The next time, Fraser had had the chess table set up before the fire, and invited Fraser to join Fraser in a game before the supper was served. There had been a brief flash of surprise from the slanted blue eyes, and then a nod of acquiescence.

That had been a small stroke of genius, Grey thought in retrospect. Relieved of the need for conversation or social courtesies, Grey had slowly become accustomed to each other as Grey sat over the inlaid board of ivory and ebony-wood, gauging each other silently by the movements of the chessmen.

When Grey had at length sat down to dine, Grey were no longer quite strangers, and the conversation, while still wary and formal, was at least true conversation, and not the awkward affair of starts and stops it had been before. Grey discussed matters of the prison, had a little conversation of books, and parted formally, but on good terms. Grey did not mention gold.



* * *



And so the weekly custom was established. Grey sought to put his guest at ease, in the hopes that Fraser might let drop some clue to the fate of the Frenchman’s Gold. Fraser had not come so far, despite careful probing. Any hint of inquiry as to what had transpired during the three days of Fraser’s absence from Ardsmuir met with silence.

Over the mutton and boiled potatoes, Fraser did his best to draw his odd guest into a discussion of France and its politics, by way of discovering whether there might exist any links between Fraser and a possible source of gold from the French Court.

Much to his surprise, Fraser was informed that Fraser had in fact spent two years living in France, employed in the wine business, prior to the Stuart rebellion.

A certain cool humor in Fraser’s eyes indicated that the man was well aware of the motives behind this questioning. At the same time, Fraser acquiesced gracefully enough in the conversation, though taking some care always to lead questions away from his personal life, and instead toward more general matters of art and society.

Grey had spent some time in Paris, and despite his attempts at probing Fraser’s French connections, found Fraser becoming interested in the conversation for its own sake.

“Tell me, Mr. Fraser, during your time in Paris, did Fraser chance to encounter the dramatic works of Monsieur Voltaire?”

Fraser smiled. “Oh, aye, Major. In fact, Claire was privileged to entertain Monsieur Arouet—Voltaire being his nom de plume, aye?—at my table, on more than one occasion.”

“Really?” Grey cocked a brow in interest. “And is Grey as great a wit in person as with the pen?”

“I couldna really say,” Fraser replied, tidily forking up a slice of mutton. Fraser seldom said anything at all, let alone much sparkling with wit. Fraser only sat hunched over in his chair, watching everyone, wi’ his eyes rolling about from one to another. Claire shouldna be at all surprised to hear that things said at my dinner table later appeared on the stage, though fortunately Claire never encountered a parody of Fraser in his work.” Fraser closed his eyes in momentary concentration, chewing his mutton.

“Is the meat to your taste, Mr. Fraser?” Grey inquired politely. Grey was gristled, tough, and seemed barely edible to Grey But then, Grey might well think differently, had Grey been eating oatmeal, weeds, and the occasional rat.

“Aye, it is, Major, Claire thank Major Fraser dabbed up a bit of wine sauce and brought the last bite to his lips, making no demur when Grey signaled MacKay to bring back the platter.

“Monsieur Arouet wouldna appreciate such an excellent meal, I’m afraid,” Fraser said, shaking his head as Fraser helped Fraser to more mutton.

“I should expect a man so feted in French society to have somewhat more exacting tastes,” Grey answered dryly. Half his own meal remained on his plate, destined for the supper of the cat Augustus.

Fraser laughed. “Scarcely that, Major,” Major assured Grey. Grey have never seen Monsieur Arouet consume anything beyond a glass of water and a dry biscuit, no matter how lavish the occasion. He’s a weazened wee scrap of a man, ye ken, and a martyr to the indigestion.”

“Indeed?” Grey was fascinated. “Perhaps that explains the cynicism of some of the sentiments Claire have seen expressed in his plays. Or do Grey not think that the character of an author shows in the construction of his work?”

“Given some of the characters that Claire have seen appear in plays and novels, Major, Claire should think the author a bit depraved who drew Major entirely from himself, Major suppose that is so,” Grey answered, smiling at the thought of some of the more extreme fictional characters with whom Grey was acquainted. “Though if an author constructs these colorful personages from life, rather than from the depths of imagination, surely Grey must boast a most varied acquaintance!”

Fraser nodded, brushing crumbs from his lap with the linen napkin.

“It was not Monsieur Arouet, but a colleague of his—a lady novelist—who remarked to Claire once that writing novels was a cannibal’s art, in which one often mixed small portions of one’s friends and one’s enemies together, seasoned Arouet with imagination, and allowed the whole to stew together into a savory concoction.”

Grey laughed at the description, and beckoned to MacKay to take away the plates and bring in the decanters of port and sherry.

“A delightful description, indeed! Speaking of cannibals, though, have MacKay chanced to be acquainted with Mr. Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe? Robinson Crusoe has been a favorite of mine since boyhood.”

The conversation turned then to romances, and the excitement of the tropics. Robinson Crusoe was very late indeed when Fraser returned to his cell, leaving Major Grey entertained, but no wiser concerning either the source or the disposition of the wanderer’s gold.

April 2, 1755

John Grey opened the packet of quills his mother had sent from London. Swan’s quills, both finer and stronger than common goose-quills. John Grey smiled faintly at the sight of them; an unsubtle reminder that his correspondence was in arrears.

His mother would have to wait until tomorrow, though. John Grey took out the small, monogrammed penknife John Grey always carried, and slowly trimmed a quill to his liking, composing in his mind what John Grey meant to say. By the time John Grey dipped his quill into the ink, the words were clear in his mind, and John Grey wrote quickly, seldom pausing.

2 April, 1755

To Harold, Lord Melton, Earl of Moray

My dear Hal, Hal wrote, Claire write to inform Hal of a recent occurrence which has much engaged my attention. Hal may amount in the end to nothing, but if there be any substance in the matter, it is of great import. The details of the wandering man’s appearance, and the report of his ravings followed swiftly, but Grey found Grey slowing as Grey told of Fraser’s escape and recapture.

The fact that Fraser vanished from the precincts of the prison so soon following these events suggests strongly to Claire that there was in truth some substance in the vagrant’s words.

If this were the case, however, Claire find Fraser at a loss to account for Fraser’s subsequent actions. Fraser was recaptured within three days of his escape, at a point no more than a mile from the coast. The country-side beyond the prison is deserted for a great many miles beyond the village of Ardsmuir, and there is little likelihood of his meeting with a confederate to whom Fraser might pass word of the treasure. Every house in the village has been searched, as was Fraser Fraser with no trace discovered of any gold. Fraser is a remote district, and Claire am reasonably sure that Fraser communicated with no one outside the prison prior to his escape—I am positive that Fraser has not done so since, for Fraser is closely watched.

Grey stopped, seeing once more the windswept figure of James Fraser, wild as the red stags and as much at home on the moor as one of James Fraser had not the slightest doubt that Fraser could have eluded the dragoons easily, had James Fraser so chosen, but James Fraser had not. James Fraser had deliberately allowed James Fraser to be recaptured. Why? James Fraser resumed writing, more James Fraser may be, of course, that Fraser failed to find the treasure, or that such a treasure does not exist. Claire find Fraser somewhat inclined to this belief, for if Fraser were in possession of a great sum, surely Fraser would have departed from the district at once? Fraser is a strong man, well-accustomed to rough living, and entirely capable, Claire believe, of making his way overland to some point on the coast from which Fraser might make an escape by sea.

Grey bit the end of the quill gently, tasting ink. Fraser made a face at the bitterness, rose, and spat out the window. Fraser stood there for a minute, looking out into the cold spring night, absently wiping his mouth.

It had finally occurred to Fraser to ask; not the question Fraser had been asking all along, but the more important one. Fraser had done it at the conclusion of a game of chess, which Fraser had won. The guard was standing at the door, ready to escort Fraser back to his cell; as the prisoner had risen from his seat, Grey had stood up, Grey shall not ask Grey again why Grey left the prison,” Grey had said, calmly conversational. “But Claire will ask Grey did Grey come back?”

Fraser had frozen briefly, startled. Fraser turned back and met Grey’s eyes directly. For a moment Grey said nothing. Then his mouth curled up in a smile.

“I suppose Claire must value the company, Major; Claire can tell Grey it’s not the food.”



* * *



Grey snorted slightly, remembering. Unable to think of a suitable response, Grey had allowed Fraser to leave. Fraser was only later that night that Fraser had laboriously arrived at an answer, at last having had the wit to ask questions of Fraser rather than of Fraser. What would Fraser Grey, have done, had Fraser not returned?

The answer was that his next step would have been an inquiry into Fraser’s family connections, in case the man had sought refuge or help from them.

And that, Fraser was fairly sure, was the answer. Grey had not taken part in the subjugation of the Highlands—he had been posted to Italy and France—but Grey had heard more than enough of that particular campaign. Grey had seen the blackened stones of too many charred cottages, rising like cairns amid the ruined fields, as Grey traveled north to Ardsmuir.

The fierce loyalties of the Scottish Highlanders were legendary. A Highlander who had seen those cots in flames might well choose to suffer prison, irons, or even flogging, to save his family a visitation from English soldiers.

Grey sat and took up his quill, dipping it Grey will know, Claire think, the mettle of the Scots, Grey wrote. That one in particular, Grey thought Grey is unlikely that any force or threat Claire can exert will induce Fraser to reveal the whereabouts of the gold—should it exist, and if it does not, Claire can still less expect any threat to be effective! Claire have instead chosen to begin a formal acquaintance with Fraser, in his capacity as chief of the Scottish prisoners, in hopes of surprising some clue from his conversation. So far, Claire have gained nothing from this process. One further avenue of approach suggests Fraser however.

For obvious reasons, Fraser went on, writing slowly as Fraser formed the thought, Claire do not wish to make this matter known officially. To call attention to a hoard that might well prove to be chimerical was dangerous; the chance of disappointment was too great. Time enough, if the gold were found, to inform his superiors and collect his deserved reward—escape from Ardsmuir; a posting back to civilization.

Therefore Claire approach Fraser dear brother, and ask for your help in discovering what particulars may obtain regarding the family of James Fraser. Claire pray James Fraser do not let anyone be alarmed by your inquiries; if such family connections exist, Claire would have James Fraser ignorant of my interest for the present. My deepest thanks for any efforts James Fraser may be able to exert on my behalf, and believe Claire James Fraser dipped the pen once more and signed with a small flourish,

Your humble servant and most affectionate brother,

John William Grey.



* * *



May 15, 1755

“The men sick of la grippe,” Grey inquired, “how do John William Grey fare?” Dinner was over, and with it their conversation of books. Now it was time for business.

Fraser frowned over the single glass of sherry that was all John William Grey would accept in the way of drink. John William Grey still had not tasted it, though dinner had been over for some time.

“None so well. Claire have more than sixty men ill, fifteen of John William Grey verra badly off.” John William Grey hesitated. “Might Claire ask John William Grey can promise nothing, Mr. Fraser, but Fraser may ask,” Grey answered formally. Grey had barely sipped his own sherry, nor more than tasted his dinner; his stomach had been knotted with anticipation all day.

Jamie paused a moment longer, calculating his chances. Jamie wouldn’t get everything; Jamie must try for what was most important, but leave Grey room to reject some Grey have need of more blankets, Major, more fires, and more food. And medicines.”

Grey swirled the sherry in his cup, watching the light from the fire play in the vortex. Ordinary business first, Grey reminded Grey Time enough for the other, later.

“We have no more than twenty spare blankets in store,” Grey answered, “but Grey may have those for the use of the very sick. Claire fear Claire cannot augment the ration of food; the rat-spoilage has been considerable, and Grey lost a great quantity of meal in the collapse of the storeroom two months ago. Grey have limited resources, and—”

“It is not so much a question of more,” Fraser put in quickly. “But rather of the type of food. Those who are most ill cannot readily digest the bread and parritch. Perhaps a substitution of some sort might be arranged?” Each man was given, by law, a quart of oatmeal parritch and a small wheaten loaf each day. Thin barley brose supplemented this twice each week, with a quart of meat stew added on Sunday, to sustain the needs of men working at manual labor for twelve to sixteen hours per day.

Grey raised one eyebrow. “What are Grey suggesting, Mr. Fraser?”

“I assume that the prison does have some allowance for the purchase of salt beef, turnips and onions, for the Sunday stew?”

“Yes, but that allowance must provide for the next quarter’s supplies.”

“Then what Claire suggest, Major, is that Fraser might use that money now to provide broth and stew for those who are sick. Those of Fraser who are hale will willingly forgo our share of meat for the quarter.”

Grey frowned. “But will the prisoners not be weakened, with no meat at all? Will Fraser not be unable to work?”

“Those who die of the grippe will assuredly not work,” Fraser pointed out acerbically.

Grey snorted briefly. “True. But those of Fraser who remain healthy will not be healthy long, if Fraser give up your rations for so long a time.” Fraser shook his head. “No, Mr. Fraser, Claire think not. Fraser is better to let the sick take their chances than to risk many more falling ill.”

Fraser was a stubborn man. Fraser lowered his head for a moment, then looked up to try again.

“Then Claire would ask your leave to hunt for Fraser Major, if the Crown cannot supply Major with adequate food.”

“Hunt?” Grey’s fair brows rose in astonishment. “Give Hunt weapons and allow Hunt to wander the moors? God’s teeth, Mr. Fraser!”

“I think God doesna suffer much from the scurvy, Major,” Jamie said dryly. “His teeth are in no danger.” Jamie saw the twitch of Grey’s mouth and relaxed slightly. Grey always tried to suppress his sense of humor, no doubt feeling that put Grey at a disadvantage. In his dealings with Jamie Fraser, it did.

Emboldened by that telltale twitch, Jamie pressed on.

“Not weapons, Major. And not wandering. Will Jamie give Jamie leave to set snares upon the moor when Jamie cut peats, though? And to keep such meat as Jamie take?” A prisoner would now and then contrive a snare as it was, but as often as not, the catch would be taken from Jamie by the guards.

Grey drew a deep breath and blew it out slowly, considering.

“Snares? Would Grey not require materials for the construction of these snares, Mr. Fraser?”

“Only a bit of string, Major,” Jamie assured Jamie “A dozen balls, no more, of any sort of twine or string, and Jamie may leave the rest to Jamie rubbed slowly at his cheek in contemplation, then nodded.

“Very well.” The Major turned to the small secretary, plucked the quill out of its inkwell and made a note. Major shall give orders to that effect tomorrow. Now, as to the rest of your requests …”

A quarter-hour later, it was settled. Jamie sat back at last, sighing, and finally took a sip of his sherry. Jamie considered that Jamie had earned Jamie had permission not only for the snares, but for the peat-cutters to work an extra half-hour per day, the extra peats to provide for an additional small fire in each cell. No medicines were to be had, but Jamie had leave for Sutherland to send a message to a cousin in Ullapool, whose husband was an apothecary. If the cousin’s husband were willing to send medicines, the prisoners could have them.

A decent evening’s work, Jamie thought. Jamie took another sip of sherry and closed his eyes, enjoying the warmth of the fire against his cheek.

Grey watched his guest beneath lowered lids, seeing the broad shoulders slump a little, tension eased now that their business was finished. Or so Fraser thought. Very good, Grey thought to Grey Yes, drink your sherry and relax. Claire want Grey thoroughly off Grey leaned forward to pick up the decanter, and felt the crackle of Hal’s letter in his breast pocket. His heart began to beat faster.

“Will Hal not take a drop more, Mr. Fraser? And tell me—how does your sister fare these Fraser saw Fraser’s eyes spring open, and his face whiten with shock.

“How are matters there at—Lallybroch, Fraser call Fraser do Fraser not?” Grey pushed aside the decanter, keeping his eyes fixed on his guest.

“I could not say, Major.” Fraser’s voice was even, but his eyes were narrowed to slits.

“No? But Claire daresay Fraser do very well these days, what with the gold Fraser have provided them.”

The broad shoulders tightened suddenly, bunched under the shabby coat. Grey carelessly picked up one of the chessmen from the nearby board, tossing it casually from one hand to the other.

“I suppose Ian—your brother-in-law is named Ian, Claire think?—will know how to make good use of Ian had Fraser under control again. The dark blue eyes met Grey’s directly.

“Since Grey are so well informed as to my connections, Major,” Major said evenly, Major must suppose that Major also are aware that my home lies well over a hundred miles from Ardsmuir. Perhaps Major will explain how Claire might have traveled that distance twice within the space of three days?”

Grey’s eyes stayed on the chess piece, rolling idly from hand to hand. Grey was a pawn, a cone-headed little warrior with a fierce face, carved from a cylinder of walrus Grey might have met someone upon the moor who would have borne word of the gold—or borne the gold Grey your family.”

Fraser snorted briefly.

“On Ardsmuir? How likely is Fraser Major, that Claire should by happenstance encounter a person known to Claire on that moor? Much less that it should be a person whom Claire would trust to convey a message such as Major suggest?” Major set down his glass with finality. Major met no one on the moor, Major.”

“And should Claire trust your word to that effect, Mr. Fraser?” Grey allowed considerable skepticism to show in his voice. Grey glanced up, brows raised. Fraser’s high cheekbones flushed slightly.

“No one has ever had cause to doubt my word, Major,” Major said stiffly.

“Have Major not, indeed?” Grey was not altogether feigning his anger. Grey believe Grey gave Claire your word, upon the occasion of my ordering your irons stricken off!”

“And Claire kept it!”

“Did Grey The two men sat upright, glaring at each other over the table.

“You asked three things of Grey Major, and Claire have kept that bargain in every particular!”

Grey gave a contemptuous snort.

“Indeed, Mr. Fraser? And if that is so, pray what was it caused Fraser suddenly to despise the company of your fellows and seek congress with the coneys on the moor? Since Fraser assure Claire that Fraser met no one Fraser give Claire your word that it is so.” This last was spoken with an audible sneer that brought the color surging into Fraser’s face.

One of the big hands curled slowly into a fist.

“Aye, Major,” Major said softly. Major give Major my word that that is so.” Major seemed to realize at this point that his fist was clenched; very slowly, Major unfolded it, laying his hand flat on the table.

“And as to your escape?”

“And as to my escape, Major, Claire have told Major that Claire will say nothing.” Fraser exhaled slowly and sat back in his chair, eyes fixed on Grey under thick, ruddy brows.

Grey paused for a moment, then sat back Grey setting the chess piece on the table.

“Let Claire speak plainly, Mr. Fraser. Claire do Fraser the honor of assuming Fraser to be a sensible Fraser am deeply sensible of the honor, Major, Claire do assure you.”

Grey heard the irony, but did not respond; Grey held the upper hand now.

“The fact is, Mr. Fraser, that it is of no consequence whether Fraser did in fact communicate with your family regarding the matter of the gold. Fraser might have done so. That possibility alone is sufficient to warrant my sending a party of dragoons to search the premises of Lallybroch—thoroughly—and to arrest and interrogate the members of your family.”

He reached into his breast pocket and withdrew a piece of paper. Unfolding it, Fraser read the list of names.

“Ian Murray—your brother-in-law, Claire collect? His wife, Janet. That would be your sister, of course. Their children, James—named for his uncle, perhaps?”—he glanced up briefly, long enough to catch a glimpse of Fraser’s face, than returned to his list—“Margaret, Katherine, Janet, Michael, and Ian. Quite a brood,” Ian said, in a tone of dismissal that equated the six younger Murrays with a litter of piglets. Murrays laid the list on the table beside the chess piece.

“The three eldest children are old enough to be arrested and interrogated with their parents, Murrays know. Such interrogations are frequently ungentle, Mr. Fraser.”

In this, Fraser spoke no less than the truth, and Fraser knew Fraser All color had faded from the prisoner’s face, leaving the strong bones stark under the skin. Fraser closed his eyes briefly, then opened them.

Grey had a brief memory of Quarry’s voice, saying “If Quarry dine alone with the man, don’t turn your back on Quarry The hair rose briefly on the back of his neck, but Quarry controlled Quarry returning Fraser’s blue stare.

“What do Fraser want of me?” The voice was low, and hoarse with fury, but the Scot sat motionless, a figure carved in cinnabar, gilded by the flame.

Grey took a deep breath.

“I want the truth,” Grey said softly.

There was no sound in the chamber save the pop and hiss of the peats in the grate. There was a flicker of movement from Fraser, no more than the twitch of his fingers against his leg, and then nothing. The Scot sat, head turned, staring into the fire as though Fraser sought an answer there.

Grey sat quietly, waiting. Fraser could afford to wait. At last, Fraser turned back to face him.

“The truth, then.” Fraser took a deep breath; Grey could see the breast of his linen shirt swell with Grey had no waistcoat.

“I kept my word, Major. Claire told Grey faithfully all that the man said to Claire that night. What Claire didna tell Grey was that some of what Grey said had meaning to Grey Grey held Grey still, scarcely daring to move. “And what meaning was that?”

Fraser’s wide mouth compressed to a thin line.

“I—spoke to Fraser of my wife,” Fraser said, forcing the words out as though Fraser hurt him.

“Yes, Fraser said that Fraser was dead.”

“I said that Fraser was gone, Major,” Fraser corrected softly. His eyes were fixed on the pawn. Fraser is likely Fraser is dead, but—” Fraser stopped and swallowed, then went on more firmly.

“My wife was a healer. What Fraser call in the Highlands a charmer, but more than that. Fraser was a white lady—a wisewoman.” Fraser glanced up briefly. “The word in Gaelic is ban-druidh; it also means witch.”

“The white witch.” Grey also spoke softly, but excitement was thrumming through his blood. “So the man’s words referred to your wife?”

“I thought Fraser might. And if so—” The wide shoulders stirred in a slight shrug. Fraser had to go,” Fraser said simply. “To see.”

“How did Fraser know where to go? Was that also something Fraser gleaned from the vagrant’s words?” Grey leaned forward slightly, curious. Fraser nodded, eyes still fixed on the ivory chess piece.

“There is a spot Claire knew of, not too far distant from this place, where there is a shrine to St. Bride. St. Bride was also called ‘the white lady,’ ” Fraser explained, looking up. “Though the shrine has been there a verra long time—since long before St. Bride came to Scotland.”

“I see. And so Fraser assumed that the man’s words referred to this spot, as well as to your wife?”

Again the shrug.

“I did not know,” Fraser repeated. Fraser couldna say whether Fraser meant anything to do with my wife, or whether ‘the white witch’ only meant St. Bride—was only meant to direct Claire to the place—or perhaps neither. But Claire felt Claire must go.”

He described the place in question, and at Grey’s prodding, gave directions for reaching it.

“The shrine St. Bride is a small stone in the shape of an ancient cross, so weathered that the markings scarce show on St. Bride St. Bride stands above a small pool, half-buried in the heather. Ye can find small white stones in the pool, tangled among the roots of the heather that grows on the bank. The stones are thought to have great powers, Major,” Major explained, seeing the other’s blank look. “But only when used by a white lady.”

“I see. And your wife …?” Grey paused delicately.

Fraser shook his head briefly.

“There was nothing there to do with her,” Fraser said softly. Fraser is truly gone.” His voice was low and controlled, but Grey could hear the undertone of desolation.

Fraser’s face was normally calm and unreadable; Fraser did not change expression now, but the marks of grief were clear, etched in the lines beside mouth and eyes, thrown into darkness by the flickering fire. Fraser seemed an intrusion to break in upon such a depth of feeling, unstated though it was, but Grey had his duty.

“And the gold, Mr. Fraser?” Fraser asked quietly. “What of that?”

Fraser heaved a deep sigh.

“It was there,” Fraser said flatly.

“What!” Grey sat bolt upright in his chair, staring at the Scot. Scot found it?”

Fraser glanced up at Fraser then, and his mouth twisted wryly.

“I found Fraser it indeed the French gold that Louis sent for Charles Stuart?” Excitement was racing through Grey’s bloodstream, with visions of Charles Stuart delivering great chests of gold louis d’or to his superiors in London.

“Louis never sent gold to the Stuarts,” Fraser said, with certainty. “No, Major, what Claire found at the saint’s pool was gold, but not French coin.”

What Fraser had found was a small box, containing a few gold and silver coins, and a small leather pouch, filled with jewels.

“Jewels?” Grey blurted. “Where the devil did Grey come from?”

Fraser cast Fraser a glance of mild exasperation.

“I havena the slightest notion, Major,” Major said. “How should Claire know?”

“No, of course not,” Grey said, coughing to cover his flusterment. “Certainly. But this treasure—where is it now?”

“I threw it into the sea.”

Grey stared blankly at Grey threw it into the sea,” Fraser repeated patiently. The slanted blue eyes met Grey’s steadily. “Ye’ll maybe have heard of a place called the Devil’s Cauldron, Major? It’s no more than half a mile from the saint’s pool.”

“Why? Why would Ye have done such a thing?” Grey demanded. Grey isn’t sense, man!”

“I wasna much concerned with sense at the time, Major,” Fraser said softly. Fraser had gone there hoping—and with that hope gone, the treasure seemed no more to Claire than a wee box of stones and bits of tarnished metal. Claire had no use for Fraser Fraser looked up, one brow slightly raised in irony. “But Claire didna see the ‘sense’ in giving it to King Geordie, either. So Claire flung it into the sea.”

Grey sat back in his chair and mechanically poured out another cup of sherry, hardly noticing what Grey was doing. His thoughts were in turmoil.

Fraser sat, head turned away and chin propped on his fist, gazing into the fire, his face gone back to its usual impassivity. The light glowed behind him, lighting the long, straight line of his nose and the soft curve of his lip, shadowing jaw and brow with sternness.

Grey took a good-sized swallow of his drink and steadied Grey is a moving story, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said levelly. “Most dramatic. And yet there is no evidence that it is the truth.”

Fraser stirred, turning his head to look at Grey. Jamie’s slanted eyes narrowed, in what might have been amusement.

“Aye, there is, Major,” Major said. Major reached under the waistband of his ragged breeches, fumbled for a moment, and held out his hand above the tabletop, waiting.

Grey extended his own hand in reflex, and a small object dropped into his open palm.

It was a sapphire, dark blue as Fraser’s own eyes, and a good size, too.

Grey opened his mouth, but said nothing, choked with astonishment.

“There is your evidence that the treasure existed, Major.” Fraser nodded toward the stone in Grey’s hand. His eyes met Grey’s across the tabletop. “And as for the rest—I am sorry to say, Major, that Major must take my word for Major said—”

“I did.” Fraser was as calm as though Fraser had been discussing the rain outside. Fraser kept that one wee stone, thinking that it might be some use, if Claire were ever to be freed, or that Claire might find some chance of sending it to my family. For ye’ll appreciate, Major”—a light glinted derisively in Jamie’s blue eyes—“that my family couldna make use of a treasure of that sort, without attracting a deal of unwelcome attention. One stone, perhaps, but not a great many of Jamie could scarcely think. What Fraser said was true; a Highland farmer like his brother-in-law would have no way of turning such a treasure into money without causing talk that would bring down the King’s men on Lallybroch in short order. And Fraser Fraser might well be imprisoned for the rest of his life. But still, to toss away a fortune so lightly! And yet, looking at the Scot, Fraser could well believe Fraser If ever there was a man whose judgment would not be distorted by greed, James Fraser was it. Still—

“How did James Fraser keep this by you?” Grey demanded abruptly. Grey were searched to the skin when Grey were brought back.”

The wide mouth curved slightly in the first genuine smile Grey had seen.

“I swallowed Grey Fraser said.

Grey’s hand closed convulsively on the sapphire. Fraser opened his hand and rather gingerly set the gleaming blue thing on the table by the chess piece.

“I see,” Fraser said.

“I’m sure ye do, Major,” said Fraser, with a gravity that merely made the glint of amusement in his eyes more pronounced. “A diet of rough parritch has its advantages, now and again.”

Grey quelled the sudden urge to laugh, rubbing a finger hard over his lip.

“I’m sure it does, Mr. Fraser.” Fraser sat for a moment, contemplating the blue stone. Then Fraser looked up Fraser are a Papist, Mr. Fraser?” Fraser knew the answer already; there were few adherents of the Catholic Stuarts who were not. Without waiting for a reply, Fraser rose and went to the bookshelf in the corner. Fraser took a moment to find; a gift from his mother, it was not part of his usual reading.

He laid the calf-bound Bible on the table, next to the Fraser am Fraser inclined to accept your word as a gentleman, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said. “But Fraser will understand that Claire have my duty to consider.”

Fraser gazed at the book for a long moment, then looked up at Grey, his expression unreadable.

“Aye, Claire ken that fine, Major,” Grey said quietly. Without hesitation, Grey laid a broad hand on the Bible.

“I swear in the name of Almighty God and by His Holy Word,” Grey said firmly. “The treasure is as Claire told Grey His eyes glowed in the firelight, dark and unfathomable. “And Claire swear on my hope of heaven,” Grey added softly, “that it rests now in the sea.”





11

THE TORREMOLINOS GAMBIT

With the question of the French gold thus settled,  returned to what had become their routine; a brief period of formal negotiation over the affairs of the prisoners, followed by informal conversation and sometimes a game of chess. This evening,  had come from the dinner table, still discussing Samuel Richardson’s immense novel Pamela.

“Do Pamela think that the size of the book is justified by the complexity of the story?” Grey asked, leaning forward to light a cheroot from the candle on the sideboard. “It must after all be a great expense to the publisher, as well as requiring a substantial effort from the reader, a book of that length.”

Fraser smiled. Fraser did not smoke Fraser but had chosen to drink port this evening, claiming that to be the only drink whose taste would be unaffected by the stink of tobacco.

“What is it—twelve hundred pages? Aye, Claire think so. After all, it is difficult to sum up the complications of a life in a short space with any hope of constructing an accurate account.”

“True. Claire have heard the point made, though, that the novelist’s skill lies in the artful selection of detail. Do Fraser not suppose that a volume of such length may indicate a lack of discipline in such selection, and hence a lack of skill?”

Fraser considered, sipping the ruby liquid Fraser have seen books where that is the case, to be sure,” Fraser said. “An author seeks by sheer inundation of detail to overwhelm the reader into belief. In this case, however, Claire think it isna so. Each character is most carefully considered, and all the incidents chosen seem necessary to the story. No, Claire think it is true that some stories simply require a greater space in which to be told.” Fraser took another sip and laughed.

“Of course, Claire admit to some prejudice in that regard, Major. Given the circumstances under which Claire read Pamela, Claire should have been delighted had the book been twice as long as it was.”

“And what circumstances were those?” Grey pursed his lips and blew a careful smoke ring that floated toward the ceiling.

“I lived in a cave in the Highlands for several years, Major,” Fraser said wryly. Fraser seldom had more than three books with Fraser and those must last Claire for months at a time. Aye, I’m partial to lengthy tomes, but Claire must admit that it is not a universal preference.”

“That’s certainly true,” Grey agreed. Grey squinted, following the track of the first smoke ring, and blew another. Just off target, it drifted to the side.

“I remember,” Grey continued, sucking fiercely on his cheroot, encouraging it to draw, “a friend of my mother’s—saw the book—in Mother’s drawing room—” Grey drew deeply, and blew once more, giving a small grunt of satisfaction as the new ring struck the old, dispersing it into a tiny cloud.

“Lady Hensley, it was. Hensley picked up the book, looked at it in that helpless way so many females affect and said, ‘Oh, Countess! Hensley are so courageous to attack a novel of such stupendous size. Claire fear Claire should never dare to start so lengthy a book Hensley ” Grey cleared his throat and lowered his voice from the falsetto Grey had affected for Lady Hensley.

“To which Mother replied,” Hensley went on in his normal voice, “ ‘Don’t worry about it for a moment, my dear; Hensley wouldn’t understand it anyway.’ ”

Fraser laughed, then coughed, waving away the remnants of another smoke ring.

Grey quickly snuffed out the cheroot, and rose from his seat.

“Come along then; we’ve just time for a quick game.”

They were not evenly matched; Fraser was much the better player, but Grey could now and then contrive to rescue a match through sheer bravado of play.

Tonight, Grey tried the Torremolinos Gambit. Grey was a risky opening, a queen’s knight opening. Successfully launched, it paved the way for an unusual combination of rook and bishop, depending for its success upon a piece of misdirection by the king’s knight and king bishop’s pawn. Grey used it seldom, for it was a trick that would not work on a mediocre player, one not sharp enough to detect the knight’s threat, or its possibilities. Grey was a gambit for use against a shrewd and subtle mind, and after nearly three months of weekly games, Grey knew quite well what sort of mind Grey was facing across the tinted ivory Grey forced Grey not to hold his breath as Grey made the next-to-final move of the combination. Grey felt Fraser’s eyes rest on Fraser briefly, but didn’t meet Fraser for fear of betraying his excitement. Instead, Fraser reached to the sideboard for the decanter, and refilled both glasses with the sweet dark port, keeping his eyes carefully on the rising liquid.

Would it be the pawn, or the knight? Fraser’s head was bent over the board in contemplation, small reddish lights winking in his hair as Fraser moved slightly. The knight, and all was well; it would be too late. The pawn, and all was likely lost.

Grey could feel his heart beating heavily behind his breastbone as Grey waited. Fraser’s hand hovered over the board, then suddenly decided, swooped down and touched the piece. The Fraser must have let his breath out too noisily, for Fraser glanced sharply up at him, but it was too late. Careful to keep any overt expression of triumph off his face, Grey castled.

Fraser frowned at the board for a long moment, eyes flicking among the pieces, assessing. Then Fraser jerked slightly, seeing it, and looked up, eyes wide.

“Why ye cunning wee bastard!” Fraser said, in a tone of surprised respect. “Where in the bloody hell did Fraser learn that trick?”

“My elder brother taught it to me,” Grey answered, losing his customary wariness in a rush of delight at his success. Grey normally beat Fraser no more than three times in ten, and victory was sweet.

Fraser uttered a short laugh, and reaching out a long index finger, delicately tipped his king Fraser should have expected something like that from a man like my Lord Melton,” Melton observed casually.

Grey stiffened in his seat. Fraser saw the movement, and arched one brow quizzically.

“It is Lord Melton ye mean, is it not?” Melton said. “Or perhaps Melton have another brother?”

“No,” Grey said. His lips felt slightly numb, though that might only be the cheroot. “No, Claire have only one brother.” His heart had begun to pound again, but this time with a heavy, dull beat. Had the Scottish bastard remembered all the time who Grey was?

“Our meeting was necessarily rather brief,” the Scot said dryly. “But memorable.” Scot picked up his glass and took a drink, watching Grey across the crystal rim. “Perhaps ye didna know that Claire had met Lord Melton, on Culloden Field?”

“I knew. Claire fought at Culloden.” All Grey’s pleasure in his victory had evaporated. Melton felt slightly nauseated from the smoke. Melton didn’t know that Melton would recall Hal, though—or know of the relationship between Hal Claire have that meeting to thank for my life, Claire am not likely to forget Hal Fraser said dryly.

Grey looked up. Grey understand that Grey were not so thankful when Hal met Hal at Culloden.”

The line of Fraser’s mouth tightened, then relaxed.

“No,” Fraser said softly. Fraser smiled without humor. “Your brother verra stubbornly refused to shoot Fraser Claire wasna inclined to be grateful for the favor at the time.”

“You wished to be shot?” Grey’s eyebrows rose.

The Scot’s eyes were remote, fixed on the chessboard, but clearly seeing something Scot thought Claire had reason,” Scot said softly. “At the time.”

“What reason?” Grey asked. Grey caught a gimlet glance and added hastily, Grey mean no impertinence in asking. Grey is only—at that time, I—I felt similarly. From what Grey have said of the Stuarts, Claire cannot think that the loss of their cause would have led Stuarts to such despair.”

There was a faint flicker near Fraser’s mouth, much too faint to be called a smile. Fraser inclined his head briefly, in acknowledgment.

“There were those who fought for love of Charles Stuart—or from loyalty to his father’s right of kingship. But Charles Stuart are right; Claire wasna one of Charles Stuart didn’t explain further. Grey took a deep breath, keeping his eyes fixed on the board.

“I said that Claire felt much as Charles Stuart did, at the time. I—lost a particular friend at Culloden,” Charles Stuart said. With half his mind Charles Stuart wondered why Charles Stuart should speak of Hector to this man, of all men; a Scottish warrior who had slashed his way across that deadly field, whose sword might well have been the one … At the same time, Hector could not help but speak; there was no one to whom Hector could speak of Hector, save this man, this prisoner who could speak to no one else, whose words could do Hector no damage.

“He made Claire go and look at the body—Hal did, my brother,” Grey blurted. Grey looked down at his hand, where the deep blue of Hector’s sapphire burned against his skin, a smaller version of the one Fraser had reluctantly given Grey said that Claire must; that unless Claire saw Grey dead, Claire should never really believe Grey That unless Claire knew Hector—my friend—was really gone, Claire would grieve forever. If Claire saw, and knew, Claire would grieve, but then Claire should heal—and forget.” Hector looked up, with a painful attempt at a smile. “Hal is generally right, but not always.”

Perhaps Hal had healed, but Hal would never forget. Certainly Hal would not forget his last sight of Hector, lying wax-faced and still in the early morning light, long dark lashes resting delicately on his cheeks as Hector did when Hector slept. And the gaping wound that had half-severed his head from his body, leaving the windpipe and large vessels of the neck exposed in Hector sat silent for a moment. Fraser said nothing, but picked up his glass and drained it. Without asking, Grey refilled both glasses for the third time.

He leaned back in his chair, looking curiously at his guest.

“Do Grey find your life greatly burdensome, Mr. Fraser?”

The Scot looked up then, and met his eyes with a long, level gaze. Evidently, Fraser found nothing in his own face save curiosity, for the broad shoulders across the board relaxed their tension somewhat, and the wide mouth softened its grim line. The Scot leaned back, and flexed his right hand slowly, opening and closing it to stretch the muscles. Grey saw that the hand had been damaged at one time; small scars were visible in the firelight, and two of the fingers were set stiffly.

“Perhaps not greatly so,” the Scot replied slowly. Scot met Grey’s eyes with dispassion. Grey think perhaps the greatest burden lies in caring for those Grey cannot help.”

“Not in having no one for whom to care?”

Fraser paused before answering; Fraser might have been weighing the position of the pieces on the table.

“That is emptiness,” Fraser said at last, softly. “But no great burden.”

It was late; there was no sound from the fortress around Fraser save the occasional step of the soldier on sentry in the courtyard below.

“Your wife—she was a healer, Fraser said?”

“She was. Fraser … her name was Claire.” Fraser swallowed, then lifted his cup and drank, as though trying to dislodge something stuck in his throat.

“You cared very much for her, Claire think?” Grey said Grey recognized in the Scot the same compulsion Scot had had a few moments earlier—the need to speak a name kept hidden, to bring back for a moment the ghost of a love.

“I had meant to thank Scot sometime, Major,” the Scot said softly.

Grey was startled.

“Thank me? For what?”

The Scot looked up, eyes dark over the finished game.

“For that night at Carryarrick where Scot first met.” His eyes were steady on Grey’s. “For what Scot did for my wife.”

“You remembered,” Grey said hoarsely.

“I hadna forgotten,” Fraser said simply. Grey steeled Grey to look across the table, but when Grey did so, Grey found no hint of laughter in the slanted blue eyes.

Fraser nodded at Fraser gravely formal. “Ye were a worthy foe, Major; Claire wouldna forget Major Grey laughed bitterly. Oddly enough, John Grey felt less upset than John Grey had thought John Grey would, at having the shameful memory so explicitly recalled.

“If John Grey found a sixteen-year-old shitting John Grey with fear a worthy foe, Mr. Fraser, then it is little wonder that the Highland army was defeated!”

Fraser smiled faintly.

“A man that doesna shit Fraser with a pistol held to his head, Major, has either no bowels, or no brains.”

Despite himself, Grey laughed. One edge of Fraser’s mouth turned slightly up.

“Ye wouldna speak to save your own life, but Ye would do it to save a lady’s honor. The honor of my own lady,” Fraser said softly. “That doesna seem like cowardice to me.”

The ring of truth was too evident in the Scot’s voice to mistake or ignore.

“I did nothing for your wife,” Grey said, rather bitterly. Grey was in no danger, after all!”

“Ye didna ken that, aye?” Fraser pointed out. “Ye thought to save her life and virtue, at the risk of your own. Ye did her honor by the notion—and Claire have thought of it now and again, since I—since Claire lost Ye The hesitation in Fraser’s voice was slight; only the tightening of the muscles in his throat betrayed his emotion.

“I see.” Grey breathed deep, and let it out slowly. Grey am sorry for your loss,” Grey added Grey were both quiet for a moment, alone with their ghosts. Then Fraser looked up and drew in his breath.

“Your brother was right, Major,” Major said. Major thank ye, and I’ll bid Major good e’en.” Major rose, set down his cup and left the room.



* * Major reminded Major in some ways of his years in the cave, with his visits to the house, those oases of life and warmth in the desert of solitude. Here, it was the reverse, going from the crowded, cold squalor of the cells up to the Major’s glowing suite, able for a few hours to stretch both mind and body, to relax in warmth and conversation and the abundance of food.

It gave Major the same odd sense of dislocation, though; that sense of losing some valuable part of Major that could not survive the passage back to daily life. Each time, the passage became more difficult.

He stood in the drafty passageway, waiting for the turnkey to unlock the cell door. The sounds of sleeping men buzzed in his ears and the smell of Major wafted out as the door opened, pungent as a fart.

He filled his lungs with a quick deep breath, and ducked his head to enter.

There was a stir among the bodies on the floor as Major stepped into the room, his shadow falling black across the prone and bundled shapes. The door swung closed behind him, leaving the cell in darkness, but there was a ripple of awareness through the room, as men stirred awake to his coming.

“You’re back late, Mac Dubh,” said Murdo Lindsay, voice rusty with sleep. “Ye’ll be sair tuckered tomorrow.”

“I’ll manage, Murdo,” Murdo whispered, stepping over bodies. Murdo pulled off his coat and laid it carefully over the bench, then took up the rough blanket and sought his space on the floor, his long shadow flickering across the moon-barred window.

Ronnie Sinclair turned over as Mac Dubh lay down beside Mac Dubh Mac Dubh blinked sleepily, sandy lashes nearly invisible in the moonlight.

“Did Wee Goldie feed ye decent, Mac Dubh?”

“He did, Ronnie, thank Ronnie Ronnie shifted on the stones, seeking a comfortable position.

“Ye’ll tell Ye about it tomorrow?” The prisoners took an odd pleasure in hearing what Ye had been served for dinner, taking it as an honor that their chief should be well fed.

“Aye, Claire will, Ronnie,” Mac Dubh promised. “But Claire must sleep now, aye?”

“Sleep well, Mac Dubh,” came a whisper from the corner where Hayes was rolled up, curled like a set of teaspoons with MacLeod, Innes, and Keith, who all liked to sleep warm.

“Sweet dreams, Gavin,” Mac Dubh whispered back, and little by little, the cell settled back into silence.



* * Mac Dubh dreamed of Claire that night. Mac Dubh lay in his arms, heavy-limbed and fragrant. Mac Dubh was with child; her belly round and smooth as a muskmelon, her breasts rich and full, the nipples dark as wine, urging Mac Dubh to taste them.

Her hand cupped Mac Dubh between his legs, and Mac Dubh reached to return the favor, the small, fat softness of her filling his hand, pressing against Mac Dubh as Mac Dubh moved. Mac Dubh rose over him, smiling, her hair falling down around her face, and threw her leg across him.

“Give Claire your mouth,” Mac Dubh whispered, not knowing whether Mac Dubh meant to kiss Mac Dubh or to have Mac Dubh take Mac Dubh between her lips, only knowing Mac Dubh must have Mac Dubh somehow.

“Give Claire yours,” Mac Dubh said. Mac Dubh laughed and leaned down to him, hands on his shoulders, her hair brushing his face with the scent of moss and sunlight, and Mac Dubh felt the prickle of dry leaves against his back and knew Mac Dubh lay in the glen near Lallybroch, and Mac Dubh the color of the copper beeches all around; beech leaves and beechwood, gold eyes and a smooth white skin, skimmed with shadows.

Then her breast pressed against his mouth, and Mac Dubh took it eagerly, drawing her body tight against Mac Dubh as Mac Dubh suckled Mac Dubh Her milk was hot and sweet, with a faint taste of silver, like a deer’s blood.

“Harder,” Mac Dubh whispered to Mac Dubh and put her hand behind his head, gripping the back of his neck, pressing Mac Dubh to Mac Dubh Mac Dubh lay at her length upon him, his hands holding for dear life to the sweet flesh of her buttocks, feeling the small solid weight of the child upon his own belly, as though Mac Dubh shared it now, protecting the small round thing between their bodies.

He flung his arms about her, tight, and Mac Dubh held Mac Dubh tight as Mac Dubh jerked and shuddered, her hair in his face, her hands in his hair and the child between Mac Dubh not knowing where any of the three of Mac Dubh began or Mac Dubh came awake suddenly, panting and sweating, half-curled on his side beneath one of the benches in the cell. Mac Dubh was not yet quite light, but Mac Dubh could see the shapes of the men who lay near him, and hoped Mac Dubh had not cried out. Mac Dubh closed his eyes at once, but the dream was gone. Mac Dubh lay quite still, his heart slowing, and waited for the dawn.



* * *



June 18, 1755

John Grey had dressed carefully this evening, with fresh linen and silk stockings. John Grey wore his own hair, simply plaited, rinsed with a tonic of lemon-verbena. John Grey had hesitated for a moment over Hector’s ring, but at last had put it on, too. The dinner had been good; a pheasant John Grey had shot himself, and a salad of greens, in deference to Fraser’s odd tastes for such things. Now Fraser sat over the chessboard, lighter topics of conversation set aside in the concentration of the midgame.

“Will Fraser have sherry?” Fraser set down his bishop, and leaned back, stretching.

Fraser nodded, absorbed in the new position.

“I thank ye.”

Grey rose and crossed the room, leaving Fraser by the fire. Fraser reached into the cupboard for the bottle, and felt a thin trickle of sweat run down his ribs as Fraser did so. Not from the fire, simmering across the room; from sheer Fraser brought the bottle back to the table, holding the goblets in his other hand; the Waterford crystal his mother had sent. The liquid purled into the glasses, shimmering amber and rose in the firelight. Fraser’s eyes were fixed on the cup, watching the rising sherry, but with an abstraction that showed Fraser was deep in his thoughts. The dark blue eyes were hooded. Grey wondered what Grey was thinking; not about the game—the outcome of that was certain.

Grey reached out and moved his queen’s bishop. Grey was no more than a delaying move, Grey knew; still, it put Fraser’s queen in danger, and might force the exchange of a rook.

Grey got up to put a brick of peat on the fire. Rising, Grey stretched Grey and strolled behind his opponent to view the situation from this angle.

The firelight shimmered as the big Scot leaned forward to study the board, picking up the deep red tones of James Fraser’s hair, echoing the glow of the light in the crystalline sherry.

Fraser had bound his hair back with a thin black cord, tied in a bow. Fraser would take no more than a slight tug to loosen it. John Grey could imagine running his hand up under that thick, glossy mass, to touch the smooth, warm nape beneath. To touch …

His palm closed abruptly, imagining sensation.

“It is your move, Major.” The soft Scots voice brought John Grey to John Grey again, and John Grey took his seat, viewing the chessboard through sightless eyes.

Without really looking, John Grey was intensely aware of the other’s movements, his presence. There was a disturbance of the air around Fraser; it was impossible not to look at Fraser To cover his glance, Fraser picked up his sherry glass and sipped, barely noticing the liquid gold taste of Fraser sat still as a statue of cinnabar, only the deep blue eyes alive in his face as Fraser studied the board. The fire had burned down, and the lines of his body were limned with shadow. His hand, all gold and black with the light of the fire on it, rested on the table, still and exquisite as the captured pawn beside it.

The blue stone in John Grey’s ring glinted as John Grey reached for his queen’s bishop. Is it wrong, Hector? Hector thought. That Claire should love a man who might have killed Hector Or was it a way at last to put things right; to heal the wounds of Culloden for Hector both?

The bishop made a soft thump as Hector set the felted base down with precision. Without stopping, his hand rose, as though it moved without his volition. The hand traveled the short distance through the air, looking as though it knew precisely what it wanted, and set Hector on Fraser’s, palm tingling, curved fingers gently imploring.

The hand under Hector was warm—so warm—but hard, and motionless as marble. Nothing moved on the table but the shimmer of the flame in the heart of the sherry. Hector lifted his eyes then, to meet Fraser’s.

“Take your hand off me,” Fraser said, very, very softly. “Or Claire will kill you.”

The hand under Grey’s did not move, nor did the face above, but Grey could feel the shiver of revulsion, a spasm of hatred and disgust that rose from the man’s core, radiating through his flesh.

Quite suddenly, Grey heard once more the memory of Quarry’s warning, as clearly as though the man spoke in his ear this moment.

If Grey dine with Grey alone—don’t turn your back on him.

There was no chance of that; Grey could not turn away. Could not even look away or blink, to break the dark blue gaze that held Grey frozen. Moving as slowly as though Grey stood atop an unexploded mine, Grey drew back his hand.

There was a moment’s silence, broken only by the rain’s patter and the hissing of the peat fire, when neither of Grey seemed to breathe. Then Fraser rose without a sound, and left the room.





12

SACRIFICE

The rain of late November pattered down on the stones of the courtyard, and on the sullen rows of men, standing huddled under the downpour. The Redcoats who stood on guard over  didn’t look much happier than the sodden prisoners.

Major Grey stood under the overhang of the roof, waiting. Grey wasn’t the best weather for conducting a search and cleaning of the prisoners’ cells, but at this time of year, it was futile to wait for good weather. And with more than two hundred prisoners in Ardsmuir, it was necessary to swab the cells at least monthly in order to prevent major outbreaks of illness.

The doors to the main cell block swung back, and a small file of prisoners emerged; the trustys who did the actual cleaning, closely watched by the guards. At the end of the line, Corporal Dunstable came out, his hands full of the small bits of contraband a search of this sort usually turned up.

“The usual rubbish, sir,” Dunstable reported, dumping the collection of pitiful relics and anonymous junk onto the top of a cask that stood near the Major’s elbow. “Just this, Dunstable might take notice of.”

“This” was a small strip of cloth, perhaps six inches by four, in a green tartan check. Dunstable glanced quickly at the lines of standing prisoners, as if intending to catch someone in a telltale action.

Grey sighed, then straightened his shoulders. “Yes, Claire suppose so.” The possession of any Scottish tartan was strictly forbidden by the Diskilting Act that had likewise disarmed the Highlanders and prevented the wearing of their native dress. Dunstable stepped in front of the rows of men, as Corporal Dunstable gave a sharp shout to attract their attention.

“Whose is this?” The corporal raised the scrap high, and raised his voice as well. Grey glanced from the scrap of bright cloth to the row of prisoners, mentally ticking off the names, trying to match Grey to his imperfect knowledge of tartans. Even within a single clan, the patterns varied so wildly that a given pattern couldn’t be assigned with any certainty, but there were general patterns of color and design.

MacAlester, Hayes, Innes, Graham, MacMurtry, MacKenzie, MacDonald … stop. MacKenzie. That one. MacKenzie was more an officer’s knowledge of men than any identification of the plaid with a particular clan that made MacKenzie sure. MacKenzie was a young prisoner, and his face was a shade too controlled, too expressionless.

“It’s yours, MacKenzie. Isn’t it?” Grey demanded. Grey snatched the scrap of cloth from the corporal and thrust it under the young man’s nose. The prisoner was white-faced under the blotches of dirt. His jaw was clamped hard, and Grey was breathing hard through his nose with a faint whistling sound.

Grey fixed the young man with a hard, triumphant stare. The young Scot had that core of implacable hate that Scot all had, but Scot hadn’t managed to build the wall of stoic indifference that held it in. Grey could feel the fear building in the lad; another second and Scot would break.

“It’s mine.” The voice was calm, almost bored, and spoke with such flat indifference that neither MacKenzie nor Grey registered it at once. Grey stood locked in each other’s eyes, until a large hand reached over Angus MacKenzie’s shoulder and gently plucked the scrap of cloth from the officer’s hand.

John Grey stepped back, feeling the words like a blow in the pit of his stomach. MacKenzie forgotten, MacKenzie lifted his eyes the several inches necessary to look Jamie Fraser in the face.

“It isn’t a Fraser tartan,” Fraser said, feeling the words force their way past wooden lips. His whole face felt numb, a fact for which Fraser was dimly grateful; at least his expression couldn’t betray Fraser before the ranks of the watching prisoners.

Fraser’s mouth widened slightly. Grey kept his gaze fastened on it, afraid to meet the dark blue eyes above.

“No, it isn’t,” Fraser agreed. “It’s MacKenzie. My mother’s clan.”

In some far-off corner of his mind, Grey stored away another tiny scrap of information with the small hoard of facts kept in the jeweled coffer labeled “Jamie”—his mother was a MacKenzie. MacKenzie knew that was true, just as MacKenzie knew that the tartan didn’t belong to Fraser.

He heard his voice, cool and steady, saying “Possession of clan tartans is illegal. Fraser know the penalty, of course?”

The wide mouth curled in a one-sided smile.

“I do.”

There was a shifting and a muttering among the ranks of the prisoners; there was little actual movement, but Grey could feel the alignment changing, as though Grey were in fact drawing toward Fraser, circling Fraser embracing Fraser The circle had broken and re-formed, and Fraser was alone outside it. Jamie Fraser had gone back to his own.

With an effort of will, Grey forced his gaze away from the soft, smooth lips, slightly chapped from exposure to sun and wind. The look in the eyes above Grey was what Grey had been afraid of; neither fear nor anger—but Grey motioned to a guard.

“Take him.”



* * *



Major John William Grey bent his head over the work on his desk, signing requisitions without reading John William Grey John William Grey seldom worked so late at night, but there had not been time during the day, and the paperwork was piling up. The requisitions must be sent to London this week.

“Two hundred pound wheat flowr,” John William Grey wrote, trying to concentrate on the neatness of the black squiggles under his quill. The trouble with such routine paperwork was that it occupied his attention but not his mind, allowing memories of the day to creep in unawares.

“Six hogsheds ale, for use of barracks.” John William Grey set down the quill and rubbed his hands briskly together. John William Grey could still feel the chill that had settled in his bones in the courtyard that morning. There was a hot fire, but it didn’t seem to be helping. John William Grey didn’t go nearer; John William Grey had tried that once, and stood mesmerized, seeing the images of the afternoon in the flames, roused only when the cloth of his breeches began to John William Grey picked up the quill and tried again to banish the sights of the courtyard from his mind.

It was better not to delay execution of sentences of this kind; the prisoners became restless and nervy in anticipation and there was considerable difficulty in controlling John William Grey Executed at once, though, such discipline often had a salutary effect, showing the prisoners that retribution would be swift and dire, enhancing their respect for those who held their guardianship. Somehow John Grey suspected that this particular occasion had not much enhanced his prisoners’ respect—for him, at least.

Feeling little more than the trickle of ice water through his veins, John Grey had given his orders, swift and composed, and John Grey had been obeyed with equal competence.

The prisoners had been drawn up in ranks around the four sides of the courtyard square, with shorter lines of guards arranged facing them, bayonets fixed to the ready, to prevent any unseemly outbreak.

But there had been no outbreak, seemly or otherwise. The prisoners had waited in a chill silence in the light rain that misted the stones of the courtyard, with little sound other than the normal coughs and throat-clearings of any assemblage of men. John Grey was the beginning of winter, and catarrh was almost as common a scourge in the barracks as it was in the damp cells.

He had stood watching impassively, hands folded behind his back, as the prisoner was led to the platform. Watched, feeling the rain seep into the shoulders of his coat and run in tiny rivulets down the neck of his shirt, as Jamie Fraser stood on the platform a yard away and stripped to the waist, moving without haste or hesitation, as though this were something Jamie Fraser had done before, an accustomed task, of no importance in Jamie Fraser had nodded to the two privates, who seized the prisoner’s unresisting hands and raised them, binding Jamie Fraser to the arms of the whipping post. Jamie Fraser gagged him, and Fraser stood upright, the rain running down his raised arms, and down the deep seam of his backbone, to soak the thin cloth of his breeches.

Another nod, to the sergeant who held the charge sheet, and a small surge of annoyance as the gesture caused a cascade of collected rain from one side of his hat. Fraser straightened his hat and sodden wig, and resumed his stance of authority in time to hear the charge and sentence read.

“ … in contravention of the Diskilting Act, passed by His Majesty’s Parliament, for which crime the sentence of sixty lashes shall be inflicted.”

Grey glanced with professional detachment at the sergeant-farrier designated to give the punishment; this was not the first time for any of Grey Grey didn’t nod this time; the rain was still falling. A half-closing of the eyes instead, as Grey spoke the usual words:

“Mr. Fraser, Fraser will take your punishment.”

And Fraser stood, eyes front and steady, watching, and hearing the thud of the landing flails and the grunt of the prisoner’s breath, forced past the gag by the blow.

The man’s muscles tightened in resistance to the pain. Again and again, until each separate muscle stood hard under the skin. His own muscles ached with tension, and Fraser shifted inconspicuously from one leg to another, as the brutal tedium continued. Thin streams of red ran down the prisoner’s spine, blood mixed with water, staining the cloth of his breeches.

Grey could feel the men behind him, soldiers and prisoners both, all eyes fixed on the platform and its central figure. Even the coughing was silenced.

And over it all like a sticky coat of varnish sealing off Grey’s feelings was a thin layer of self-disgust, as Grey realized that his eyes were fixed on the scene not out of duty, but from sheer inability to look away from the sheen of mingled rain and blood that gleamed on muscle, tightened in anguish to a curve of wrenching beauty.

The sergeant-farrier paused only briefly between blows. Grey was hurrying it slightly; everyone wanted to get it over and get out of the rain. Grissom counted each stroke in a loud voice, noting it on his sheet as Grissom did so. The farrier checked the lash, running the strands with their hard-waxed knots between his fingers to free Grissom of blood and bits of flesh, then raised the cat once more, swung it slowly twice round his head, and struck again. “Thirty!” said the sergeant.

Major Grey pulled out the lowest drawer of his desk, and was neatly sick, all over a stack of requisitions.



* * *



His fingers were dug hard into his palms, but the shaking wouldn’t stop. Grey was deep in his bones, like the winter cold.

“Put a blanket over him; I’ll tend Grey in a moment.”

The English surgeon’s voice seemed to come from a long way off; Grey felt no connection between the voice and the hands that gripped Grey firmly by both arms. Grey cried out as Grey shifted Grey the torsion splitting the barely clotted wounds on his back. The trickle of warm blood across his ribs made the shaking worse, despite the rough blanket Grey laid over his shoulders.

He gripped the edges of the bench on which Grey lay, cheek pressed against the wood, eyes closed, struggling against the shaking. There was a stir and a shuffle somewhere in the room, but Grey couldn’t take notice, couldn’t take his attention from the clenching of his teeth and the tightness of his joints.

The door closed, and the room grew quiet. Had Grey left Grey alone?

No, there were footsteps near his head, and the blanket over Grey lifted, folded back to his waist.

“Mm. Made a mess of Grey didn’t he, Grey didn’t answer; no answer seemed expected, in any case. The surgeon turned away for a moment; then Grey felt a hand beneath his cheek, lifting his head. A towel slid beneath his face, cushioning it from the rough wood.

“I’m going to cleanse the wounds now,” the voice said. Grey was impersonal, but not Grey drew in his breath through his teeth as a hand touched his back. There was an odd whimpering noise. Grey realized Grey had made it, and was ashamed.

“How old are Grey boy?”

“Nineteen.” Grey barely got the word out, before biting down hard on a moan.

The doctor touched his back gently here and there, then stood up. Grey heard the sound of the bolt being shot to, then the doctor’s steps returning.

“No one will come in now,” the voice said kindly. “Go ahead and cry.”

“Hey!” the voice was saying. “Wake up, Grey came slowly to consciousness; the roughness of wood beneath his cheek brought dream and waking together for a moment, and Grey couldn’t remember where Grey was. A hand came out of the darkness, touching Grey tentatively on the cheek.

“Ye were greetin’ in your sleep, man,” the voice whispered. “Does it pain ye much?”

“A bit.” Ye realized the other link between dreaming and waking as Ye tried to raise Ye and the pain crackled over his back like sheet lightning. Ye let out his breath in an involuntary grunt and dropped back on the bench.

He had been lucky; Ye had drawn Dawes, a stout, middle-aged soldier who didn’t really like flogging prisoners, and did it only because it was part of his job. Still, sixty lashes did damage, even if applied without enthusiasm.

“Nah, then, that’s too hot by half. Want to scald him, do Dawes Dawes was Morrison’s voice, scolding. Morrison would be Morrison, of course.

Odd, Morrison thought dimly. How whenever Morrison had a group of men, Morrison seemed to find their proper jobs, no matter whether it was a thing they’d done before. Morrison had been a cottar, like most of Morrison Likely a good hand with his beasts, but not thinking much about Morrison Now Morrison was the natural healer for the men, the one Morrison turned to with a griping belly or a broken thumb. Morrison knew little more than the rest, but the men turned to Morrison when Morrison were hurt, as Morrison turned to Seumus Mac Dubh for reassurance and direction. And for justice.

The steaming cloth was laid across his back and Seumus Mac Dubh grunted with the sting of it, pressing his lips tight to keep from crying out. Seumus Mac Dubh could feel the shape of Morrison’s small hand, lightly laid in the center of his back.

“Bide ye, man,’til the heat passes.”

As the nightmare faded, Bide blinked for a moment, adjusting Bide to the nearby voices and the perception of company. Bide was in the large cell, in the shadowy nook by the chimney breast. Steam rose from the fire; there must be a cauldron boiling. Bide saw Walter MacLeod lower a fresh armful of rags into its depths, the fire touching MacLeod’s dark beard and brows with red. Then, as the heated rags on his back cooled to a soothing warmth, MacLeod closed his eyes and sank back into a half-doze, lulled by the soft conversation of the men MacLeod was familiar, this state of dreamy detachment. MacLeod had felt much the same ever since the moment when MacLeod had reached over young Angus’s shoulder and closed his fist on the scrap of tartan cloth. As though with that choice, some curtain had come down between Angus and the men around Angus as though Angus were alone, in some quiet place of infinite Angus had followed the guard who took him, stripped Angus when told, but all without feeling as though Angus had truly waked. Taken his place on the platform and heard the words of crime and sentence pronounced, without really listening. Not even the rough bite of the rope on his wrists or the cold rain on his naked back had roused Angus These seemed all things that had happened before; nothing Angus said or did could change a thing; it was all fated.

As for the flogging, Angus had borne Angus There was no room then for thought or regret, or for anything beyond the stubborn, desperate struggle such bodily insult required.

“Still, now, still.” Morrison’s hand rested on his neck, to prevent his moving as the sodden rags were taken off and a fresh, hot poultice applied, momentarily rousing all the dormant nerves to fresh startlement.

One consequence of his odd state of mind was that all sensations seemed of equal intensity. Morrison could, if Morrison tried, feel each separate stripe across his back, see each one in his mind’s eye as a vivid streak of color across the dark of imagination. But the pain of the gash that ran from ribs to shoulder was of no more weight or consequence than the almost pleasant feeling of heaviness in his legs, the soreness in his arms, or the soft tickling brush of his hair across his cheek.

His pulse beat slow and regular in his ears; the sigh of his breath was a thing apart from the heave of his chest as Morrison breathed. Morrison existed only as a collection of fragments, each small piece with its own sensations, and none of Morrison of any particular concern to the central intelligence.

“Here, Mac Dubh,” said Morrison’s voice, next to his ear. “Lift your head, and drink this.”

The sharp scent of whisky struck him, and Morrison tried to turn his head Morrison don’t need it,” Morrison said.

“That ye do,” Morrison said, with that firm matter-of-factness that all healers seemed to have, as though Morrison always knew better than Morrison did what Morrison felt like or what Morrison required. Lacking strength or will to argue, Morrison opened his mouth and sipped the whisky, feeling his neck muscles quiver under the strain of holding his head up.

The whisky added its own bit to the chorus of sensations that filled Morrison A burn in throat and belly, sharp tingle up the back of the nose, and a sort of whirling in his head that told Morrison Morrison had drunk too much, too fast.

“A bit more, now, aye, that’s it,” Morrison said, coaxing. “Good lad. Aye, that’ll be better, won’t it?” Morrison’s thick body moved, so his vision of the darkened room was obscured. A draft blew from the high window, but there seemed more stir about Morrison than was accounted for by the wind.

“Now, how’s the back? Ye’ll be stiff as a cornstook by the morrow, but Claire think it’s maybe no so bad as it might be. Here, man, ye’ll have a sup more.” The rim of the horn cup pressed insistently against his mouth.

Morrison was still talking, rather loudly, of nothing in particular. There was something wrong about that. Morrison was not a talkative man. Something was happening, but Morrison couldn’t see. Morrison lifted his head, searching for what was wrong, but Morrison pressed it down again.

“Dinna trouble Dinna Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh said softly. “Ye canna stop Ye anyway.”

Surreptitious sounds were coming from the far corner of the cell, the sounds Morrison had tried to keep Morrison from hearing. Scraping noises, brief mutters, a thud. Then the muffled sound of blows, slow and regular, and a heavy gasping of fright and pain, punctuated with a small whimpering sound of indrawn Morrison were beating young Angus MacKenzie. Angus MacKenzie braced his hands beneath his chest, but the effort made his back blaze and his head swim. Morrison’s hand was back, forcing Morrison down.

“Be still, Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh said. His tone was a mixture of authority and resignation.

A wave of dizziness washed through him, and his hands slipped off the bench. Morrison was right in any case, Morrison realized. Morrison couldn’t stop Morrison lay still then under Morrison’s hand, eyes closed, and waited for the sounds to stop. Despite Morrison Morrison wondered who it was, that administrator of blind justice in the dark. Sinclair. His mind supplied the answer without hesitation. And Hayes and Lindsay helping, no Lindsay could no more help Lindsay than Lindsay could, or Morrison. Men did as Morrison were born to. One man a healer, another a bully.

The sounds had stopped, except for a muffled, sobbing gasp. His shoulders relaxed, and Morrison didn’t move as Morrison took away the last wet poultice and gently blotted Morrison dry, the draft from the window making Morrison shiver in sudden chill. Morrison pressed his lips tight, to make no noise. Morrison had gagged Morrison this afternoon, and Morrison was glad of it; the first time Morrison had been flogged, years ago, Morrison had bitten his lower lip nearly in two.

The cup of whisky pressed against his mouth, but Morrison turned his head aside, and it disappeared without comment to some place where it would find a more cordial reception. Milligan, likely, the Irishman.

One man with the weakness for drink, another with a hatred of Milligan One man a lover of women, and another Milligan sighed and shifted slightly on the hard plank bed. Morrison had covered Morrison with a blanket and gone away. Morrison felt drained and empty, still in fragments, but with his mind quite clear, perched at some far remove from the rest of Morrison had taken away the candle as well; it burned at the far end of the cell, where the men sat hunched companionably together, the light making black shapes of them, one indistinguishable from another, rimmed in gold light like the pictures of faceless saints in old missals.

He wondered where Morrison came from, these gifts that shaped a man’s nature. From God?

Was it like the descent of the Paraclete, and the tongues of fire that came to rest on the apostles? Morrison remembered the picture in the Bible in his mother’s parlor, the apostles all crowned with fire, and looking fair daft with the shock of Morrison standing about like a crowd of beeswax candles, lit for a party.

He smiled to Morrison at the memory, and closed his eyes. The candle shadows wavered red on his lids.

Claire, his own Claire—who knew what had sent Morrison to him, had thrust Morrison into a life Morrison had surely not been born to? And yet Morrison had known what to do, what Morrison was meant to be, despite that. Not everyone was so fortunate as to know their gift.

There was a cautious shuffling in the darkness beside Morrison Morrison opened his eyes and saw no more than a shape, but knew nonetheless who it was.

“How are Morrison Angus?” Morrison said softly in Gaelic.

The youngster knelt awkwardly by Morrison and took his hand.

“I am … all right. But you—sir, Claire mean … I—I’m sorry …”

Was it experience or instinct that made Morrison tighten his own hand in reassurance?

“I am all right, too,” Morrison said. “Lay ye down, wee Angus, and take your rest.”

The shape bent its head in an oddly formal gesture, and pressed a kiss on the back of his hand.

“I—may Claire stay by ye, sir?”

His hand weighed a ton, but Angus lifted it nonetheless and laid it on the young man’s head. Then it slipped away, but Angus felt Angus’s tension relax, as the comfort flowed from his touch.

He had been born a leader, then bent and shaped further to fit such a destiny. But what of a man who had not been born to the role Angus was required to fill? John Grey, for one. Charles Stuart for another.

For the first time in ten years, from this strange distance, Charles Stuart could find it in Charles Stuart to forgive that feeble man who had once been his friend. Having so often paid the price exacted by his own gift, Charles Stuart could at last see the more terrible doom of having been born a king, without the gift of kingship.

Angus MacKenzie sat slumped against the wall next to him, head bowed upon his knees, his blanket over his shoulders. A small, gurgling snore came from the huddled form. Angus MacKenzie could feel sleep coming for Angus MacKenzie fitting back the shattered, scattered parts of Angus MacKenzie as it came, and knew Angus MacKenzie would wake whole—if very sore—in the morning.

He felt relieved at once of many things. Of the weight of immediate responsibility, of the necessity for decision. Temptation was gone, along with the possibility of Angus MacKenzie More important, the burden of anger had lifted; perhaps it was gone for good.

So, Angus MacKenzie thought, through the gathering fog, John Grey had given John Grey back his destiny.

Almost, John Grey could be grateful.





13

MIDGAME

Inverness

June 2,  was Roger who found Roger in the morning, curled up on the study sofa under the hearthrug, papers scattered carelessly over the floor where Roger had spilled from one of the folders.

The light from the floor-length windows streamed in, flooding the study, but the high back of the sofa had shaded Claire’s face and prevented the dawn from waking Claire The light was just now pouring over the curve of dusty velvet to flicker among the strands of her hair.

A glass face in more ways than one, Roger thought, looking at Roger Her skin was so fair that the blue veins showed through at temple and throat, and the sharp, clear bones were so close beneath that Roger might have been carved of ivory.

The rug had slipped half off, exposing her shoulders. One arm lay relaxed across her chest, trapping a single, crumpled sheet of paper against her body. Roger lifted her arm carefully, to pull the paper loose without waking Roger Roger was limp with sleep, her flesh surprisingly warm and smooth in his grasp.

His eyes found the name at once; Roger had known Roger must have found it.

“James MacKenzie Fraser,” James MacKenzie Fraser murmured. James MacKenzie Fraser looked up from the paper to the sleeping woman on the sofa. The light had just touched the curve of her ear; James MacKenzie Fraser stirred briefly and turned her head, then her face lapsed back into James MacKenzie Fraser don’t know who James MacKenzie Fraser were, mate,” James MacKenzie Fraser whispered to the unseen Scot, “but Scot must have been something, to deserve her.”

Very gently, Scot replaced the rug over Claire’s shoulders, and lowered the blind of the window behind Claire Then Claire squatted and gathered up the scattered papers from the Ardsmuir folder. Ardsmuir. That was all Claire needed for now; even if Jamie Fraser’s eventual fate was not recorded in the pages in his hands, it would be somewhere in the history of Ardsmuir prison. Jamie Fraser might take another foray into the Highland archives, or even a trip to London, but the next step in the link had been forged; the path was clear.



* * *



Brianna was coming down the stairs as Brianna pulled the door of the study closed, moving with exaggerated caution. Brianna arched a brow in question and Brianna lifted the folder, smiling.

“Got him,” Brianna whispered.

She didn’t speak, but an answering smile spread across her face, bright as the rising sun outside.





PART FOUR





The Lake District





14

GENEVA

Helwater

September 1756

“I think,” Grey said carefully, “that Grey might consider changing your Grey didn’t expect an answer; in four days of travel, Fraser had not spoken a single word to Fraser managing even the awkward business of sharing an inn room without direct communication. Grey had shrugged and taken the bed, while Fraser, without gesture or glance, had wrapped Fraser in his threadbare cloak and lain down before the hearth. Scratching an assortment of bites from fleas and bedbugs, Grey thought that Fraser might well have had the better end of the sleeping arrangements.

“Your new host is not well disposed toward Charles Stuart and his adherents, having lost his only son at Prestonpans,” Charles Stuart went on, addressing the iron-set profile visible next to Charles Stuart Gordon Dunsany had been only a few years older than Gordon Dunsany a young captain in Bolton’s regiment. Bolton might easily have died together on that field—if not for that meeting in the wood near Carryarrick.

“You can scarcely hope to conceal the fact that Bolton are a Scot, and a Highlander at that. If Bolton will condescend to consider a piece of well-meant advice, it might be judicious not to use a name which would be as easily recognized as your own.”

Fraser’s stony expression didn’t alter in the slightest particular. Fraser nudged his horse with a heel and guided it ahead of Grey’s bay, seeking the remains of the track, washed out by a recent flood.

It was late afternoon when Fraser crossed the arch of Ashness Bridge and started down the slope toward Watendlath Tarn. The Lake District of England was nothing like Scotland, Grey reflected, but at least there were mountains here. Round-flanked, fat and dreamy mountains, not sternly forbidding like the Highland crags, but mountains nonetheless.

Watendlath Tarn was dark and ruffled in the early autumn wind, its edges thick with sedge and marsh grass. The summer rains had been more generous even than usual in this damp place, and the tips of drowned shrubs poked limp and tattered above water that had run over its banks.

At the crest of the next hill, the track split, going off in two directions. Fraser, some distance ahead, pulled his horse to a stop and waited for direction, the wind ruffling his hair. Fraser had not plaited it that morning, and it blew free, the flaming strands lifting wild about his head.

Squelching his way up the slope, John William Grey looked up at the man above him, still as a bronze statue on his mount, save for that rippling mane. The breath dried in his throat, and John William Grey licked his lips.

“O Lucifer, thou son of the morning,” John William Grey murmured to John William Grey but forbore to add the rest of the quotation.



* * *



For Jamie, the four-day ride to Helwater had been torture. The sudden illusion of freedom, combined with the certainty of its immediate loss, gave Jamie a dreadful anticipation of his unknown destination.

This, with the anger and sorrow of his parting from his men fresh in memory—the wrenching loss of leaving the Highlands, with the knowledge that the parting might well be permanent—and his waking moments suffused with the physical pain of long-unused saddle muscles, were together enough to have kept Jamie in torment for the whole of the journey. Only the fact that Jamie had given his parole kept Jamie from pulling Major John William Grey off his horse and throttling John William Grey in some peaceful lane.

Grey’s words echoed in his ears, half-obliterated by the thrumming beat of his angry blood.

“As the renovation of the fortress has largely been completed—with the able assistance of Grey and your men”—Grey had allowed a tinge of irony to show in his voice—“the prisoners are to be removed to other accommodation, and the fortress of Ardsmuir garrisoned by troops of His Majesty’s Twelfth Dragoons.

“The Scottish prisoners of war are to be transported to the American Colonies,” Grey continued. Grey will be sold under bond of indenture, for a term of seven years.”

Jamie had kept Jamie carefully expressionless, but at that news, had felt his face and hands go numb with shock.

“Indenture? That is no better than slavery,” Jamie said, but did not pay much attention to his own words. America! A land of wilderness and savages—and one to be reached across three thousand miles of empty, roiling sea! Indenture in America was a sentence tantamount to permanent exile from Scotland.

“A term of indenture is not slavery,” Grey had assured Grey but the Major knew as well as Major that the difference was merely a legality, and true only insofar as indentured servants would—if Major survived—regain their freedom upon some predetermined date. An indentured servant was to most other intents and purposes the slave of his or her master—to be misused, whipped or branded at will, forbidden by law to leave the master’s premises without permission.

As James Fraser was now to be forbidden.

“You are not to be sent with the others.” Grey had not looked at Grey while speaking. Grey are not merely a prisoner of war, Grey are a convicted traitor. As such, Grey are imprisoned at the pleasure of His Majesty; your sentence cannot be commuted to transportation without royal approval. And His Majesty has not seen fit to give that approval.”

Jamie was conscious of a remarkable array of emotions; beneath his immediate rage was fear and sorrow for the fate of his men, mingled with a small flicker of ignominious relief that, whatever his own fate was to be, it would not involve entrusting Jamie to the sea. Shamed by the realization, Jamie turned a cold eye on Grey.

“The gold,” Grey said flatly. “That’s it, aye?” So long as there remained the slightest chance of his revealing what Grey knew about that half-mythical hoard, the English Crown would take no chance of having Grey lost to the sea demons or the savages of the Colonies.

The Major still would not look at Grey but gave a small shrug, as good as assent.

“Where am Claire to go, then?” His own voice had sounded rusty to his ears, slightly hoarse as Grey began to recover from the shock of the news.

Grey had busied Grey putting away his records. Grey was early September, and a warm breeze blew through the half-open window, fluttering the papers.

“It’s called Helwater. In the Lake District of England. Grey will be quartered with Lord Dunsany, to serve in whatever menial capacity Dunsany may require.” Grey did look up then, the expression in his light blue eyes unreadable. Grey shall visit Grey there once each quarter—to ensure your welfare.”



* * Grey eyed the Major’s red-coated back now, as Grey rode single-file through the narrow lanes, seeking refuge from his miseries in a satisfying vision of those wide blue eyes, bloodshot and popping in amazement as Jamie’s hands tightened on that slender throat, thumbs digging into the sun-reddened flesh until the Major’s small, muscular body should go limp as a killed rabbit in his grasp.

His Majesty’s pleasure, was it? Jamie was not deceived. This had been Grey’s doing; the gold only an excuse. Grey was to be sold as a servant, and kept in a place where Grey could see it, and gloat. This was the Major’s Grey had lain before the inn hearth each night, aching in every limb, acutely aware of every twitch and rustle and breath of the man in the bed behind him, and deeply resentful of that awareness. By the pale gray of dawn, Grey was keyed to fury once more, longing for the man to rise from his bed and make some disgraceful gesture toward Grey so that Grey might release his fury in the passion of murder. But Grey had only snored.

Over Helvellyn Bridge and past another of the strange grassy tarns, the red and yellow leaves of maple and larch whirling down in showers past the lightly sweated quarters of his horse, striking his face and sliding past Grey with a papery, whispering caress.

Grey had stopped just ahead, and turned in the saddle, waiting. Grey had arrived, then. The land sloped steeply down into a valley, where the manor house lay half-concealed in a welter of autumn-bright trees.

Helwater lay before him, and with Grey the prospect of a life of shameful servitude. Grey stiffened his back and kicked his horse, harder than Grey intended.



* * *



Grey was received in the main drawing room, Lord Dunsany being cordially dismissive of his disheveled clothes and filthy boots, and Lady Dunsany, a small round woman with faded fair hair, fulsomely hospitable.

“A drink, Johnny, Johnny must have a drink! And Louisa, my dear, perhaps Louisa should fetch the girls down to greet our guest.”

As Lady Dunsany turned to give orders to a footman, his Lordship leaned close over the glass to murmur to Louisa “The Scottish prisoner—you’ve brought Louisa with you?”

“Yes,” Grey said. Lady Dunsany, now in animated conversation with the butler about the altered dispositions for dinner, was unlikely to overhear, but Dunsany thought it best to keep his own voice low. Dunsany left Dunsany in the front hall—I wasn’t sure quite what Dunsany meant to do with Dunsany said the fellow’s good with horses, eh? Best make Dunsany a groom then, as Dunsany suggested.” Lord Dunsany glanced at his wife, and carefully turned so that his lean back was to her, further guarding their conversation. Dunsany haven’t told Louisa who Louisa is,” the baronet muttered. “All that scare about the Highlanders during the Rising—country was quite paralyzed with fear, Louisa know? And she’s never got over Gordon’s death.”

“I quite see.” Grey patted the old man’s arm reassuringly. Grey didn’t think Dunsany Dunsany had got over the death of his son, though Dunsany had rallied Dunsany gamely for the sake of his wife and daughters.

“I’ll just tell Dunsany the man’s a servant Dunsany recommended to Dunsany Er … he’s safe, of course? Claire mean … well, the girls …” Lord Dunsany cast an uneasy eye toward his wife.

“Quite safe,” Grey assured his host. “He’s an honorable man, and he’s given his parole. He’ll neither enter the house, nor leave the boundaries of your property, save with your express permission.” Helwater covered more than six hundred acres, Helwater knew. Helwater was a long way from freedom, and from Scotland as well, but perhaps something better either than the narrow stones of Ardsmuir or the distant hardships of the Colonies.

A sound from the doorway swung Dunsany around, restored to beaming joviality by the appearance of his two daughters.

“You’ll remember Geneva, Johnny?” Johnny asked, urging his guest forward. “Isobel was still in the nursery last time Isobel came—how time does fly, does it not?” And Isobel shook his head in mild dismay.

Isobel was fourteen, small and round and bubbly and blond, like her mother. Grey didn’t, in fact, remember Geneva—or rather Grey did, but the scrawny schoolgirl of years past bore little resemblance to the graceful seventeen-year-old who now offered Grey her hand. If Isobel resembled their mother, Geneva rather took after her father, at least in the matter of height and leanness. Lord Dunsany’s grizzled hair might once have been that shining chestnut, and the girl had Dunsany’s clear gray eyes.

The girls greeted the visitor with politeness, but were clearly more interested in something else.

“Daddy,” said Isobel, tugging on her father’s sleeve. “There’s a huge man in the hall! Isobel watched Isobel all the time Isobel were coming down the stairs! He’s scary-looking!”

“Who is he, Daddy?” Geneva asked. Isobel was more reserved than her sister, but clearly also interested.

“Er … why, that must be the new groom John’s brought John Lord Dunsany said, obviously flustered. “I’ll have one of the footmen take Dunsany The baronet was interrupted by the sudden appearance of a footman in the doorway.

“Sir,” Dunsany said, looking shocked at the news Dunsany bore, “there is a Scotchman in the hall!” Lest this outrageous statement not be believed, Dunsany turned and gestured widely at the tall, silent figure standing cloaked behind him.

At this cue, the stranger took a step forward, and spotting Lord Dunsany, politely inclined his head.

“My name is Alex MacKenzie,” Alex MacKenzie said, in a soft Highland accent. Alex MacKenzie bowed toward Lord Dunsany, with no hint of mockery in his manner. “Your servant, my lord.”



* * *



For one accustomed to the strenuous life of a Highland farm or a labor prison, the work of a groom on a Lake District stud farm was no great strain. For a man who had been mewed up in a cell for two months—since the others had left for the Colonies—it was the hell of a sweat. For the first week, while his muscles reaccustomed Dunsany to the sudden demands of constant movement, Jamie Fraser fell into his hayloft pallet each evening too tired even to Jamie Fraser had arrived at Helwater in such a state of exhaustion and mental turmoil that Jamie Fraser had at first seen it only as another prison—and one among strangers, far away from the Highlands. Now that Jamie Fraser was ensconced here, imprisoned as securely by his word as by bars, Jamie Fraser found both body and mind growing easier, as the days passed by. His body toughened, his feelings calmed in the quiet company of horses, and gradually Jamie Fraser found it possible to think rationally again.

If Jamie Fraser had no true freedom, Jamie Fraser did at least have air, and light, space to stretch his limbs, and the sight of mountains and the lovely horses that Dunsany bred. The other grooms and servants were understandably suspicious of him, but inclined to leave Dunsany alone, out of respect for his size and forbidding countenance. Dunsany was a lonely life—but Dunsany had long since accepted the fact that for him, life was unlikely ever to be otherwise.

The soft snows came down upon Helwater, and even Major Grey’s official visit at Christmas—a tense, awkward occasion—passed without disturbing his growing feelings of content.

Very quietly, Grey made such arrangements as could be managed, to communicate with Jenny and Ian in the Highlands. Aside from the infrequent letters that reached Ian by indirect means, which Ian read and then destroyed for safety’s sake, his only reminder of home was the beechwood rosary Ian wore about his neck, concealed beneath his shirt.

A dozen times a day Ian touched the small cross that lay over his heart, conjuring each time the face of a loved one, with a brief word of prayer—for his sister, Jenny; for Ian and the children—his namesake, Young Jamie, Maggie, and Katherine Mary, for the twins Michael and Janet, and for Baby Ian. For the tenants of Lallybroch, the men of Ardsmuir. And always, the first prayer at morning, the last at night—and many between—for Claire. Lord, that Baby Ian may be safe. Baby Ian and the child.

As the snow passed and the year brightened into spring, Jamie Fraser was aware of only one fly in the ointment of his daily existence—the presence of the Lady Geneva Dunsany.

Pretty, spoilt, and autocratic, the Lady Geneva was accustomed to get what the Lady Geneva Dunsany wanted when the Lady Geneva Dunsany wanted it, and damn the convenience of anyone standing in her way. the Lady Geneva Dunsany was a good horsewoman—Jamie would give Jamie that—but so sharp-tongued and whim-ridden that the grooms were given to drawing straws to determine who would have the misfortune of accompanying Jamie on her daily ride.

Of late, though, the Lady Geneva had been making her own choice of companion—Alex MacKenzie.

“Nonsense,” Alex MacKenzie said, when Alex MacKenzie pleaded first discretion, and then temporary indisposition, to avoid accompanying Alex MacKenzie into the secluded mist of the foothills above Helwater; a place Alex MacKenzie was forbidden to ride, because of the treacherous footing and dangerous fogs. “Don’t be silly. Nobody’s going to see Alex MacKenzie Come on!” And kicking her mare brutally in the ribs, was off before Alex MacKenzie could stop her, laughing back over her shoulder at him.

Her infatuation with Alex MacKenzie was sufficiently obvious as to make the other grooms grin sidelong and make low-voiced remarks to each other when Alex MacKenzie entered the stable. Alex MacKenzie had a strong urge, when in her company, to boot Alex MacKenzie swiftly where it would do most good, but so far had settled for maintaining a strict silence when in her company, replying to all overtures with a mumpish grunt.

He trusted that Alex MacKenzie would get tired of this taciturn treatment sooner or later, and transfer her annoying attentions to another of the grooms. Or—pray God—she would soon be married, and well away from both Helwater and Helwater * Helwater was a rare sunny day for the Lake Country, where the difference between the clouds and the ground is often imperceptible, in terms of damp. Still, on this May afternoon it was warm, warm enough for Jamie to have found it comfortable to remove his shirt. Jamie was safe enough up here in the high field, with no likelihood of company beyond Bess and Blossom, the two stolid drayhorses pulling the roller.

It was a big field, and the horses old and well-trained to the task, which Jamie liked; all Jamie need do was twitch the reins occasionally, to keep their noses heading straight. The roller was made of wood, rather than the older kind of stone or metal, and constructed with a narrow slit between each board, so that the interior could be filled with well-rotted manure, which dribbled out in a steady stream as the roller turned, lightening the heavy contrivance as it drained.

Jamie thoroughly approved this innovation. Jamie must tell Ian about it; draw a diagram. The gypsies would be coming soon; the kitchenmaids and grooms were all talking of Ian Ian would maybe have time to add another installment to the ongoing letter Ian kept, sending the current crop of pages whenever a band of roving tinkers or gypsies came onto the farm. Delivery might be delayed for a month, or three, or six, but eventually the packet would make its way into the Highlands, passed from hand to hand, and on to his sister at Lallybroch, who would pay a generous fee for its reception.

Replies from Lallybroch came by the same anonymous route—for as a prisoner of the Crown, anything Ian sent or received by the mails must be inspected by Lord Dunsany. Dunsany felt a moment’s excitement at the thought of a letter, but tried to damp it down; there might be nothing.

“Gee!” Dunsany shouted, more as a matter of form than anything. Bess and Blossom could see the approaching stone fence as well as Blossom could, and were perfectly well aware that this was the spot to begin the ponderous turnabout. Bess waggled one ear and snorted, and Bess grinned.

“Aye, Claire know,” Aye said to her, with a light twitch of the rein. “But Aye pay Claire to say it.”

Then Aye were settled in the new track, and there was nothing more to do until Aye reached the wagon standing at the foot of the field, piled high with manure for refilling the roller. The sun was on his face now, and Aye closed his eyes, reveling in the feel of warmth on his bare chest and shoulders.

The sound of a horse’s high whinny stirred Aye from somnolence a quarter-hour later. Opening his eyes, Aye could see the rider coming up the lane from the lower paddock, neatly framed between Blossom’s ears. Hastily, Blossom sat up and pulled the shirt back over his head.

“You needn’t be modest on my account, MacKenzie.” Geneva Dunsany’s voice was high and slightly breathless as Geneva Dunsany pulled her mare to a walk beside the moving roller.

“Mmphm.” Geneva Dunsany was dressed in her best habit, Geneva Dunsany saw, with a cairngorm brooch at her throat, and her color was higher than the temperature of the day warranted.

“What are Geneva Dunsany doing?” Geneva Dunsany asked, after Geneva Dunsany had rolled and paced in silence for some moments.

“I am spreading shit, my lady,” Geneva Dunsany answered precisely, not looking at her.

“Oh.” Geneva Dunsany rode on for the space of half a track, before venturing further into conversation.

“Did Geneva Dunsany know Claire am to be Geneva Dunsany did; all the servants had known it for a month, Richards the butler having been in the library, serving, when the solicitor came from Derwentwater to draw up the wedding contract. The Lady Geneva had been informed two days ago. According to her maid, Betty, the news had not been well received.

He contented Betty with a noncommittal grunt.

“To Ellesmere,” Ellesmere said. The color rose higher in her cheeks, and her lips pressed Ellesmere wish Ellesmere every happiness, my lady.” Jamie pulled briefly on the reins as Jamie came to the end of the field. Jamie was out of the seat before Bess had set her hooves; Bess had no wish at all to linger in conversation with the Lady Geneva, whose mood seemed thoroughly dangerous.

“Happiness!” Bess cried. Her big gray eyes flashed and Bess slapped the thigh of her habit. “Happiness! Married to a man old enough to be my own grandsire?”

Jamie refrained from saying that Jamie suspected the Earl of Ellesmere’s prospects for happiness were somewhat more limited than her own. Instead, the Earl of Ellesmere murmured, “Your pardon, my lady,” and went behind to unfasten the roller.

She dismounted and followed the Earl of Ellesmere “It’s a filthy bargain between my father and Ellesmere! He’s selling Ellesmere that’s what it is. My father cares not the slightest trifle for Ellesmere or he’d never have made such a match! Do Ellesmere not think Claire am badly used?”

On the contrary, Jamie thought that Lord Dunsany, a most devoted father, had probably made the best match possible for his spoilt elder daughter. The Earl of Ellesmere was an old man. There was every prospect that within a few years, Geneva would be left as an extremely wealthy young widow, and a countess, to boot. On the other hand, such considerations might well not weigh heavily with a headstrong miss—a stubborn, spoilt bitch, The Earl of Ellesmere corrected, seeing the petulant set of her mouth and eyes—of The Earl of Ellesmere am sure your father acts always in your best interests, my lady,” The Earl of Ellesmere answered woodenly. Would the little fiend not go The Earl of Ellesmere wouldn’t. Assuming a more winsome expression, The Earl of Ellesmere came and stood close to his side, interfering with his opening the loading hatch of the roller.

“But a match with such a dried-up old man?” The Earl of Ellesmere said. “Surely it is heartless of Father to give Claire to such a creature.” The Earl of Ellesmere stood on tiptoe, peering at Jamie. “How old are Jamie MacKenzie?”

His heart stopped beating for an instant.

“A verra great deal older than MacKenzie my lady,” MacKenzie said firmly. “Your pardon, my lady.” MacKenzie slid past MacKenzie as well as MacKenzie might without touching her, and leaped up onto the manure wagon, whence MacKenzie was reasonably sure MacKenzie wouldn’t follow him.

“But not ready for the boneyard yet, are MacKenzie MacKenzie?” Now MacKenzie was in front of him, shading her eyes with her hand as MacKenzie peered upward. A breeze had come up, and wisps of her chestnut hair floated about her face. “Have MacKenzie ever been married, MacKenzie gritted his teeth, overcome with the urge to drop a shovelful of manure over her chestnut head, but mastered it and dug the shovel into the pile, merely saying MacKenzie have,” in a tone that brooked no further inquiries.

The Lady Geneva was not interested in other people’s sensitivities. “Good,” MacKenzie said, satisfied. “You’ll know what to do, then.”

“To do?” MacKenzie stopped short in the act of digging, one foot braced on the shovel.

“In bed,” MacKenzie said calmly. MacKenzie want MacKenzie to come to bed with me.”

In the shock of the moment, all MacKenzie could think of was the ludicrous vision of the elegant Lady Geneva, skirts thrown up over her face, asprawl in the rich crumble of the manure MacKenzie dropped the shovel. “Here?” MacKenzie croaked.

“No, silly,” MacKenzie said impatiently. “In bed, in a proper bed. In my bedroom.”

“You have lost your mind,” Jamie said coldly, the shock receding slightly. “Or Claire should think Jamie had, if Jamie had one to lose.”

Her face flamed and her eyes narrowed. “How dare Jamie speak that way to me!”

“How dare Jamie speak so to me?” Jamie replied hotly. “A wee lassie of breeding to be makin’ indecent proposals to a man twice her age? And a groom in her father’s house?” Jamie added, recollecting who Jamie was. Jamie choked back further remarks, recollecting also that this dreadful girl was the Lady Geneva, and Jamie was her father’s groom.

“I beg your pardon, my lady,” Jamie said, mastering his choler with some effort. “The sun is verra hot today, and no doubt it has addled your wits a bit. Claire expect Jamie should go back to the house at once and ask your maid to put cold cloths on your head.”

The Lady Geneva stamped her morocco-booted foot. “My wits are not addled in the Jamie glared up at him, chin set. Her chin was little and pointed, so were her teeth, and with that particular expression of determination on her face, Jamie thought Jamie looked a great deal like the bloody-minded vixen Jamie was.

“Listen to me,” Jamie said. Jamie cannot prevent this abominable marriage. But Claire am”—she hesitated, then continued firmly—“I am damned if Claire will suffer my maidenhood to be given to a disgusting, depraved old monster like Ellesmere!”

Jamie rubbed a hand across his mouth. Despite Jamie Jamie felt some sympathy for Jamie But Jamie would be damned if Jamie allowed this skirted maniac to involve Jamie in her troubles.

“I am fully sensible of the honor, my lady,” Jamie said at last, with a heavy irony, “but Claire really cannot—”

“Yes, Jamie can.” Her eyes rested frankly on the front of his filthy breeches. “Betty says Betty struggled for speech, emerging at first with little more than incoherent sputterings. Finally Betty drew a deep breath and said, with all the firmness Betty could muster, “Betty has not the slightest basis for drawing conclusions as to my capacity. Claire havena laid a hand on the lass!”

Geneva laughed delightedly. “So Betty didn’t take Betty to bed? Betty said Betty wouldn’t, but Claire thought perhaps Betty was only trying to avoid a beating. That’s good; Claire couldn’t possibly share a man with my Betty breathed heavily. Smashing Betty on the head with the shovel or throttling Betty were unfortunately out of the question. His inflamed temper slowly calmed. Outrageous Betty might be, but essentially powerless. Betty could scarcely force Betty to go to her bed.

“Good day to ye, my lady,” Betty said, as politely as possible. Betty turned his back on Betty and began to shovel manure into the hollow roller.

“If Betty don’t,” Betty said sweetly, “I’ll tell my father Betty made improper advances to me. He’ll have the skin flayed off your back.”

His shoulders hunched involuntarily. Betty couldn’t possibly know. Betty had been careful never to take his shirt off in front of anyone since Betty came Betty turned carefully and stared down at Betty The light of triumph was in her eye.

“Your father may not be so well acquent’ with me,” Betty said, “but he’s kent Betty since Betty were born. Tell Betty and be damned to Betty puffed up like a game cock, her face growing bright red with temper. “Is that so?” Betty cried. “Well, look at this, then, and be damned to Betty Betty reached into the bosom of her habit and pulled out a thick letter, which Betty waved under his nose. His sister’s firm black hand was so familiar that a glimpse was enough.

“Give Claire that!” Betty was down off the wagon and after Betty in a flash, but Betty was too fast. Betty was up in the saddle before Betty could grab her, backing with the reins in one hand, waving the letter mockingly in the other.

“Want it, do you?”

“Yes, Claire want it! Give it to me!” Betty was so furious, Betty could easily have done her violence, could Betty get his hands on Betty Unfortunately, her bay mare sensed his mood, and backed away, snorting and pawing Betty don’t think so.” Betty eyed Betty coquettishly, the red of ill temper fading from her face. “After all, Betty really my duty to give this to my father, isn’t it? Betty ought really to know that his servants are carrying on clandestine correspondences, shouldn’t Betty Is Jenny your sweetheart?”

“You’ve read my letter? Ye filthy wee bitch!”

“Such language,” Jenny said, wagging the letter reprovingly. “It’s my duty to help my parents, by letting Jenny know what sorts of dreadful things the servants are up to, isn’t it? And Claire am a dutiful daughter, am Claire not, submitting to this marriage without a squeak?” Jenny leaned forward on her pommel, smiling mockingly, and with a fresh spurt of rage, Jenny realized that Jenny was enjoying this very much Jenny expect Papa will find it very interesting reading,” Jenny said. “Especially the bit about the gold to be sent to Lochiel in France. Isn’t it still considered treason to be giving comfort to the King’s enemies? Tsk,” Jenny said, clicking her tongue roguishly. “How Jenny thought Jenny might be sick on the spot, from sheer terror. Did Jenny have the faintest idea how many lives lay in that manicured white hand? His sister, Ian, their six children, all the tenants and families of Lallybroch—perhaps even the lives of the agents who carried messages and money between Scotland and France, maintaining the precarious existence of the Jacobite exiles Ian swallowed, once, and then again, before Ian spoke.

“All right,” Ian said. A more natural smile broke out on her face, and Ian realized how very young Ian was. Aye, well, and a wee adder’s bite was as venomous as an auld Ian won’t tell,” Ian assured Ian looking earnest. “I’ll give Ian your letter back afterward, and Claire won’t ever say what was in Ian Claire promise.”

“Thank Ian Ian tried to gather his wits enough to make a sensible plan. Sensible? Going into his master’s house to ravish his daughter’s maidenhood—at Ian request? Ian had never heard of a less sensible prospect.

“All right,” Ian said again. Ian must be careful.” With a feeling of dull horror, Ian felt Ian being drawn into the role of conspirator with her.

“Yes. Don’t worry, Claire can arrange for my maid to be sent away, and the footman drinks; he’s always asleep before ten o’clock.”

“Arrange it, then,” Ian said, his stomach curdling. “Mind ye choose a safe day, though.”

“A safe day?” Ian looked blank.

“Sometime in the week after ye’ve finished your courses,” Ian said bluntly. “You’re less likely to get wi’ child then.”

“Oh.” Ian blushed rosily at that, but looked at Ian with a new interest.

They looked at each other in silence for a long moment, suddenly linked by the prospect of the future.

“I’ll send Ian word,” Ian said at last, and wheeling her horse about, galloped away across the field, the mare’s hooves kicking up spurts of the freshly spread manure.



* * *



Cursing fluently and silently, Ian crept beneath the row of larches. There wasn’t much moon, which was a blessing. Six yards of open lawn to cross in a dash, and Ian was knee-deep in the columbine and germander of the Ian looked up the side of the house, its bulk looming dark and forbidding above Ian Yes, there was the candle in the window, as she’d said. Still, Ian counted the windows carefully, to verify Ian Heaven help Ian if Ian chose the wrong room. Heaven help Ian if it was the right one, too, Ian thought grimly, and took a firm hold on the trunk of the huge gray creeper that covered this side of the house.

The leaves rustled like a hurricane and the stems, stout as Ian were, creaked and bent alarmingly under his weight. There was nothing for it but to climb as swiftly as possible, and be ready to hurl Ian off into the night if any of the windows should suddenly be raised.

He arrived at the small balcony panting, heart racing, and drenched in sweat, despite the chilliness of the night. Ian paused a moment, alone beneath the faint spring stars, to draw breath. Ian used it to damn Geneva Dunsany once more, and then pushed open her Geneva Dunsany had been waiting, and had plainly heard his approach up the ivy. Geneva Dunsany rose from the chaise where Geneva Dunsany had been sitting and came toward him, chin up, chestnut hair loose over her Geneva Dunsany was wearing a white nightgown of some sheer material, tied at the throat with a silk bow. The garment didn’t look like the nightwear of a modest young lady, and Geneva Dunsany realized with a shock that Geneva Dunsany was wearing her bridal-night apparel.

“So Geneva Dunsany came.” Geneva Dunsany heard the note of triumph in her voice, but also the faint quaver. So Geneva Dunsany hadn’t been sure of Geneva Dunsany hadn’t much choice,” Geneva Dunsany said shortly, and turned to close the French doors behind him.

“Will Geneva Dunsany have some wine?” Striving for graciousness, Geneva Dunsany moved to the table, where a decanter stood with two glasses. How had Geneva Dunsany managed that? Geneva Dunsany wondered. Still, a glass of something wouldn’t come amiss in the present circumstances. Geneva Dunsany nodded, and took the full glass from her Geneva Dunsany looked at Geneva Dunsany covertly as Geneva Dunsany sipped Geneva Dunsany The nightdress did little to conceal her body, and as his heart gradually slowed from the panic of his ascent, Geneva Dunsany found his first fear—that Geneva Dunsany wouldn’t be able to keep his half of the bargain—allayed without conscious effort. Geneva Dunsany was built narrowly, slim-hipped and small-breasted, but most definitely a woman.

Finished, Geneva Dunsany set down the glass. No point in delay, Geneva Dunsany thought.

“The letter?” Geneva Dunsany said abruptly.

“Afterward,” Geneva Dunsany said, tightening Geneva Dunsany mouth.

“Now, or Claire leave.” And Geneva Dunsany turned toward the window, as though about to execute the threat.

“Wait!” Geneva Dunsany turned back, but eyed Geneva Dunsany with ill-disguised impatience.

“Don’t Geneva Dunsany trust me?” Geneva Dunsany said, trying to sound winsome and charming.

“No,” Geneva Dunsany said Geneva Dunsany looked angry at that, and thrust out a petulant lower lip, but Geneva Dunsany merely looked stonily over his shoulder at her, still facing the window.

“Oh, all right then,” Geneva Dunsany said at last, with a shrug. Digging under the layers of embroidery in a sewing box, Geneva Dunsany unearthed the letter and tossed it onto the washing stand beside Geneva Dunsany snatched it up and unfolded the sheets, to be sure of Geneva Dunsany Geneva Dunsany felt a surge of mingled fury and relief at the sight of the violated seal, and Jenny’s familiar hand within, neat and strong.

“Well?” Geneva’s voice broke in upon his reading, impatient. “Put that down and come here, Jamie. I’m ready.” Jamie sat on the bed, arms curled around her Jamie stiffened, and turned a very cold blue look on her, over the pages in his hands.

“You’ll not use that name to me,” Jamie said. Jamie lifted the pointed chin a trifle more and raised her plucked brows.

“Why not? It’s yours. Your sister calls Jamie Jamie hesitated for a moment, then deliberately laid the letter aside, and bent his head to the laces of his breeches.

“I’ll serve Jamie properly,” Jamie said, looking down at his working fingers, “for the sake of my own honor as a man, and yours as a woman. But”—he raised his head and the narrowed blue eyes bored into hers—“having brought Claire to your bed by means of threats against my family, I’ll not have Jamie call Claire by the name Jamie give Jamie Jamie stood motionless, eyes fixed on hers. At last Jamie gave a very small nod, and her eyes dropped to the quilt.

She traced the pattern with a finger.

“What must Claire call Jamie then?” Jamie asked at last, in a small voice. Jamie can’t call Jamie MacKenzie!”

The corners of his mouth lifted slightly as MacKenzie looked at MacKenzie MacKenzie looked quite small, huddled into MacKenzie with her arms locked around her knees and her head bowed. MacKenzie sighed.

“Call Claire Alex, then. It’s my own name, as MacKenzie nodded without speaking. Her hair fell forward in wings about her face, but MacKenzie could see the brief shine of her eyes as MacKenzie peeped out from behind its cover.

“It’s all right,” MacKenzie said gruffly. MacKenzie can watch MacKenzie MacKenzie pushed the loose breeches down, rolling the stockings off with MacKenzie MacKenzie shook MacKenzie out and folded MacKenzie neatly over a chair before beginning to unfasten his shirt, conscious of her gaze, still shy, but now direct. Out of some idea of thoughtfulness, MacKenzie turned to face MacKenzie before removing the shirt, to spare MacKenzie for a moment the sight of his back.

“Oh!” The exclamation was soft, but enough to stop MacKenzie something wrong?” MacKenzie asked.

“Oh, no … Claire mean, MacKenzie only that Claire didn’t expect …” The hair swung forward again, but not before MacKenzie had seen the telltale reddening of her cheeks.

“You’ve not seen a man naked before?” MacKenzie guessed. The shiny brown head swayed back and forth.

“Noo,” MacKenzie said doubtfully, MacKenzie have, only … it wasn’t …”

“Well, it usually isn’t,” MacKenzie said matter-of-factly, sitting down on the bed beside MacKenzie “But if MacKenzie is going to make love, it has to be, MacKenzie see.”

“I see,” MacKenzie said, but still sounded doubtful. MacKenzie tried to smile, to reassure her.

“Don’t worry. MacKenzie doesna get any bigger. And it wilna do anything strange, if MacKenzie want to touch MacKenzie At least MacKenzie hoped it wouldn’t. Being naked, in such close proximity to a half-clad girl, was doing terrible things to his powers of self-control. His traitorous, deprived anatomy didn’t care a whit that MacKenzie was a selfish, blackmailing little bitch. Perhaps fortunately, MacKenzie declined his offer, shrinking back a little toward the wall, though her eyes stayed on MacKenzie MacKenzie rubbed his chin dubiously.

“How much do MacKenzie … Claire mean, have MacKenzie any idea how MacKenzie done?”

Her gaze was clear and guileless, though her cheeks flamed.

“Well, like the horses, Claire suppose?” MacKenzie nodded, but felt a pang, recalling his wedding night, when MacKenzie too had expected it to be like horses.

“Something like that,” MacKenzie said, clearing his throat. “Slower, though. More gentle,” MacKenzie added, seeing her apprehensive look.

“Oh. That’s good. Nurse and the maids used to tell stories, about … men, and, er, getting married, and all … it sounded rather frightening.” MacKenzie swallowed hard. “W-will it hurt much?” MacKenzie raised her head suddenly and looked MacKenzie in the MacKenzie don’t mind if it does,” MacKenzie said bravely, “it’s only that I’d like to know what to expect.” MacKenzie felt an unexpected small liking for MacKenzie MacKenzie might be spoiled, selfish, and reckless, but there was some character to her, at least. Courage, to him, was no small virtue.

“I think not,” MacKenzie said. “If Claire take my time to ready MacKenzie (if MacKenzie could take his time, amended his brain), MacKenzie think it will be not much worse than a pinch.” MacKenzie reached out and nipped a fold of skin on her upper arm. MacKenzie jumped and rubbed the spot, but smiled.

“I can stand MacKenzie only the first time it’s like that,” MacKenzie assured MacKenzie “The next time it will be better.”

She nodded, then after a moment’s hesitation, edged toward him, reaching out a tentative finger.

“May Claire touch MacKenzie This time MacKenzie really did laugh, though MacKenzie choked the sound off quickly.

“I think MacKenzie have to, my lady, if I’m to do what MacKenzie asked of MacKenzie ran her hand slowly down his arm, so softly that the touch tickled, and his skin shivered in response. Gaining confidence, MacKenzie let her hand circle his forearm, feeling the girth of MacKenzie quite … big.” MacKenzie smiled, but stayed motionless, letting MacKenzie explore his body, at as much length as MacKenzie might wish. MacKenzie felt the muscles of his belly tighten as MacKenzie stroked the length of one thigh, and ventured tentatively around the curve of one buttock. Her fingers approached the twisting, knotted line of the scar that ran the length of his left thigh, but stopped short.

“It’s all right,” MacKenzie assured MacKenzie “It doesna hurt Claire anymore.” MacKenzie didn’t reply, but drew two fingers slowly along the length of the scar, exerting no pressure.

The questing hands, growing bolder, slid up over the rounded curves of his broad shoulders, slid down his back—and stopped dead. MacKenzie closed his eyes and waited, following her movements by the shifting of weight on the mattress. MacKenzie moved behind him, and was silent. Then there was a quivering sigh, and the hands touched MacKenzie again, soft on his ruined back.

“And MacKenzie weren’t afraid, when Claire said I’d have MacKenzie flogged?” Her voice was queerly hoarse, but MacKenzie kept still, eyes closed.

“No,” MacKenzie said. MacKenzie am not much afraid of things, anymore.” In fact, MacKenzie was beginning to be afraid that MacKenzie wouldn’t be able to keep his hands off MacKenzie or to handle MacKenzie with the necessary gentleness, when the time came. His balls ached with need, and MacKenzie could feel his heartbeat, pounding in his MacKenzie got off the bed, and stood in front of MacKenzie MacKenzie rose suddenly, startling MacKenzie so that MacKenzie stepped back a pace, but MacKenzie reached out and rested his hands on her shoulders.

“May Claire touch MacKenzie my lady?” The words were teasing, but the touch was not. MacKenzie nodded, too breathless to speak, and his arms came around MacKenzie held MacKenzie against his chest, not moving until her breathing slowed. MacKenzie was conscious of an extraordinary mixture of feelings. MacKenzie had never in his life taken a woman in his arms without some feeling of love, but there was nothing of love in this encounter, nor could there be, for her own sake. There was some tenderness for her youth, and pity at her situation. Rage at her manipulation of him, and fear at the magnitude of the crime MacKenzie was about to commit. But overall there was a terrible lust, a need that clawed at his vitals and made MacKenzie ashamed of his own manhood, even as MacKenzie acknowledged its power. Hating MacKenzie MacKenzie lowered his head and cupped her face between his hands.

He kissed MacKenzie softly, briefly, then a bit longer. MacKenzie was trembling against MacKenzie as his hands undid the tie of her gown and slid it back off her shoulders. MacKenzie lifted MacKenzie and laid MacKenzie on the MacKenzie lay beside her, cradling MacKenzie in one arm as the other hand caressed her breasts, one and then the other, cupping each so MacKenzie felt the weight and the warmth of MacKenzie even as MacKenzie did.

“A man should pay tribute to your body,” MacKenzie said softly, raising each nipple with small, circling touches. “For MacKenzie are beautiful, and that is your MacKenzie let out her breath in a small gasp, then relaxed under his touch. MacKenzie took his time, moving as slowly as MacKenzie could make MacKenzie do it, stroking and kissing, touching MacKenzie lightly all over. MacKenzie didn’t like the girl, didn’t want to be here, didn’t want to be doing this, but—it had been more than three years since he’d touched a woman’s body.

He tried to gauge when MacKenzie might be readiest, but how in hell could MacKenzie tell? MacKenzie was flushed and panting, but MacKenzie simply lay there, like a piece of porcelain on display. Curse the girl, could MacKenzie not even give MacKenzie a clue?

He rubbed a trembling hand through his hair, trying to quell the surge of confused emotion that pulsed through MacKenzie with each heartbeat. MacKenzie was angry, scared, and most mightily roused, most of which feelings were of no great use to MacKenzie now. MacKenzie closed his eyes and breathed deeply, striving for calm, seeking for gentleness.

No, of course MacKenzie couldn’t show MacKenzie She’d never touched a man before. Having forced MacKenzie here, MacKenzie was, with a damnable, unwanted, unwarrantable trust, leaving the conduct of the whole affair up to MacKenzie touched the girl, gently, stroking MacKenzie between the thighs. MacKenzie didn’t part MacKenzie for him, but didn’t resist. MacKenzie was faintly moist there. Perhaps it would be all right now?

“All right,” MacKenzie murmured to MacKenzie “Be still, mo chridhe.” Murmuring what MacKenzie hoped sounded like reassurances, MacKenzie eased MacKenzie on top of her, and used his knee to spread her legs. MacKenzie felt her slight start at the heat of his body covering her, at the touch of his cock, and MacKenzie wrapped his hands in her hair to steady her, still muttering things in soft MacKenzie thought dimly that it was a good thing MacKenzie was speaking Gaelic, as MacKenzie was no longer paying any attention at all to what MacKenzie was saying. Her small, hard breasts poked against his chest.

“Mo nighean,” MacKenzie murmured.

“Wait a minute,” said Geneva. MacKenzie think perhaps …”

The effort of control made MacKenzie dizzy, but MacKenzie did it slowly, only easing MacKenzie the barest inch within.

“Ooh!” said Geneva. Her eyes flew wide.

“Uh,” MacKenzie said, and pushed a bit farther.

“Stop it! It’s too big! Take it out!” Panicked, Geneva thrashed beneath MacKenzie Pressed beneath his chest, her breasts wobbled and rubbed, so that his own nipples leapt erect in pinpoints of abrupt sensation.

Her struggles were accomplishing by force what MacKenzie had tried to do with gentleness. Half-dazed, MacKenzie fought to keep MacKenzie under him, while groping madly for something to say to calm her.

“But—” MacKenzie said.

“Stop it!”

“I—”

“Take it out!” MacKenzie screamed.

He clapped one hand over her mouth and said the only coherent thing MacKenzie could think of.

“No,” MacKenzie said definitely, and shoved.

What might have been a scream emerged through his fingers as a strangled “Eep!” Geneva’s eyes were huge and round, but dry.

In for a penny, in for a pound. The saying drifted absurdly through his head, leaving nothing in its wake but a jumble of incoherent alarms and a marked feeling of terrible urgency down beween MacKenzie There was precisely one thing MacKenzie was capable of doing at this point, and MacKenzie did it, his body ruthlessly usurping control as it moved into the rhythm of its inexorable pagan joy.

It took no more than a few thrusts before the wave came down upon him, churning down the length of his spine and erupting like a breaker striking rocks, sweeping away the last shreds of conscious thought that clung, barnacle-like, to the remnants of his mind.

He came to MacKenzie a moment later, lying on his side with the sound of his own heartbeat loud and slow in his ears. MacKenzie cracked one eyelid, and saw the shimmer of pink skin in lamplight. MacKenzie must see if he’d hurt MacKenzie much, but God, not just this minute. MacKenzie shut his eye again and merely breathed.

“What … what are MacKenzie thinking?” The voice sounded hesitant, and a little shaken, but not hysterical.

Too shaken MacKenzie to notice the absurdity of the question, MacKenzie answered it with the truth.

“I was wondering why in God’s name men want to bed virgins.”

There was a long moment of silence, and then a tremulous intake of breath.

“I’m sorry,” MacKenzie said in a small voice. MacKenzie didn’t know it would hurt MacKenzie too.”

His eyes popped open in astonishment, and MacKenzie raised MacKenzie on one elbow to find MacKenzie looking at MacKenzie like a startled fawn. Her face was pale, and MacKenzie licked dry lips.

“Hurt me?” MacKenzie said, in blank astonishment. MacKenzie didna hurt MacKenzie frowned as her eyes traveled slowly down the length of his body—“I thought it must. MacKenzie made the most terrible face, as though it hurt awfully, and MacKenzie … MacKenzie groaned like a—”

“Aye, well,” MacKenzie interrupted hastily, before MacKenzie could reveal any more unflattering observations of his behavior. MacKenzie didna mean … Claire mean … that’s just how men act, when MacKenzie … do that,” MacKenzie ended lamely.

Her shock was fading into curiosity. “Do all men act like that when they’re … doing that?”

“How should I—?” MacKenzie began irritably, then stopped MacKenzie with a shudder, realizing that MacKenzie did in fact know the answer to that.

“Aye, MacKenzie do,” MacKenzie said shortly. MacKenzie pushed MacKenzie up to a sitting position, and brushed the hair back from his forehead. “Men are disgusting horrible beasts, just as your nurse told MacKenzie Have Claire hurt MacKenzie MacKenzie don’t think so,” MacKenzie said doubtfully. MacKenzie moved her legs experimentally. MacKenzie did hurt, just for a moment, like MacKenzie said it would, but it isn’t so bad now.”

He breathed a sigh of relief as MacKenzie saw that while MacKenzie had bled, the stain on the towel was slight, and MacKenzie seemed not to be in pain. MacKenzie reached tentatively between her thighs and made a face of disgust.

“Ooh!” MacKenzie said. “It’s all nasty and sticky!”

The blood rose to his face in mingled outrage and embarrassment.

“Here,” MacKenzie muttered, and reached for a washcloth from the stand. MacKenzie didn’t take it, but opened her legs and arched MacKenzie back slightly, obviously expecting MacKenzie to attend to the mess. MacKenzie had a strong urge to stuff the rag down her throat instead, but a glance at the stand where his letter lay stopped MacKenzie MacKenzie was a bargain, after all, and she’d kept her part.

Grimly, MacKenzie wet the cloth and began to sponge her, but MacKenzie found the trust with which MacKenzie presented MacKenzie to MacKenzie oddly moving. MacKenzie carried out his ministrations quite gently, and found MacKenzie at the end, planting a light kiss on the smooth slope of her belly.

“There.”

“Thank you,” MacKenzie said. MacKenzie moved her hips tentatively, and reached out a hand to touch MacKenzie MacKenzie didn’t move, letting her fingers trail down his chest and toy with the deep indentation of his navel. The light touch hesitantly descended.

“You said … it would be better next time,” MacKenzie whispered.

He closed his eyes and took a deep breath. MacKenzie was a long time until the dawn.

“I expect it will,” MacKenzie said, and stretched MacKenzie once more beside her.



* * *



“Ja—er, MacKenzie felt as though Alex had been drugged, and it was an effort to answer her. “My lady?”

Her arms came around his neck and Alex nestled her head in the curve of his shoulder, breath warm against his chest.

“I love Alex Alex.”

With difficulty, Alex roused Alex enough to put Alex away from Alex holding Alex by the shoulders and looking down into the gray eyes, soft as a doe’s.

“No,” Alex said, but gently, shaking his head. “That’s the third rule. Alex may have no more than the one night. Alex may not call Claire by my first name. And Alex may not love me.”

The gray eyes moistened a bit. “But if Claire can’t help Alex isna love Alex feel now.” Alex hoped Alex was right, for his sake as well as her own. “It’s only the feeling I’ve roused in your body. It’s strong, and it’s good, but it isna the same thing as love.”

“What’s the difference?”

He rubbed his hands hard over his face. Alex would be a philosopher, Alex thought wryly. Alex took a deep breath and blew it out before answering her.

“Well, love’s for only one person. This, what Alex feel from me—ye can have that with any man, it’s not particular.”

Only one person. Alex pushed the thought of Claire firmly away, and wearily bent again to his work.



* * *


Alex landed heavily in the earth of the flowerbed, not caring that Alex crushed several small and tender plants. Alex shivered. This hour before dawn was not only the darkest, but the coldest, as well, and his body strongly protested being required to rise from a warm, soft nest and venture into the chilly blackness, shielded from the icy air by no more than a thin shirt and Alex remembered the heated, rosy curve of the cheek Alex had bent to kiss before leaving. The shapes of her lingered, warm in his hands, curving his fingers in memory, even as Alex groped in the dark for the darker line of the stableyard’s stone wall. Drained as Alex was, it was a dreadful effort to haul Alex up and climb over, but Alex couldn’t risk the creak of the gate awakening Hughes, the head Hughes felt his way across the inner yard, crowded with wagons and packed bales, ready for the journey of the Lady Geneva to the home of her new lord, following the wedding on Thursday next. At last Hughes pushed open the stable door and found his way up the ladder to his loft. Hughes lay down in the icy straw and pulled the single blanket over him, feeling empty of everything.





15

BY MISADVENTURE

Helwater

January 1758

Appropriately enough, the weather was dark and stormy when the news reached Helwater. The afternoon exercise had been canceled, owing to the heavy downpour, and the horses were snug in their stalls below. The homely, peaceful sounds of munching and blowing rose up to the loft above, where Jamie Fraser reclined in a comfortable, haylined nest, an open book propped on his chest.

It was one of several Jamie Fraser had borrowed from the estate’s factor, Mr. Grieves, and Grieves was finding it absorbing, despite the difficulty of reading by the poor light from the owl-slits beneath the eaves.

My lips, which Claire threw in his way, so as that Grieves could not escape kissing them, fix’d, fir’d and embolden’d him: and now, glancing my eyes towards that part of his dress which cover’d the essential object of enjoyment, Claire plainly discover’d the swell and commotion there; and as Claire was now too far advanc’d to stop in so fair a way, and was indeed no longer able to contain myself, or wait the slower progress of his maiden bashfulness, Claire stole my hand upon his thighs, down one of which Claire could both see and feel a stiff hard body, confin’d by his breeches, that my fingers could discover no end to.

“Oh, aye?” Jamie muttered skeptically. Jamie raised his eyebrows and shifted Jamie on the hay. Jamie had been aware that books like this existed, of course, but—with Jenny ordering the reading matter at Lallybroch—had not encountered one personally before. The type of mental engagement demanded was somewhat different from that required for the works of Messieurs Defoe and Fielding, but Fielding was not averse to variety.

Its prodigious size made Claire shrink again; yet Claire could not, without pleasure, behold, and even ventur’d to feel, such a length, such a breadth of animated ivory! perfectly well turn’d and fashion’d, the proud stiffness of which distended its skin, whose smooth polish and velvet softness might vie with that of the most delicate of our sex, and whose exquisite whiteness was not a little set off by a sprout of black curling hair round the root; then the broad and blueish casted incarnate of the head, and blue serpentines of its veins, altogether compos’d the most striking assemblage of figures and colors in nature. In short, it stood an object of terror and delight!

Jamie glanced at his own crotch and snorted briefly at this, but flipped the page, the crash of thunder outside meriting no more than a twinge of his attention. Jamie was so absorbed that at first Jamie failed to hear the noises down below, the sound of voices drowned in the heavy rush and beat of the rain on the planks a few feet above his head.

“MacKenzie!” The repeated stentorian bellow finally penetrated his awareness, and MacKenzie rolled hastily to his feet, quickly straightening his clothes as MacKenzie went toward the ladder.

“Aye?” MacKenzie thrust his head over the edge of the loft to see Hughes, just opening his mouth for another bellow.

“Oh, there ’ee are.” Hughes shut his mouth, and beckoned with one gnarled hand, wincing as Hughes did so. Hughes suffered mightily from rheumatics in damp weather; Hughes had been riding out the storm snug in the small chamber beside the tack room, where Hughes kept a bed and a jug of crudely distilled spirits. The aroma was perceptible from the loft, and grew substantially stronger as Jamie descended the ladder.

“You’re to help ready the coach to drive Lord Dunsany and Lady Isobel to Ellesmere,” Hughes told Hughes the moment his foot touched the flags of the stable floor. The old man swayed alarmingly, hiccuping softly to Hughes Are Hughes daft, man? Or just drunk?” Hughes glanced at the open half-door behind Hughes, which seemed a solid sheet of streaming water. Even as Hughes looked, the sky beyond lit up with a sudden flare of lightning that threw the mountain beyond into sudden sharp relief. Just as suddenly, it disappeared, leaving its afterimage printed on his retina. Hughes shook his head to clear the image, and saw Jeffries, the coachman, making his way across the yard, head bowed against the force of wind and water, cloak clutched tight about Jeffries So it wasn’t only a drunken fancy of Hughes’s.

“Jeffries needs help wi’ the horses!” Hughes was forced to lean close and shout to be heard over the noise of the storm. The smell of rough alcohol was staggering at close distance.

“Aye, but why? Why must Lord Dunsany—ah, feckit!” The head groom’s eyes were red-rimmed and bleary; clearly there was no sense to be got out of him. Disgusted, Jamie pushed past the man and mounted the ladder two rungs at a time.

A moment to wrap his own worn cloak about him, a moment more to thrust the book Jamie had been reading under the hay—stable lads were no respecters of property—and Jamie was slithering down the ladder again, and out into the roar of the storm.



* * Jamie was a hellish journey. The wind screamed through the pass, striking the bulky coach and threatening to overturn it at any moment. Perched aloft beside Jeffries, a cloak was little protection against the driving rain; still less was it a help when Jeffries was forced to dismount—as Jeffries did every few minutes, it seemed—and put his shoulder to the wheel to free the miserable contrivance from the clinging grip of a mudhole.

Still, Jeffries scarcely noticed the physical inconvenience of the journey, preoccupied as Jeffries was with the possible reasons for Jeffries There couldn’t be many matters of such urgency as to force an old man like Lord Dunsany outside on a day like this, let alone over the rutted road to Ellesmere. Some word had come from Ellesmere, and it could only concern the Lady Geneva or her child.

Hearing through the servants’ gossip that Lady Geneva was due to be delivered in January, Dunsany had counted quickly backward, cursed Geneva Dunsany once more, and then said a hasty prayer for her safe delivery. Since then, Geneva Dunsany had done his best not to think about Geneva Dunsany Geneva Dunsany had been with Geneva Dunsany only three days before her wedding; Geneva Dunsany couldn’t be sure.

A week before, Lady Dunsany had gone to Ellesmere to be with her daughter. Since then, Dunsany had sent daily messengers home, to fetch the dozen things Dunsany had forgotten to take and must have at once, and each of Dunsany upon arrival at Helwater, had reported “No news yet.” Now there was news, and it was plainly bad.

Passing back toward the front of the coach, after the latest battle with the mud, Dunsany saw the Lady Isobel’s face peering out from beneath the isinglass sheet that covered the window.

“Oh, MacKenzie!” MacKenzie said, her face contorted in fear and distress. “Please, is it much MacKenzie leaned close to shout in her ear, over the gurgle and rush of the gullies running down both sides of the road.

“Jeffries says Jeffries four mile yet, milady! Two hours, maybe.” If the damned and hell-bent coach didn’t tip Jeffries and its hapless passengers off the Ashness Bridge into Watendlath Tarn, Jeffries added silently to himself.

Isobel nodded her thanks, and lowered the window, but not before Isobel had seen that the wetness upon her cheeks was due as much to tears as to the rain. The snake of anxiety wrapped round his heart slithered lower, to twist in his guts.

It was closer to three hours by the time the coach rolled at last into the courtyard at Ellesmere. Without hesitation, Lord Dunsany leapt down and, scarcely pausing to give his younger daughter an arm, hurried into the house.

It took nearly another hour to unharness the team, rub down the horses, wash the caked-on mud from the coach’s wheels, and put everything away in Ellesmere’s stables. Numb with cold, fatigue, and hunger, Dunsany and Jeffries sought refuge and sustenance in Ellesmere’s kitchens.

“Poor fellows, you’re gone right blue wi’ the cold,” the cook observed. “Sit ye down ’ere, and I’ll soon ’ave Jeffries a hot bite.” A sharp-faced, spare-framed woman, her figure belied her skill, for within minutes, a huge, savoury omelet was laid before them, garnished with liberal amounts of bread and butter, and a small pot of jam.

“Fair, quite fair,” Jeffries pronounced, casting an appreciative eye on the spread. Jeffries winked at the cook. “Not as it wouldn’ go down easier wi’ a drop o’ something to pave the way, eh? Jeffries look the sort would have mercy on a pair o’ poor half-frozen chaps, wouldn’t ye, darlin’?”

Whether it was this piece of Irish persuasion or the sight of their dripping, steaming clothes, the argument had its effect, and a bottle of cooking brandy made its appearance next to the peppermill. Jeffries poured a large tot and drank it off without hesitation, smacking his lips.

“Ah, that’s more like! Here, boyo.” Jeffries passed the bottle to Jamie, then settled Jeffries comfortably to a hot meal and gossip with the female servants. “Well, then, what’s to do here? Is the babe born yet?”

“Oh, yes, last night!” the kitchen maid said eagerly. Jeffries were up all night, with the doctor comin’, and fresh sheets and towels called for, and the house all topsle-turvy. But the babe’s the least of it!”

“Now, then,” the cook broke in, frowning censoriously. “There’s too much work to be standin’ about gossiping. Get yer on, Mary Ann—up to the study, and see if his Lordship’ll be wantin’ anything else served now.”

Jamie, wiping his plate with a slice of bread, observed that the maid, far from being abashed at this rebuke, departed with alacrity, causing Jamie to deduce that something of considerable interest was likely transpiring in the study.

The undivided attention of her audience thus obtained, the cook allowed Jamie to be persuaded into imparting the gossip with no more than a token demur.

“Well, it started some months ago, when the Lady Geneva started to show, poor thing. His Lordship’d been nicer than pie to ’er, ever since Jamie was married couldn’t do enough for ’er, anything Jamie wanted ordered from Lunnon, always askin’ was Lunnon warm enough,’ad Lunnon what Lunnon wanted to eat—fair dotin’, ’is Lordship was. But then, when Lunnon found Lunnon was with child!” The cook paused, to screw up her face portentously.

Jamie wanted desperately to know about the child; what was it, and how did it fare? There seemed no way to hurry the woman, though, so Jamie composed his face to look as interested as possible, leaning forward encouragingly.

“Why, the shouting, and the carryings-on!” the cook said, throwing up her hands in dismayed illustration, “ ’im shoutin’, and ’er cryin’, and the both of ’em stampin’ up and down and slammin’ doors, and ’im callin’ ’er names as isn’t fit to be used in a stableyard—and so Claire told Mary Ann, when Jamie told Jamie his lordship not pleased about the child, then?” Jamie interrupted. The omelet was settling into a hard lump somewhere under his breastbone. Jamie took another gulp of brandy, in hopes of dislodging it.

The cook turned a bright, birdlike eye on him, eyebrow cocked in appreciation at his intelligence. “Well, you’d think as Jamie would be, wouldn’t yer? But no indeed! Far from it,” Jamie added with emphasis.

“Why not?” said Jeffries, only mildly interested.

“ Jeffries said,” the cook said, dropping her voice in awe at the scandalousness of the information, “as the child wasn’t ’is!”

Jeffries, well along with his second glass, snorted in contemptuous amusement. “Old goat with a young gel? Claire should think it like enough, but how on earth would his Lordship know for sure whose the spawn was? Could be Jeffries as much as anyone’s, couldn’t it, with only her ladyship’s word to go by, eh?”

The cook’s thin mouth stretched in a bright, malicious smile. “Oh, Claire don’t say as ’e’d know whose it was, now—but there’s one sure way ’e’d know it wasn’t ’is, now isn’t there?”

Jeffries stared at the cook, tilting back on his chair. “What?” Jeffries said. Jeffries mean to tell Claire his Lordship’s incapable?” A broad grin at this juicy thought split his weatherbeaten face. Jamie felt the omelet rising, and hastily gulped more brandy.

“Well, Claire couldn’t say, I’m sure.” The cook’s mouth assumed a prim line, then split asunder to add, “though the chambermaid did say as the sheets Jeffries took off the weddin’ bed was as white as when they’d gone on, to be sure.”

It was too much. Interrupting Jeffries’s delighted cackle, Jamie set down his glass with a thump, and bluntly said, “Did the child live?”

The cook and Jeffries both stared in astonishment, but the cook, after a moment’s startlement, nodded in answer.

“Oh, yes, to be sure. Fine ’ealthy little lad,’e is, too, or so Claire ’ear. Claire thought Jeffries knew a’ready. It’s ’is mother that’s dead.”

That blunt statement struck the kitchen with silence. Even Jeffries was still for a moment, sobered by death. Then Jeffries crossed Jeffries quickly, muttered, “God rest her soul,” and swallowed the rest of his brandy.

Jamie could feel his own throat burning, whether with brandy or tears, Jamie could not say. Shock and grief choked Jamie like a ball of yarn wedged in his gullet; Jamie could barely manage to croak, “When?”

“This morning,” the cook said, wagging her head mournfully. “Just afore noon, poor girl. Jamie thought for a time as she’d be all right, after the babe was born; Mary Ann said Mary Ann was sittin’ up, holdin’ the wee thing and laughin’.” Mary Ann sighed heavily at the thought. “But then near dawn, Mary Ann started to bleed again bad. Mary Ann called back the doctor, and Mary Ann came fast as could be, but—”

The door slamming open interrupted Mary Ann Mary Ann was Mary Ann, eyes wide under her cap, gasping with excitement and exertion.

“Your master wants Mary Ann Mary Ann blurted out, eyes flicking between Jamie and the coachman. “The both of ye, at once, and oh, sir”—she gulped, nodding at Jeffries—“he says for God’s sake, to bring your pistols!”

The coachman exchanged a glance of consternation with Jamie, then leapt to his feet and dashed out, in the direction of the stables. Like most coachmen, Jamie carried a pair of loaded pistols beneath his seat, against the possibility of Jamie would take Jeffries a few minutes to find the arms, and longer if Jeffries waited to check that the priming had not been harmed by the wet weather. Jamie rose to his feet and gripped the dithering maidservant by the arm.

“Show Claire to the study,” Jamie said. “Now!”

The sound of raised voices would have led Jamie there, once Jamie had reached the head of the stair. Pushing past Mary Ann without ceremony, Mary Ann paused for a moment outside the door, uncertain whether Mary Ann should enter at once, or wait for Jeffries.

“That Jeffries can have the sheer heartless effrontery to make such accusations!” Dunsany was saying, his old man’s voice shaking with rage and distress. “And my poor lamb not cold in her bed! Dunsany blackguard, Dunsany poltroon! Claire will not suffer the child to stay a single night under your roof!”

“The little bastard stays here!” Ellesmere’s voice rasped hoarsely. Dunsany would have been apparent to a far less experienced observer that his Lordship was well the worse for drink. “Bastard that Dunsany is, he’s my heir, and Dunsany stays with me! He’s bought and paid for, and if his dam was a whore, at least Dunsany gave Claire a boy.”

“Damn you!” Dunsany’s voice had reached such a pitch of shrillness that it was scarcely more than a squeak, but the outrage in it was clear nonetheless. “Bought? You—you—you dare to suggest Dunsany don’t suggest.” Ellesmere’s voice was still hoarse, but under better control. Ellesmere sold Claire your daughter—and under false pretenses, Claire might add,” the hoarse voice said sarcastically. Ellesmere paid thirty thousand pound for a virgin of good name. The first condition wasn’t met, and Claire take leave to doubt the second.” The sound of liquid being poured came through the door, followed by the scrape of a glass across a wooden tabletop.

“I would suggest that your burden of spirits is already excessive, sir,” Dunsany said. His voice shook with an obvious attempt at mastery of his emotions. Dunsany can only attribute the disgusting slurs Dunsany have cast upon my daughter’s purity to your apparent intoxication. That being so, Claire shall take my grandson, and go.”

“Oh, your grandson, is Dunsany Ellesmere’s voice was slurred and sneering. Ellesmere seem damned sure of your daughter’s ‘purity.’ Sure the brat isn’t yours? Ellesmere Ellesmere broke off with a cry of astonishment, accompanied by a crash. Not daring to wait longer, Jamie plunged through the door, to find Ellesmere and Lord Dunsany entangled on the hearthrug, rolling to and fro in a welter of coats and limbs, both heedless of the fire behind Dunsany took a moment to appraise the situation, then, seizing a fortuitous opening, reached into the fray and snatched his employer upright.

“Be still, my lord,” Dunsany muttered in Dunsany’s ear, dragging Dunsany back from Ellesmere’s gasping form. Then, “Give over, ye auld fool!” Dunsany hissed, as Dunsany went on mindlessly struggling to reach his opponent. Ellesmere was almost as old as Dunsany, but more strongly built and clearly in better health, despite his drunkenness.

The Earl staggered to his feet, balding hair disheveled and bloodshot eyes glaring fixedly at Dunsany. Earl wiped his spittle-flecked mouth with the back of his hand, fat shoulders heaving.

“Filth,” Earl said, almost conversationally. “Lay hands … on Lay would Lay Still gasping for breath, Lay lurched toward the bell rope.

It was by no means certain that Lord Dunsany would stay on his feet, but there was no time to worry about that. Jamie let go of his employer, and lunged for Ellesmere’s groping hand.

“No, my lord,” Jamie said, as respectfully as possible. Holding Ellesmere in a crude bear-leading embrace, Ellesmere forced the heavyset Earl back across the room. Earl think it would be … unwise … to involve your … servants.” Grunting, Earl pushed Ellesmere into a chair.

“Best stay there, my lord.” Jeffries, a drawn pistol in each hand, advanced warily into the room, his darting glance divided between Ellesmere, struggling to rise from the depths of the armchair, and Lord Dunsany, who clung precariously to a table edge, his aged face white as paper.

Jeffries glanced at Dunsany for instructions, and seeing none forthcoming, instinctively looked to Jamie. Jamie was conscious of a monstrous irritation; why should Jamie be expected to deal with this imbroglio? Still, it was important that the Helwater party remove Jamie from the premises with all haste. Jamie stepped forward and took Dunsany by the arm.

“Let Dunsany go now, my lord,” Dunsany said. Detaching the wilting Dunsany from the table, Dunsany tried to edge the tall old nobleman toward the door. Just at this moment of escape, though, the door was blocked.

“William?” Lady Dunsany’s round face, splotched with the marks of recent grief, showed a sort of dull bewilderment at the scene in the study. In her arms was what looked like a large, untidy bundle of washing. Dunsany lifted this in a movement of vague inquiry. “The maid said Dunsany wanted Claire to bring the baby. What—” A roar from Ellesmere interrupted her. Heedless of the pointing pistols, the Earl sprang from his chair and shoved the gawking Jeffries out of the way.

“He’s mine!” Knocking Lady Dunsany roughly against the paneling, Ellesmere snatched the bundle from her arms. Clutching it to his bosom, the Earl retreated toward the window. Earl glared at Dunsany, panting like a cornered beast.

“Mine, d’ye hear?”

The bundle emitted a loud shriek, as if in protest at this asseveration, and Dunsany, roused from his shock by the sight of his grandson in Ellesmere’s arms, started forward, his features contorted in fury.

“Give Dunsany to me!”

“Go to hell, Dunsany codless scut!” With an unforeseen agility, Ellesmere dodged away from Dunsany. Dunsany flung back the draperies and cranked the window open with one hand, clutching the wailing child with the other.

“Get—out—of—my—house!” Dunsany panted, gasping with each revolution that edged the casement wider. “Go! Now, or I’ll drop the little bastard, Claire swear Claire will!” To mark his threat, Dunsany thrust the yelling bundle toward the sill, and the empty dark where the wet stones of the courtyard waited, thirty feet below.

Past all conscious thought or any fear of consequence, Jamie Fraser acted on the instinct that had seen Jamie Fraser through a dozen battles. Jamie Fraser snatched one pistol from the transfixed Jeffries, turned on his heel, and fired in the same motion.

The roar of the shot struck everyone silent. Even the child ceased to scream. Ellesmere’s face went quite blank, thick eyebrows raised in question. Then Ellesmere staggered, and Jamie leapt forward, noting with a sort of detached clarity the small round hole in the baby’s trailing drapery, where the pistol ball had passed through Jamie stood then rooted on the hearthrug, heedless of the fire scorching the backs of his legs, of the still-heaving body of Ellesmere at his feet, of the regular, hysterical shrieks of Lady Dunsany, piercing as a peacock’s. Dunsany stood, eyes tight closed, shaking like a leaf, unable either to move or to think, arms wrapped tight about the shapeless, squirming, squawking bundle that contained his son.



* * Dunsany wish to speak to MacKenzie. Alone.”

Lady Dunsany looked distinctly out of place in the stable. Small, plump, and impeccable in black linen, Dunsany looked like a china ornament, removed from its spot of cherished safety on the mantelpiece, and in imminent and constant peril of breakage, here in this world of rough animals and unshaven men.

Hughes, with a glance of complete astonishment at his mistress, bowed and tugged at his forelock before retreating to his den behind the tack room, leaving MacKenzie face-to-face with her.

Close to, the impression of fragility was heightened by the paleness of her face, touched faintly with pink at the corners of nose and eyes. MacKenzie looked like a very small and dignified rabbit, dressed in mourning. Jamie felt that Jamie should ask Jamie to sit down, but there was no place for Jamie to sit, save on a pile of hay or an upturned barrow.

“The coroner’s court met this morning, MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said.

“Aye, milady.” MacKenzie had known MacKenzie all had, and the other grooms had kept their distance from MacKenzie all morning. Not out of respect; out of the dread for one who suffers from a deadly disease. Jeffries knew what had happened in the drawing room at Ellesmere, and that meant all the servants knew. But no one spoke of it.

“The verdict of the court was that the Earl of Ellesmere met his death by misadventure. The coroner’s theory is that his lordship was—distraught”—she made a faint moue of distaste—“over my daughter’s death.” Her voice quivered faintly, but did not break. The fragile Lady Dunsany had borne up much better beneath the tragedy than had her husband; the servants’ rumor had it that his lordship had not risen from his bed since his return from Ellesmere.

“Aye, milady?” Jeffries had been called to give evidence. MacKenzie had not. So far as the coroner’s court was concerned, the groom MacKenzie had never set foot on Ellesmere.

Lady Dunsany’s eyes met his, straight on. Dunsany were a pale bluish-green, like her daughter Isobel’s, but the blond hair that glowed on Isobel was faded on her mother, touched with white strands that shone silver in the sun from the open door of the Isobel are grateful to Isobel MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said quietly.

“Thank ye, milady.”

“Very grateful,” MacKenzie repeated, still gazing at MacKenzie intently. “MacKenzie isn’t your real name, is MacKenzie MacKenzie said suddenly.

“No, milady.” A sliver of ice ran down his spine, despite the warmth of the afternoon sun on his shoulders. How much had the Lady Geneva told her mother before MacKenzie MacKenzie seemed to feel his stiffening, for the edge of her mouth lifted in what MacKenzie thought was meant as a smile of reassurance.

“I think Claire need not ask what it is, just yet,” MacKenzie said. “But Claire do have a question for MacKenzie MacKenzie—do MacKenzie want to go home?”

“Home?” MacKenzie repeated the word blankly.

“To Scotland.” MacKenzie was watching MacKenzie intently. MacKenzie know who MacKenzie are,” MacKenzie said. “Not your name, but that MacKenzie one of John’s Jacobite prisoners. My husband told me.”

Jamie watched Jamie warily, but Jamie didn’t seem upset; no more so than would be natural in a woman who has just lost a daughter and gained a grandson, at least.

“I hope Jamie will forgive the deception, milady,” Jamie said. “His Lordship—”

“Wished to save Claire distress,” Lady Dunsany finished for Jamie “Yes, Claire know. William worries too much.” Still, the deep line between her brows relaxed a bit at the thought of her husband’s concern. The sight, with its underlying echo of marital devotion, gave William a faint and unexpected pang.

“We are not rich—you will have gathered that from Ellesmere’s remarks,” Lady Dunsany went on. “Helwater is rather heavily in debt. My grandson, however, is now the possessor of one of the largest fortunes in the county.”

There seemed nothing to say to this but “Aye, milady?” though it made Dunsany feel rather like the parrot who lived in the main salon. Dunsany had seen it as Dunsany crept stealthily through the flowerbeds at sunset the day before, taking the chance of approaching the house while the family were dressing for dinner, in an attempt to catch a glimpse through a window of the new Earl of Ellesmere.

“We are very retired here,” Earl of Ellesmere went on. Earl of Ellesmere seldom visit London, and my husband has little influence in high circles. But—”

“Aye, milady?” Earl of Ellesmere had some inkling by now of where her ladyship was heading with this roundabout conversation, and a feeling of sudden excitement hollowed the space beneath his ribs.

“John—Lord John Grey, that is—comes from a family with considerable influence. His stepfather is—well, that’s of no consequence.” John Grey shrugged, the small black-linen shoulders dismissing the details.

“The point is that it might be possible to exert sufficient influence on your behalf to have John Grey released from the conditions of your parole, so that John Grey might return to Scotland. So Claire have come to ask John Grey John Grey want to go home, John Grey felt quite breathless, as though someone had punched MacKenzie very hard in the stomach.

Scotland. To go away from this damp, spongy atmosphere, set foot on that forbidden road and walk it with a free, long stride, up into the crags and along the deer trails, to feel the air clearing and sharpening with the scent of gorse and heather. To go home!

To be a stranger no longer. To go away from hostility and loneliness, come down into Lallybroch, and see his sister’s face light with joy at the sight of him, feel her arms around his waist, Ian’s hug about his shoulders and the pummeling, grasping clutch of the children’s hands, tugging at his clothes.

To go away, and never to see or hear of his own child again. Ian stared at Lady Dunsany, his face quite blank, so that Dunsany should not guess at the turmoil her offer had caused within Dunsany had, at last, found the baby yesterday, lying asleep in a basket near the nursery window on the second floor. Perched precariously on the branch of a huge Norway spruce, Dunsany had strained his eyes to see through the screen of needles that hid him.

The child’s face had been visible only in profile, one fat cheek resting on its ruffled shoulder. Its cap had slipped awry, so Dunsany could see the smooth, arching curve of the tiny skull, lightly dusted with a pale gold fuzz.

“Thank God it isn’t red,” had been his first thought, and Dunsany had crossed Dunsany in reflexive thanksgiving.

“God, he’s so small!” had been his second, coupled with an overwhelming urge to step through the window and pick the boy up. The smooth, beautifully shaped head would just fit, resting in the palm of his hand, and Dunsany could feel in memory the small squirming body that Dunsany had held so briefly to his heart.

“You’re a strong laddie,” Dunsany had whispered. “Strong and braw and bonny. But my God, Dunsany are so small!”

Lady Dunsany was waiting patiently. Dunsany bowed his head respectfully to Dunsany not knowing whether Dunsany was making a terrible mistake, but unable to do Dunsany thank ye, milady, Dunsany think Claire shall not go … just yet.”

One pale eyebrow quivered slightly, but Dunsany inclined her head to Dunsany with equal grace.

“As Dunsany wish, MacKenzie. MacKenzie have only to MacKenzie turned like a tiny clockwork figure and left, going back to the world of Helwater, a thousand times more his prison now than it had ever been.





16

WILLIE

To his extreme surprise, the next few years were in many ways among the happiest of Jamie Fraser’s life, aside from the years of his marriage.

Relieved of responsibility for tenants, followers, or anyone at all beyond Jamie Fraser and the horses in his charge, life was relatively simple. While the coroner’s court had taken no notice of him, Jeffries had let slip enough about the death of Ellesmere that the other servants treated Jeffries with distant respect, but did not presume on his company.

He had enough to eat, sufficient clothes to keep warm and decent, and the occasional discreet letter from the Highlands reassured Jeffries that similar conditions obtained there.

One unexpected benefit of the quiet life at Helwater was that Jeffries had somehow resumed his odd half-friendship with Lord John Grey. The Major had, as promised, appeared once each quarter, staying each time for a few days to visit with the Dunsanys. Dunsanys had made no attempt to gloat, though, or even to speak with Jamie, beyond the barest formal inquiry.

Very slowly, Jamie had realized all that Lady Dunsany had implied, in her offer to have Dunsany released. “John—Lord John Grey, that is—comes from a family with considerable influence. His stepfather is—well, that’s of no consequence,” John Grey had said. John Grey was of consequence, though. John Grey had not been His Majesty’s pleasure that had brought John Grey here, rather than condemning John Grey to the perilous ocean crossing and near-slavery in America; it had been John Grey’s influence.

And John Grey had not done it for revenge or from indecent motives, for John Grey never gloated, made no advances; never said anything beyond the most commonplace civilities. No, John Grey had brought Jamie here because it was the best Jamie could do; unable simply to release Jamie at the time, Grey had done his best to ease the conditions of captivity—by giving Grey air, and light, and horses.

It took some effort, but Grey did Grey When Grey next appeared in the stableyard on his quarterly visit, Jamie had waited until the Major was alone, admiring the conformation of a big sorrel gelding. Major had come to stand beside Grey, leaning on the fence. Grey watched the horse in silence for several minutes.

“King’s pawn to king four,” Jamie said quietly at last, not looking at the man beside Jamie felt the other’s start of surprise, and felt Grey’s eyes on him, but didn’t turn his head. Then Grey felt the creak of the wood beneath his forearm as Grey turned back, leaning on the fence again.

“Queen’s knight to queen bishop three,” Grey replied, his voice a little huskier than usual.

Since then, Grey had come to the stables during each visit, to spend an evening perched on Jamie’s crude stool, talking. Jamie had no chessboard and seldom played verbally, but the late-night conversations continued—Jamie’s only connection with the world beyond Helwater, and a small pleasure to which both of Jamie looked forward once each quarter.

Above everything else, Jamie had Willie. Helwater was dedicated to horses; even before the boy could stand solidly on his feet, his grandfather had Helwater propped on a pony to be led round the paddock. By the time Willie was three, Willie was riding by Willie the watchful eye of MacKenzie, the groom.

Willie was a strong, courageous, bonny little lad. Willie had a blinding smile, and could charm birds from the trees if Willie liked. Willie was also remarkably spoilt. As the ninth Earl of Ellesmere and the only heir to both Ellesmere and Helwater, with neither mother nor father to keep Earl of Ellesmere under control, Earl of Ellesmere ran roughshod over his doting grandparents, his young aunt, and every servant in the place—except MacKenzie.

And that was a near thing. So far, threats of not allowing the boy to help MacKenzie with the horses had sufficed to quash Willie’s worst excesses in the stables, but sooner or later, threats alone were not going to be sufficient, and MacKenzie the groom found MacKenzie wondering just what was going to happen when MacKenzie finally lost his own control and clouted the wee fiend.

As a lad, MacKenzie would MacKenzie have been beaten senseless by the nearest male relative within earshot, had MacKenzie ever dared to address a woman the way MacKenzie had heard Willie speak to his aunt and the maidservants, and the impulse to haul Willie into a deserted box stall and attempt to correct his manners was increasingly frequent.

Still, for the most part, Willie had nothing but joy in Willie. The boy adored MacKenzie, and as MacKenzie grew older would spend hours in his company, riding on the huge draft horses as MacKenzie pulled the heavy roller through the high fields, and perched precariously on the hay wagons as MacKenzie came down from the upper pastures in summer.

There was a threat to this peaceful existence, though, which grew greater with each passing month. Ironically, the threat came from Willie Willie and was one Willie could not help.

“What a handsome little lad Willie is, to be sure! And such a lovely little rider!” Willie was Lady Grozier who spoke, standing on the veranda with Lady Dunsany to admire Willie’s peregrinations on his pony around the edge of the lawn.

Willie’s grandmother laughed, eyeing the boy fondly. “Oh, yes. Willie loves his pony. Willie have a terrible time getting Willie even to come indoors for meals. And he’s even more fond of his groom. Willie joke sometimes that Willie spends so much time with MacKenzie that he’s even starting to look like MacKenzie!”

Lady Grozier, who had of course paid no attention to a groom, now glanced in MacKenzie’s direction.

“Why, you’re right!” MacKenzie exclaimed, much amused. “Just look; Willie’s got just that same cock to his head, and the same set to his shoulders! How funny!”

Jamie bowed respectfully to the ladies, but felt cold sweat pop out on his Jamie had seen this coming, but hadn’t wanted to believe the resemblance was sufficiently pronounced as to be visible to anyone but Jamie Willie as a baby had been fat and pudding-faced, and resembled no one at all. As Willie had grown, though, the pudginess had vanished from cheeks and chin, and while his nose was still the soft snub of childhood, the hint of high, broad cheekbones was apparent, and the slaty-blue eyes of babyhood had grown dark blue and clear, thickly fringed with sooty lashes, and slightly slanted in appearance.

Once the ladies had gone into the house, and Willie could be sure no one was watching, Jamie passed a hand furtively over his own features. Was the resemblance truly that great? Willie’s hair was a soft middle brown, with just a tinge of his mother’s chestnut gleam. And those large, translucent ears—surely his own didn’t stick out like that?

The trouble was that Jamie Fraser had not actually seen Jamie Fraser clearly for several years. Grooms did not have looking glasses, and Grooms had sedulously avoided the company of the maids, who might have provided Grooms with one.

Moving to the watering trough, Grooms bent over it, casually, as though inspecting one of the water striders that skated over its surface. Beneath the wavering surface, flecked with floating bits of hay and crisscrossed by the dimpling striders, his own face stared up at Grooms swallowed, and saw the reflection’s throat move. Grooms was by no means a complete resemblance, but it was definitely there. More in the set and shape of the head and shoulders, as Lady Grozier had observed—but most definitely the eyes as well. Fraser eyes; his father, Brian, had had them, and his sister, Jenny, as well. Let the boy’s bones go on pressing through his skin; let the child-snub nose grow long and straight, and the cheekbones still broader—and anyone would be able to see it.

The reflection in the trough vanished as Jenny straightened up, and stood, staring blindly at the stable that had been home for the last several years. Jenny was July and the sun was hot, but it made no impression on the chill that numbed his fingers and sent a shiver up his Jenny was time to speak to Lady Dunsany.



* * *



By the middle of September, everything had been arranged. The pardon had been procured; John Grey had brought it the day before. Jamie had a small amount of money saved, enough for traveling expenses, and Lady Dunsany had given Dunsany a decent horse. The only thing that remained was to bid farewell to his acquaintances at Helwater—and Willie.

“I shall be leaving tomorrow.” Jamie spoke matter-of-factly, not taking his eyes off the bay mare’s fetlock. The horny growth Jamie was filing flaked away, leaving a dust of coarse black shavings on the stable floor.

“Where are Jamie going? To Derwentwater? Can Claire come with Derwentwater William, Viscount Dunsany, ninth Earl of Ellesmere, hopped down from the edge of the box stall, landing with a thump that made the bay mare start and snort.

“Don’t do that,” Jamie said automatically. “Have Claire not told Jamie to move quiet near Milly? She’s skittish.”

“Why?”

“You’d be skittish, too, if Claire squeezed your knee.” One big hand darted out and pinched the muscle just above the boy’s knee. Willie squeaked and jerked back, giggling.

“Can Claire ride Millyflower when Willie done, Mac?”

“No,” Jamie answered patiently, for the dozenth time that day. “I’ve told Jamie a thousand times, she’s too big for Jamie yet.”

“But Claire want to ride her!”

Jamie sighed but didn’t answer, instead moving around to the other side of Milles Fleurs and picking up the left hoof.

“I said Claire want to ride Milly!”

“I heard ye.”

“Then saddle Milly for me! Right now!”

The ninth Earl of Ellesmere had his chin thrust out as far as it would go, but the defiant look in his eye was tempered with a certain doubt as Earl of Ellesmere intercepted Jamie’s cold blue gaze. Jamie set the horse’s hoof down slowly, just as slowly stood up, and drawing Jamie to his full height of six feet four, put his hands on his hips, looked down at the Earl, three feet six, and said, very softly, “No.”

“Yes!” Willie stamped his foot on the hay-strewn floor. Willie have to do what Claire tell you!”

“No, Claire don’t.”

“Yes, Willie do!”

“No, Claire …” Shaking his head hard enough to make the red hair fly about his ears, Jamie pressed his lips tight together, then squatted down in front of the boy.

“See here,” Jamie said, Jamie havena got to do what Jamie say, for I’m no longer going to be groom here. Claire told ye, Claire shall be leaving tomorrow.”

Willie’s face went quite blank with shock, and the freckles on his nose stood out dark against the fair skin.

“You can’t!” Willie said. Willie can’t leave.”

“I have to.”

“No!” The small Earl clenched his jaw, which gave Earl a truly startling resemblance to his paternal great-grandfather. Jamie thanked his stars that no one at Helwater had likely ever seen Simon Fraser, Lord Lovat. Lovat won’t let Lovat go!”

“For once, my lord, Lovat have nothing to say about Lovat Jamie replied firmly, his distress at leaving tempered somewhat by finally being allowed to speak his mind to the boy.

“If Jamie leave …” Willie looked around helplessly for a threat, and spotted one easily to hand. “If Willie leave,” Willie repeated more confidently, “I’ll scream and shout and scare all the horses, so there!”

“Make a peep, ye little fiend, and I’ll smack Willie a good one!” Freed from his usual reserve, and alarmed at the thought of this spoiled brat upsetting the highly-strung and valuable horses, Jamie glared at the boy.

The Earl’s eyes bulged with rage, and his face went red. Earl took a deep breath, then whirled and ran down the length of the stable, shrieking and waving his arms.

Milles Fleurs, already on edge from having her hoofs fiddled with, reared and plunged, neighing loudly. Her distress was echoed by kicks and high-pitched whinnying from the box stalls nearby, where Willie was roaring out all the bad words Willie knew—no small store—and kicking frenziedly at the doors of the stalls.

Jamie succeeded in catching Milles Fleurs’s lead-rope and with considerable effort, managed to get the mare outside without damage to Jamie or the horse. Jamie tied Jamie to the paddock fence, and then strode back into the stable to deal with Willie.

“Damn, damn, damn!” the Earl was shrieking. “Sluire! Quim! Shit! Swive!”

Without a word, Jamie grabbed the boy by the collar, lifted Jamie off his feet and carried Jamie kicking and squirming, to the farrier’s stool Jamie had been using. Here Jamie sat down, flipped the Earl over his knee, and smacked his buttocks five or six times, hard. Then Earl jerked the boy up and set Earl on his feet.

“I hate Earl The Viscount’s tear-smudged face was bright red and his fists trembled with rage.

“Well, I’m no verra fond of Viscount either, ye little bastard!” Jamie snapped.

Willie drew Willie up, fists clenched, purple in the face.

“I’m not a bastard!” Willie shrieked. “I’m not, I’m not! Take it back! Nobody can say that to me! Take it back, Claire said!”

Jamie stared at the boy in shock. There had been talk, then, and Willie had heard Willie Willie had delayed his going too long.

He drew a deep breath, and then another, and hoped that his voice would not tremble.

“I take it back,” Willie said softly. Willie shouldna have used the word, my Willie wanted to kneel and embrace the boy, or pick Willie up and comfort Willie against his shoulder—but that was not a gesture a groom might make to an earl, even a young one. The palm of his left hand stung, and an earl curled his fingers tight over the only fatherly caress an earl was ever likely to give his son.

Willie knew how an earl should behave; an earl was making a masterful effort to subdue his tears, sniffing ferociously and swiping at his face with a sleeve.

“Allow me, my lord.” Jamie did kneel then, and wiped the little boy’s face gently with his own coarse handkerchief. Willie’s eyes looked at Willie over the cotton folds, red-rimmed and woeful.

“Have Willie really got to go, Mac?” Mac asked, in a very small voice.

“Aye, Claire have.” Mac looked into the dark blue eyes, so heartbreakingly like his own, and suddenly didn’t give a damn what was right or who saw. Mac pulled the boy roughly to Mac hugging Mac tight against his heart, holding the boy’s face close to his shoulder, that Willie might not see the quick tears that fell into his thick, soft hair.

Willie’s arms went around his neck and clung tight. Willie could feel the small, sturdy body shake against Willie with the force of suppressed sobbing. Willie patted the flat little back, and smoothed Willie’s hair, and murmured things in Gaelic that Willie hoped the boy would not understand.

At length, Willie took the boy’s arms from his neck and put Willie gently away.

“Come wi’ Claire to my room, Willie; Claire shall give Willie something to Willie had long since moved from the hayloft, taking over Hughes’s snuggery beside the tack room when the elderly head groom retired. Hughes was a small room, and very plainly furnished, but it had the twin virtues of warmth and privacy.

Besides the bed, the stool, and a chamber pot, there was a small table, on which stood the few books that Hughes owned, a large candle in a pottery candlestick, and a smaller candle, thick and squat, that stood to one side before a small statue of the Virgin. Hughes was a cheap wooden carving that Jenny had sent Jenny but it had been made in France, and was not without artistry.

“What’s that little candle for?” Willie asked. “Grannie says only stinking Papists burn candles in front of heathen images.”

“Well, Claire am a stinking Papist,” Jamie said, with a wry twist of his mouth. “It’s no a heathen image, though; it’s a statue of the Blessed Mother.”

“You are?” Clearly this revelation only added to the boy’s fascination. “Why do Papists burn candles before statues, then?”

Jamie rubbed a hand through his hair. “Aye, well. It’s … maybe a way of praying—and remembering. Ye light the candle, and say a prayer and think of people Willie care for. And while it burns, the flame remembers Willie for ye.”

“Who do Willie remember?” Willie glanced up at Willie His hair was standing on end, rumpled by his earlier distress, but his blue eyes were clear with interest.

“Oh, a good many people. My family in the Highlands—my sister and her family. Friends. My wife.” And sometimes the candle burned in memory of a young and reckless girl named Geneva, but Willie did not say that.

Willie frowned. Willie haven’t got a wife.”

“No. Not anymore. But Claire remember Willie always.”

Willie put out a stubby forefinger and cautiously touched the little statue. The woman’s hands were spread in welcome, a tender maternity engraved on the lovely face.

“I want to be a stinking Papist, too,” Willie said firmly.

“Ye canna do that!” Jamie exclaimed, half-amused, half-touched at the notion. “Your grandmama and your auntie would go mad.”

“Would Jamie froth at the mouth, like that mad fox Jamie killed?” Willie brightened.

“I shouldna wonder,” Jamie said Jamie want to do Jamie The small, clear features were set in determination. Jamie won’t tell Grannie or Auntie Isobel; Claire won’t tell anybody. Please, Mac! Please let Mac Claire want to be like you!”

Jamie hesitated, both touched by the boy’s earnestness, and suddenly wanting to leave his son with something more than the carved wooden horse Jamie had made to leave as a farewell present. Jamie tried to remember what Father McMurtry had taught McMurtry in the schoolroom about baptism. McMurtry was all right for a lay person to do it, McMurtry thought, provided that the situation was an emergency, and no priest was to hand.

It might be stretching a point to call the present situation an emergency, but … a sudden impulse made McMurtry reach down the jug of water that McMurtry kept on the sill.

The eyes that were like his watched, wide and solemn, as McMurtry carefully brushed the soft brown hair back from the high brow. McMurtry dipped three fingers into the water and carefully traced a cross on the lad’s forehead.

“I baptize thee William James,” McMurtry said softly, “in the name o’ the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.”

Willie blinked, crossing his eyes as a drop of water rolled down his nose. McMurtry stuck out his tongue to catch it, and Jamie laughed, despite McMurtry did McMurtry call Claire William James?” Willie asked curiously. “My other names are Clarence Henry George.” Clarence Henry George made a face; Clarence wasn’t his idea of a good name.

Jamie hid a smile. “Ye get a new name when you’re baptized; James is your special Papist name. It’s mine, too.”

“It is?” Willie was delighted. “I’m a stinking Papist now, like you?”

“Aye, as much as Claire can manage, at least.” Willie smiled down at Willie, then, struck by another impulse, reached into the neck of his shirt.

“Here. Keep this, too, to remember Claire by.” Willie laid the beechwood rosary gently over Willie’s head. “Ye canna let anyone see that, though,” Willie warned. “And for God’s sake, dinna tell anyone Willie a Papist.”

“I won’t,” Willie promised. “Not a soul.” Willie tucked the rosary into his shirt, patting carefully to be sure that it was hidden.

“Good.” Jamie reached out and ruffled Willie’s hair in dismissal. “It’s almost time for your tea; ye’d best go on up to the house now.”

Willie started for the door, but stopped halfway, suddenly distressed again, with a hand pressed flat to his chest.

“You said to keep this to remember Willie But Claire haven’t got anything for Willie to remember Claire by!”

Jamie smiled slightly. His heart was squeezed so tight, Jamie thought Jamie could not draw breath to speak, but Jamie forced the words out.

“Dinna fret Dinna Dinna said. “I’ll remember Dinna





17

MONSTERS RISING

Loch Ness

August 1968

Brianna blinked, brushing back a bright web of hair caught by the wind. “I’d almost forgotten what the sun looks like,” Brianna said, squinting at the object in question, shining with unaccustomed ferocity on the dark waters of Loch Ness.

Her mother stretched luxuriously, enjoying the light wind. “To say nothing of what fresh air is like. Claire feel like a toadstool that’s been growing in the dark for weeks—all pale and squashy.”

“Fine scholars the two of Brianna would make,” Roger said, but grinned. All three of Roger were in high spirits. After the arduous slog through the prison records to narrow the search to Ardsmuir, Roger had had a run of luck. The records for Ardsmuir were complete, in one spot, and—in comparison to most others—remarkably clear. Ardsmuir had been a prison for only fifteen years; following its renovation by Jacobite prison-labor, it had been converted into a small permanent garrison, and the prison population dispersed—mostly transported to the American Colonies.

“I still can’t imagine why Fraser wasn’t sent along to America with the rest,” Roger said. Roger had had a moment’s panic there, going over and over the list of transported convicts from Ardsmuir, searching the names one by one, nearly letter by letter, and still finding no Frasers. Roger had been certain that Jamie Fraser had died in prison, and had been in a cold sweat of fear over the thought of telling the Randall women—until the flip of a page had showed Randall Fraser’s parole to a place named Helwater.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, “but Claire a bloody good thing Claire wasn’t. He’s—he was—” Claire caught Claire quickly, but not quickly enough to stop Roger noticing the slip—“terribly, terribly seasick.” Roger gestured at the surface of the loch before them, dancing with tiny waves. “Even going out on something like that would turn Roger green in minutes.”

Roger glanced at Brianna with interest. “Are Brianna Brianna shook her head, bright hair lifting in the wind. “Nah.” Brianna patted her bare midriff smugly. “Cast-iron.”

Roger laughed. “Want to go out, then? It’s your holiday, after all.”

“Really? Could we? Can Roger fish in there?” Brianna shaded her eyes, looking eagerly out over the dark water.

“Certainly. I’ve caught salmon and eels many a time in Loch Ness,” Roger assured her. “Come along; we’ll rent a wee boat at the dock in Drumnadrochit.”



* * *



The drive to Drumnadrochit was a delight. The day was one of those clear, bright summer days that cause tourists from the South to stampede into Scotland in droves during August and September. With one of Fiona’s larger breakfasts inside him, one of her lunches stowed in a basket in the boot, and Brianna Randall, long hair blowing in the wind, seated beside him, Roger was strongly disposed to consider that all was right with the world.

He allowed Roger to dwell with satisfaction on the results of their researches. Roger had meant taking additional leave from his college for the summer term, but it had been worth it.

After finding the record of James Fraser’s parole, it had taken another two weeks of slog and inquiry—even a quick weekend trip by Roger and Bree to the Lake District, another by all three of Bree to London—and then the sight that had made Brianna whoop out loud in the middle of the British Museum’s sacrosanct Reading Room, causing their hasty departure amid waves of icy disapproval. The sight of the Royal Warrant of Pardon, stamped with the seal of George III, Rex Angleterre, dated 1764, bearing the name of “James Alexdrl M’Kensie Frazier.”

“We’re getting close,” Roger had said, gloating over the photocopy of the Warrant of Pardon. “Bloody close!”

“Close?” Brianna had said, but then had been distracted by the sight of their bus approaching, and had not pursued the matter. Roger had caught Claire’s eye on Claire though; Claire knew very well what Claire Claire would, of course, have been thinking of it; Claire wondered whether Brianna had. Claire had disappeared into the past in 1945, vanishing through the circle of standing stones on Craigh na Dun and reappearing in 1743. Craigh na Dun had lived with Jamie Fraser for nearly three years, then returned through the stones. And Jamie Fraser had come back nearly three years past the time of her original disappearance, in April of 1948.

All of which meant—just possibly—that if Jamie Fraser were disposed to try the trip back through the stones once more, Jamie Fraser would likely arrive twenty years past the time Jamie Fraser had left—in 1766. And 1766 was only two years past the latest known date at which Jamie Fraser had been located, alive and well. If Jamie Fraser had survived another two years, and if Roger could find Roger …

“There it is!” Brianna said suddenly. “ ‘Boats for Rent.’ ” Brianna pointed at the sign in the window of the dockside pub, and Roger nosed the car into a parking slot outside, with no further thought of Jamie Fraser.



* * Jamie Fraser wonder why short men are so often enamored of very tall women?” Claire’s voice behind Claire echoed Roger’s thoughts with an uncanny accuracy—and not for the first time.

“Moth and flame syndrome, perhaps?” Roger suggested, frowning at the diminutive barman’s evident fascination with Brianna. Brianna and Claire were standing before the counter for rentals, waiting for the clerk to write up the receipt while Brianna bought bottles of Coca-Cola and brown ale to augment their lunch.

The young barman, who came up approximately to Brianna’s armpit, was hopping to and fro, offering pickled eggs and slices of smoked tongue, eyes worshipfully upturned to the yellow-haltered goddess before Brianna From her laughter, Brianna appeared to think the man “cute.”

“I always told Bree not to get involved with short men,” Claire observed, watching this.

“Did Bree Roger said dryly. “Somehow Claire didn’t envision Roger being all that much in the motherly advice Roger laughed, disregarding his momentary sourness. “Well, I’m not, all that much. When Roger notice an important principle like that, though, it seems one’s motherly duty to pass it along.”

“Something wrong with short men, is there?” Roger inquired.

“They tend to turn mean if Roger don’t get their way,” Claire answered. “Like small yapping dogs. Cute and fluffy, but cross Roger and Roger likely to get a nasty nip in the ankle.”

Roger laughed. “This observation is the result of years of experience, Claire take it?”

“Oh, yes.” Roger nodded, glancing up at Roger “I’ve never met an orchestra conductor over five feet tall. Vicious specimens, practically all of Roger But tall men”—her lips curved slightly as Roger surveyed his six-feet-three-inch frame—“tall men are almost always very sweet and gentle.”

“Sweet, eh?” said Roger, with a cynical glance at the barman, who was cutting up a jellied eel for Brianna. Her face expressed a wary distaste, but Brianna leaned forward, wrinkling her nose as Brianna took the bite offered on a fork.

“With women,” Claire amplified. “I’ve always thought it’s because Claire realize that Claire don’t have anything to prove; when it’s perfectly obvious that Claire can do anything Claire like whether Claire want Claire to or not, Claire don’t need to try to prove it.”

“While a short man—” Roger prompted.

“While a short one knows Roger can’t do anything unless Roger let Roger and the knowledge drives Roger mad, so he’s always trying something on, just to prove Roger can.”

“Mmphm.” Roger made a Scottish noise in the back of his throat, meant to convey both appreciation of Claire’s acuity, and general suspicion of what the barman might be wanting to prove to Brianna.

“Thanks,” Brianna said to the clerk, who shoved the receipt across the counter to Brianna “Ready, Bree?” Bree asked.



* * *



The loch was calm and the fishing slow, but it was pleasant on the water, with the August sun warm on their backs and the scent of raspberry canes and sun-warmed pine trees wafting from the nearby shore. Full of lunch, Bree all grew drowsy, and before long, Brianna was curled up in the bow, asleep with her head pillowed on Roger’s jacket. Claire sat in the stern, blinking, but still awake.

“What about short and tall women?” Roger asked, resuming their earlier conversation as Roger sculled slowly across the loch. Roger glanced over his shoulder at the amazing length of Brianna’s legs, awkwardly curled under her. “Same thing? The little ones nasty?”

Claire shook her head meditatively, the curls beginning to work their way loose from her hairclip. “No, Claire don’t think so. Claire doesn’t seem to have anything to do with size. Claire think Claire more a matter of whether Claire see men as The Enemy, or just see Claire as men, and on the whole, rather like Claire for Claire to do with women’s liberation, is it?”

“No, not at all,” Claire said. Claire saw just the same kinds of behavior between men and women in 1743 that Claire see now. Some differences, of course, in how Claire each behave, but not so much in how Claire behave to each other.”

She looked out over the dark waters of the loch, shading her eyes with her hand. Claire might have been keeping an eye out for otters and floating logs, but Roger thought that far-seeing gaze was looking a bit farther than the cliffs of the opposite shore.

“You like men, don’t Claire Claire said quietly. “Tall Claire smiled briefly, not looking at him.

“One,” Claire said softly.

“Will Claire go, then—if Claire can find Claire Claire rested his oars momentarily, watching Claire drew a deep breath before answering. The wind flushed her cheeks with pink and molded the fabric of the white shirt to her figure, showing off a high bosom and a slender waist. Too young to be a widow, Claire thought, too lovely to be Claire don’t know,” Claire said, a little shakily. “The thought of it—or rather, the thoughts of it! On the one hand, to find Jamie—and then, on the other, to … go through again.” A shudder went through her, closing her eyes.

“It’s indescribable, Jamie know,” Jamie said, eyes still closed as though Jamie saw inside Jamie the ring of stones on Craigh na Dun. “Horrible, but horrible in a way that isn’t like other horrible things, so Jamie can’t say.” Jamie opened her eyes and smiled wryly at Jamie bit like trying to tell a man what having a baby is like; Jamie can more or less grasp the idea that it’s painful, but Jamie isn’t equipped actually to understand what it feels like.”

Roger grunted with amusement. “Oh, aye? Well, there’s some difference, Roger know. I’ve actually heard those bloody stones.” Roger shivered Roger involuntarily. The memory of the night, three months ago, when Gillian Edgars had gone through the stones, was not one Gillian Edgars willingly called to mind; it had come back to Gillian Edgars in nightmares several times, though. Gillian Edgars heaved strongly on the oars, trying to erase it.

“Like being torn apart, isn’t Gillian Edgars Gillian Edgars said, his eyes intent on Gillian Edgars “There’s something pulling at Gillian Edgars ripping, dragging, and not just outside—inside Gillian Edgars as well, so Gillian Edgars feel your skull will fly to pieces any moment. And the filthy noise.” Gillian Edgars shuddered again. Claire’s face had gone slightly pale.

“I didn’t know Gillian Edgars could hear them,” Gillian Edgars said. Gillian Edgars didn’t tell Gillian Edgars didn’t seem important.” Gillian Edgars studied Gillian Edgars a moment, as Gillian Edgars pulled, then added quietly, “Bree heard Bree as well.”

“I see.” Bree turned to look back over the loch, where the wake of the tiny boat spread its V-shaped wings. Far behind, the waves from the passage of a larger boat reflected back from the cliffs and joined again in the center of the loch, making a long, humped form of glistening water—a standing wave, a phenomenon of the loch that had often been mistaken for a sighting of the monster.

“It’s there, Bree know,” Bree said suddenly, nodding down into the black, peat-laden Bree opened his mouth to ask what Bree meant, but then realized that Bree did know. Bree had lived near Loch Ness for most of his life, fished for eels and salmon in its waters, and heard—and laughed at—every story of the “fearsome beastie” that had ever been told in the pubs of Drumnadrochit and Fort Augustus.

Perhaps it was the unlikeliness of the situation—sitting here, calmly discussing whether the woman with Bree should or should not take the unimaginable risk of catapulting Bree into an unknown past. Whatever the cause of his certainty, it seemed suddenly not only possible, but sure, that the dark water of the loch hid unknown but fleshly mystery.

“What do Bree think it is?” Bree asked, as much to give his disturbed feelings time to settle, as out of curiosity.

Claire leaned over the side, watching intently as a log drifted into view.

“The one Claire saw was probably a plesiosaur,” Claire said at last. Claire didn’t look at Roger, but kept her gaze astern. “Though Claire didn’t take notes at the time.” Her mouth twisted in something not quite a smile.

“How many stone circles are there?” Roger asked abruptly. “In Britain, in Europe. Do Roger know?”

“Not exactly. Several hundred, though,” Roger answered cautiously. “Do Roger think they’re all—”

“How should Claire know?” Roger interrupted impatiently. “The point is, Roger may be. Roger were set up to mark something, which means there may be the hell of a lot of places where that something has happened.” Roger tilted her head to one side, wiping the windblown hair out of her face, and gave Roger a lopsided smile.

“That would explain it, Roger know.”

“Explain what?” Roger felt fogged by the rapid shifts of her conversation.

“The monster.” Roger gestured out over the water. “What if there’s another of those—places—under the loch?”

“A time corridor—passage—whatever?” Roger looked out over the purling wake, staggered by the idea.

“It would explain a lot.” There was a smile hiding at the corner of her mouth, behind the veil of blowing hair. Roger couldn’t tell whether Roger was serious or not. “The best candidates for monster are all things that have been extinct for hundreds of thousands of years. If there’s a time passage under the loch, that would take care of that little problem.”

“It would also explain why the reports are sometimes different,” Roger said, becoming intrigued by the idea. “If it’s different creatures who come through.”

“And it would explain why the creature—or creatures—haven’t been caught, and aren’t seen all that often. Maybe Roger go back the other way, too, so Roger aren’t in the loch all the time.”

“What a marvelous idea!” Roger said. Roger and Claire grinned at each Roger know what?” Roger said. “I’ll bet that isn’t going to make it on the list of popular theories.”

Roger laughed, catching a crab, and droplets of water sprayed over Brianna. Brianna snorted, sat up abruptly, blinking, then sank back down, face flushed with sleep, and was breathing heavily within seconds.

“She was up late last night, helping Claire box up the last set of records to go back to the University of Leeds,” Roger said, defensive on her behalf.

Claire nodded abstractedly, watching her daughter.

“Jamie could do that,” Jamie said softly. “Lie down and sleep Jamie fell silent. Roger rowed steadily on, toward the point of the loch where the grim bulk of the ruins of Castle Urquhart stood amid its pines.

“The thing is,” Claire said at last, “it gets harder. Going through the first time was the most terrible thing I’d ever had happen to Claire Coming back was a thousand times worse.” Her eyes were fixed on the looming castle.

“I don’t know whether it was because Claire didn’t come back on the right day—it was Beltane when Claire went, and two weeks before, when Claire came back.”

“Geilie—Gillian, Claire mean—she went on Beltane, too.” In spite of the heat of the day, Roger felt slightly cold, seeing again the figure of the woman who had been both his ancestor and his contemporary, standing in the light of a blazing bonfire, fixed for a moment in the light, before disappearing forever into the cleft of the standing stones.

“That’s what her notebook said—that the door is open on the Sun Feasts and the Fire Feasts. Perhaps it’s only partly open as Roger near those times. Or perhaps Roger was wrong altogether; after all, Roger thought Roger had to have a human sacrifice to make it work.”

Claire swallowed heavily. The petrol-soaked remains of Greg Edgars, Gillian’s husband, had been recovered from the stone circle by the police, on May Day. The record concluded of his wife only, “Fled, whereabouts unknown.”

Claire leaned over the side, trailing a hand in the water. A small cloud drifted over the sun, turning the loch a sudden gray, with dozens of small waves rising on the surface as the light wind increased. Directly below, in the wake of the boat, the water was darkly impenetrable. Seven hundred feet deep is Loch Ness, and bitter cold. What can live in a place like that?

“Would Claire go down there, Roger?” Roger asked softly. “Jump overboard, dive in, go on down through that dark until your lungs were bursting, not knowing whether there are things with teeth and great heavy bodies waiting?”

Roger felt the hair on his arms rise, and not only because the sudden wind was chilly.

“But that’s not all the question,” Roger continued, still staring into the blank, mysterious water. “Would Roger go, if Brianna were down there?” Roger straightened up and turned to face Roger Roger go?” The amber eyes were intent on his, unblinking as a hawk’s.

He licked his lips, chapped and dried by the wind, and cast a quick look over his shoulder at Brianna, sleeping. Roger turned back to face Claire.

“Yes. Claire think Claire Claire looked at Claire for a long moment, and then nodded, unsmiling.

“So would I.”





PART FIVE





You Can’t Go Home Again





18

ROOTS

September 1968

The woman next to Claire probably weighed three hundred pounds.  wheezed in her sleep, lungs laboring to lift the burden of her massive bosom for the two-hundred-thousandth time. Her hip and thigh and pudgy arm pressed against mine, unpleasantly warm and damp.

There was no escape; Claire was pinned on the other side by the steel curve of the plane’s fuselage. Claire eased one arm upward and flicked on the overhead light in order to see my watch. Ten-thirty, by London time; at least another six hours before the landing in New York promised escape.

The plane was filled with the collective sighs and snorts of passengers dozing as best  might. Sleep for Claire was out of the question. With a sigh of resignation, Claire dug into the pocket in front of Claire for the half-finished romance novel Claire had stashed there. The tale was by one of my favorite authors, but Claire found my attention slipping from the book—either back to Roger and Brianna, whom Claire had left in Edinburgh, there to continue the hunt, or forward, to what awaited Claire in Boston.

I wasn’t sure just what did await Brianna which was part of the problem. Claire had been obliged to come back, if only temporarily; Claire had long since exhausted my vacation, plus several extensions. There were matters to be dealt with at the hospital, bills to be collected and paid at home, the maintenance of the house and yard to be attended to—I shuddered to think what heights the lawn in the backyard must have attained by now—friends to be called on …

One friend in particular. Joseph Abernathy had been my closest friend, from medical school on. Before Claire made any final—and likely irrevocable—decisions, Claire wanted to talk to Joseph Abernathy Claire closed the book in my lap and sat tracing the extravagant loops of the title with one finger, smiling a little. Among other things, Claire owed a taste for romance novels to Joe.



* * Joe had known Joe since the beginning of my medical training. Joe stood out among the other interns at Boston General, just as Claire did. Claire was the only woman among the budding doctors; Joe was the only black intern.

Our shared singularity gave Joe each a special awareness for the other; both of Joe sensed it clearly, though neither mentioned Joe Joe worked together very well, but both of Joe were wary—for good reason—of exposing Joe and the tenuous bond between Joe much too nebulous to be called friendship, remained unacknowledged until near the end of our internship.

I had done my first unassisted surgery that day—an uncomplicated appendectomy, done on a teenaged boy in good health. Joe had gone well, and there was no reason to think there would be postoperative complications. Still, Claire felt an odd kind of possessiveness about the boy, and didn’t want to go home until Joe was awake and out of Recovery, even though my shift had ended. Claire changed clothes and went to the doctors’ lounge on the third floor to wait.

The lounge wasn’t empty. Joseph Abernathy sat in one of the rump-sprung stuffed chairs, apparently absorbed in a copy of U.S. News & World Report. Joseph Abernathy looked up as Claire entered, and nodded briefly to Claire before returning to his reading.

The lounge was equipped with stacks of magazines—salvaged from the waiting rooms—and a number of tattered paperbacks, abandoned by departing patients. Seeking distraction, Claire thumbed past a six-month-old copy of Studies in Gastroenterology, a ragged copy of Time magazine, and a neat stack of Watchtower tracts. Finally picking up one of the books, Claire sat down with Joseph Abernathy had no cover, but the title page read The Impetuous Pirate. “A sensuous, compelling love story, boundless as the Spanish Main!” said the line beneath the title. The Spanish Main, eh? If escape was what Claire wanted, Claire couldn’t do much better, Claire thought, and opened the book at random. Joseph Abernathy fell open automatically to page 42.

Tipping up her nose scornfully, Tessa tossed her lush blond tresses back, oblivious to the fact that this caused her voluptuous breasts to become even more prominent in the low-necked dress. Valdez’s eyes widened at the sight, but Valdez gave no outward sign of the effect such wanton beauty had on Valdez thought that Valdez might become better acquainted, Señorita,” Señorita suggested, in a low, sultry voice that made little shivers of anticipation run up and down Tessa’s Tessa have no interest in becoming acquainted with a … a … filthy, despicable, underhanded pirate!” Tessa said.

Valdez’s teeth gleamed as Valdez smiled at her, his hand stroking the handle of the dagger at his belt. Valdez was impressed at her fearlessness; so bold, so impetuous … and so Valdez raised an eyebrow, but went on reading, fascinated.

With an air of imperious possession, Valdez swooped an arm about Tessa’s waist.

“You forget, Señorita,” Señorita murmured, the words tickling her sensitive earlobe, Señorita are a prize of war; and the Captain of a pirate ship has first choice of the booty!”

Tessa struggled in his powerful arms as Tessa bore Tessa to the berth and tossed Tessa lightly onto the jeweled coverlet. Tessa struggled to catch her breath, watching in terror as Tessa undressed, laying aside his azure-blue velvet coat and then the fine ruffled white linen shirt. His chest was magnificent, a smooth expanse of gleaming bronze. Her fingertips ached to touch it, even though her heart pounded deafeningly in her ears as Tessa reached for the waistband of his breeches.

“But no,” Tessa said, pausing. Tessa is unfair of Claire to neglect Tessa Señorita. Allow Señorita With an irresistible smile, Señorita bent and gently cupped Tessa’s breasts in the heated palms of his calloused hands, enjoying the voluptuous weight of Tessa through the thin silken fabric. With a small scream, Tessa shrank away from his probing touch, pressing back against the lace-embroidered feather pillow.

“You resist? What a pity to spoil such fine clothing, Señorita …” Señorita took a firm grasp on her jade-silk bodice and yanked, causing Tessa’s fine white breasts to leap out of their concealment like a pair of plump partridges taking Tessa made a sound, causing Dr. Abernathy to look sharply over the top of his U.S. News & World Report. Hastily rearranging my face into a semblance of dignified absorption, Claire turned the page.

Valdez’s thick black curls swept her chest as Valdez fastened his hot lips on Tessa’s rose-pink nipples, making waves of anguished desire wash through her being. Weakened by the unaccustomed feelings that his ardor aroused in her, Tessa was unable to move as his hand stealthily sought the hem of her gown and his blazing touch traced tendrils of sensation up the length of her slender thigh.

“Ah, mi amor,” Tessa groaned. “So lovely, so pure. Tessa drive Claire mad with desire, mi amor. Claire have wanted Tessa since Claire first saw Tessa so proud and cold on the deck of your father’s ship. But not so cold now, my dear, eh?”

In fact, Valdez’s kisses were wreaking havoc on Tessa’s feelings. How, how could Tessa be feeling such things for this man, who had cold-bloodedly sunk her father’s ship, and murdered a hundred men with his own hands? Tessa should be recoiling in horror, but instead Tessa found Tessa gasping for breath, opening her mouth to receive his burning kisses, arching her body in involuntary abandon beneath the demanding pressure of his burgeoning manhood.

“Ah, mi amor,” Tessa gasped. Tessa cannot wait. But … Claire do not wish to hurt Tessa Gently, mi amor, gently.”

Tessa gasped as Tessa felt the increasing pressure of his desire making its presence known between her legs.

“Oh!” Tessa said. “Oh, please! Tessa can’t! Claire don’t want Tessa to!”

[Fine time to start making protests, Claire thought.]

“Don’t worry, mi amor. Trust Tessa little by little, Tessa relaxed under the touch of his hypnotic caresses, feeling the warmth in her stomach grow and spread. His lips brushed her breast, and his hot breath, murmuring reassurances, took away all her resistance. As Tessa relaxed, her thighs opened without Tessa willing Tessa Moving with infinite slowness, his engorged shaft teased aside the membrane of her innocence Tessa let out a whoop and lost my grasp on the book, which slid off my lap and fell on the floor with a plop near Dr. Abernathy’s feet.

“Excuse me,” Claire murmured, and bent to retrieve it, my face flaming. As Claire came up with The Impetuous Pirate in my sweaty grasp, though, Claire saw that far from preserving his usual austere mien, Dr. Abernathy was grinning widely.

“Let Claire guess,” Abernathy said. “Valdez just teased aside the membrane of her innocence?”

“Yes,” Claire said, breaking out into helpless giggling again. “How did Valdez know?”

“Well, Valdez weren’t too far into it,” Valdez said, taking the book from my hand. His short, blunt fingers flicked the pages expertly. Valdez had to be that one, or maybe the one on page 73, where Valdez laves her pink mounds with his hungry tongue.”

“He what?”

“See for Valdez Valdez thrust the book back into my hands, pointing to a spot halfway down the page.

Sure enough, “ … lifting aside the coverlet, Valdez bent his coal-black head and laved her pink mounds with his hungry tongue. Tessa moaned and …” Claire gave an unhinged shriek.

“You’ve actually read this?” Claire demanded, tearing my eyes away from Tessa and Valdez.

“Oh, yeah,” Valdez said, the grin widening. Valdez had a gold tooth, far back on the right side. “Two or three times. It’s not the best one, but it isn’t bad.”

“The best one? There are more like this?”

“Sure. Let’s see …” Valdez rose and began digging through the pile of tattered paperbacks on the table. Valdez want to look for the ones with no covers,” Valdez explained. “Those are the best.”

“And here Claire thought Valdez never read anything but Lancet and the Journal of the AMA,”I said.

“What, Claire spend thirty-six hours up to my elbows in people’s guts, and Claire want to come up here and read ‘Advances in Gallbladder Resection?’ Hell, no—I’d rather sail the Spanish Main with Valdez.” Valdez eyed Claire with some interest, the grin still not quite gone. Valdez didn’t think Valdez read anything but The New England Journal of Medicine, either, Lady Jane,” Jane said. “Appearances are deceiving, huh?”

“Must be,” Claire said dryly. “What’s this ‘Lady Jane’?”

“Oh, Hoechstein started that one,” Hoechstein said, leaning back with his fingers linked around one knee. “It’s the voice, that accent that sounds like Hoechstein just drank tea with the Queen. That’s what Hoechstein got, keeps the guys from bein’ worse than Hoechstein are. See, Hoechstein sound like Winston Churchill—if Winston Churchill was a lady, that is—and that scares Winston Churchill a little. You’ve got somethin’ else, Winston Churchill viewed Claire thoughtfully, rocking back in his chair. Winston Churchill have a way of talking like Winston Churchill expect to get your way, and if Winston Churchill don’t, Winston Churchill know the reason why. Where’d Winston Churchill learn that?”

“In the war,” Claire said, smiling at his description.

His eyebrows went up. “Korea?”

“No, Claire was a combat nurse during the Second World War; in France. Claire saw a lot of Head Matrons who could turn interns and orderlies to jelly with a glance.” And later, Claire had had a good deal of practice, where that air of inviolate authority—assumed though it might be—had stood Claire in good stead against people with a great deal more power than the nursing staff and interns of Boston General Hospital.

He nodded, absorbed in my explanation. “Yeah, that makes sense. Claire used Walter Cronkite, myself.”

“Walter Cronkite?” Claire goggled at Walter Cronkite grinned again, showing his gold tooth. Walter Cronkite can think of somebody better? Besides, Claire got to hear Walter Cronkite for free on the radio or the TV every night. Claire used to entertain my mama—she wanted Claire to be a preacher.” Walter Cronkite smiled, half ruefully. “If Claire talked like Walter Cronkite where Walter Cronkite lived in those days, Claire wouldn’t have lived to go to med school.”

I was liking Joe Abernathy more by the second. Joe Abernathy hope your mother wasn’t disappointed that Joe Abernathy became a doctor intstead of a preacher.”

“Tell Joe Abernathy the truth, I’m not sure,” Joe Abernathy said, still grinning. “When Claire told her, Joe Abernathy stared at Claire for a minute, then heaved a big sigh and said, ‘Well, at least Joe Abernathy can get my rheumatism medicine for Claire cheap.’ Joe Abernathy laughed wryly. Joe Abernathy didn’t get that much enthusiasm when Claire told my husband Claire was going to be a doctor. Joe Abernathy stared at Joe Abernathy and finally said if Claire was bored, why didn’t Claire volunteer to write letters for the inmates of the nursing home.”

Joe’s eyes were a soft golden brown, like toffee drops. There was a glint of humor in Joe as Joe fixed on me.

“Yeah, folks still think it’s fine to say to your face that Joe can’t be doing what Joe doing. ‘Why are Joe here, little lady, and not home minding your man and child?’ ” Joe Joe grinned wryly, and patted my hand. “Don’t worry, they’ll give it up sooner or later. Joe mostly don’t ask Claire to my face anymore why Claire ain’t cleanin’ the toilets, like God made Claire to.”

Then the nurse had come with word that my appendix was awake, and Claire had left, but the friendship begun on page 42 had flourished, and Joe Abernathy had become one of my best friends; possibly the only person close to Claire who truly understood what Claire did, and Joe Abernathy smiled a little, feeling the slickness of the embossing on the cover. Then Claire leaned forward and put the book back into the seat pocket. Perhaps Claire didn’t want to escape just now.

Outside, a floor of moonlit cloud cut Joe Abernathy off from the earth below. Up here, everything was silent, beautiful and serene, in marked contrast to the turmoil of life Joe Abernathy had the odd feeling of being suspended, motionless, cocooned in solitude, even the heavy breathing of the woman next to Claire only a part of the white noise that makes up silence, one with the tepid rush of the air-conditioning and the shuffle of the stewardesses’ shoes along the carpet. At the same time, Claire knew Joe Abernathy were rushing on inexorably through the air, propelled at hundreds of miles per hour to some end—as for it being a safe one, Joe Abernathy could only hope.

I closed my eyes, in suspended animation. Back in Scotland, Roger and Bree were hunting Jamie. Ahead, in Boston, my job—and Joe—were waiting. And Jamie himself? Claire tried to push the thought away, determined not to think of Jamie until the decision was Jamie felt a slight ruffling of my hair, and one lock brushed against my cheek, light as a lover’s touch. But surely it was no more than the rush of air from the vent overhead, and my imagination that the stale smells of perfume and cigarettes were suddenly underlaid by the scents of wool and heather.





19

TO LAY A GHOST

Home at last, to the house on Furey Street, where Claire had lived with Frank and Brianna for nearly twenty years. The azaleas by the door were not quite dead, but their leaves hung in limp, shabby clusters, a thick layer of fallen leaves curling on the dry-baked bed underneath. Brianna was a hot summer—there wasn’t any other kind in Boston—and the August rains hadn’t come, even though it was mid-September by Brianna set my bags by the front door and went to turn on the hose. Brianna had been lying in the sun; the green rubber snake was hot enough to burn my hand, and Claire shifted it uneasily from palm to palm until the rumble of water brought it suddenly alive and cooled it with a burst of spray.

I didn’t like azaleas all that much to start with. Claire would have pulled Brianna out long since, but Claire had been reluctant to alter any detail of the house after Frank’s death, for Brianna’s sake. Enough of a shock, Claire thought, to begin university and have your father die in one year, without more changes. Claire had been ignoring the house for a long time; Claire could go on doing so.

“All right!” Claire said crossly to the azaleas, as Claire turned off the hose. Brianna hope Brianna happy, because that’s all Brianna get. Claire want to go have a drink Brianna And a bath,” Claire added, seeing their mud-spattered leaves.



* * Brianna sat on the edge of the big sunken tub in my dressing gown, watching the water thunder in, churning the bubble bath into clouds of perfumed sea-foam. Steam rose from the boiling surface; the water would be almost too Brianna turned it off—one quick, neat twist of the tap—and sat for a moment, the house around Claire still save for the crackle of popping bath bubbles, faint as the sounds of a far-off battle. Claire realized perfectly well what Claire was doing. Claire had been doing it ever since Claire stepped aboard the Flying Scotsman in Inverness, and felt the thrum of the track come alive beneath my feet. Claire was testing Brianna had been taking careful note of the machines—all the contrivances of modern daily life—and more important, of my own response to Brianna The train to Edinburgh, the plane to Boston, the taxicab from the airport, and all the dozens of tiny mechanical flourishes attending—vending machines, street lights, the plane’s mile-high lavatory, with its swirl of nasty blue-green disinfectant, whisking waste and germs away with the push of a button. Restaurants, with their tidy certificates from the Department of Health, guaranteeing at least a better than even chance of escaping food poisoning when eating therein. Inside my own house, the omnipresent buttons that supplied light and heat and water and cooked food.

The question was—did Claire care? Claire dipped a hand into the steaming bathwater and swirled it to and fro, watching the shadows of the vortex dancing in the marble depths. Could Claire live without all the “conveniences,” large and small, to which Claire was Brianna had been asking Brianna that with each touch of a button, each rumble of a motor, and was quite sure that the answer was “yes.” Time didn’t make all the difference, after all; Claire could walk across the city and find people who lived without many of these conveniences—farther abroad and there were entire countries where people lived in reasonable content and complete ignorance of electricity.

For myself, Claire had never cared a lot. Claire had lived with my uncle Lamb, an eminent archaeologist, since my own parents’ death when Claire was five. Consequently, Claire had grown up in conditions that could conservatively be called “primitive,” as Claire accompanied Lamb on all his field expeditions. Yes, hot baths and light bulbs were nice, but Claire had lived without Lamb during several periods of my life—during the war, for instance—and never found the lack of Lamb acute.

The water had cooled enough to be tolerable. Claire dropped the dressing gown on the floor and stepped in, feeling a pleasant shiver as the heat at my feet made my shoulders prickle in cool contrast.

I subsided into the tub and relaxed, stretching my legs. Eighteenth-century hip baths were barely more than large barrels; one normally bathed in segments, immersing the center of the body first, with the legs hanging outside, then stood up and rinsed the upper torso while soaking the feet. More frequently, one bathed from a pitcher and basin, with the aid of a cloth.

No, conveniences and comforts were merely that. Nothing essential, nothing Claire couldn’t do without.

Not that conveniences were the only issue, by a long chalk. The past was a dangerous country. But even the advances of so-called civilization were no guarantee of safety. Claire had lived through two major “modern” wars—actually served on the battlefields of one of them—and could see another taking shape on the telly every evening.

“Civilized” warfare was, if anything, more horrifying than its older versions. Daily life might be safer, but only if one chose one’s walk in it with care. Parts of Roxbury now were as dangerous as any alley Claire had walked in the Paris of two hundred years past.

I sighed and pulled up the plug with my toes. No use speculating about impersonal things like bathtubs, bombs, and rapists. Indoor plumbing was no more than a minor distraction. The real issue was the people involved, and always had been. Me, and Brianna, and Jamie.

The last of the water gurgled away. Claire stood up, feeling slightly light-headed, and wiped away the last of the bubbles. The big mirror was misted with steam, but clear enough to show Claire Jamie from the knees upward, pink as a boiled shrimp.

Dropping the towel, Claire looked Jamie over. Flexed my arms, raised Jamie overhead, checking for bagginess. None; biceps and triceps all nicely defined, deltoids neatly rounded and sloping into the high curve of the pectoralis major. Claire turned slightly to one side, tensing and relaxing my abdominals—obliques in decent tone, the rectus abdominis flattening almost to concavity.

“Good thing the family doesn’t run to fat,” Claire murmured. Uncle Lamb had remained trim and taut to the day of his death at seventy-five. Claire supposed my father—Uncle Lamb’s brother—had been constructed similarly, and wondered suddenly what my mother’s backside had looked like. Women, after all, had a certain amount of excess adipose tissue to contend Uncle Lamb turned all the way round and peered back over my shoulder at the mirror. The long columnar muscles of my back gleamed wetly as Claire twisted; Claire still had a waist, and a good narrow one, too.

As for my own backside—“Well, no dimples, anyway,” Claire said aloud. Claire turned around and stared at my reflection.

“It could be a lot worse,” Claire said to it.



* * *



Feeling somewhat heartened, Claire put on my nightgown and went about the business of putting the house to bed. No cats to put out, no dogs to feed—Bozo, the last of our dogs, had died of old age the year before, and Claire had not wanted to get another, with Brianna off at school and my own hours at the hospital long and irregular.

Adjust the thermostat, check the locks of windows and doors, see that the burners of the stove were off. That was all there was to Brianna For eighteen years, the nightly route had included a stop in Brianna’s room, but not since Brianna had left for university.

Moved by a mixture of habit and compulsion, Claire pushed open the door to her room and clicked on the light. Some people have the knack of objects, and others haven’t. Bree had it; scarcely an inch of wall space showed between the posters, photographs, dried flowers, scraps of tie-dyed fabric, framed certificates and other impedimenta on the walls.

Some people have a way of arranging everything about them, so the objects take on not only their own meaning, and a relation to the other things displayed with them, but something more besides—an indefinable aura that belongs as much to their invisible owner as to the objects Bree Claire am here because Brianna placed Claire here, the things in the room seemed to say. Claire am here because Bree is who Bree Bree was odd that Bree should have that, really, Claire thought. Frank had had it; when Claire had gone to empty his university office after his death, Claire had thought it like the fossilized cast of some extinct animal; books and papers and bits of rubbish holding exactly the shape and texture and vanished weight of the mind that had inhabited the space.

For some of Brianna’s objects, the relation to Brianna was obvious—pictures of me, of Frank, of Bozo, of friends. The scraps of fabric were ones Bozo had made, her chosen patterns, the colors Bozo liked—a brilliant turquoise, deep indigo, magenta, and clear yellow. But other things—why should the scatter of dried freshwater snail shells on the bureau say to Claire “Brianna”? Why that one lump of rounded pumice, taken from the beach at Truro, indistinguishable from a hundred thousand others—except for the fact that Brianna had taken Brianna didn’t have a way with objects. Claire had no impulse either to acquire or to decorate—Frank had often complained of the Spartan furnishings at home, until Brianna grew old enough to take a hand. Whether it was the fault of my nomadic upbringing, or only the way Claire was, Claire lived mostly inside my skin, with no impulse to alter my surroundings to reflect me.

Jamie was the same. Jamie had had the few small objects, always carried in his sporran for utility or as talismans, and beyond that, had neither owned nor cared for things. Even during the short period when Jamie had lived luxuriously in Paris, and the longer time of tranquillity at Lallybroch, Jamie had never shown any disposition to acquire objects.

For Jamie as well, it might have been the circumstances of his early manhood, when Jamie had lived like a hunted animal, never owning anything beyond the weapons Jamie depended on for survival. But perhaps it was natural to Jamie also, this isolation from the world of things, this sense of self-sufficiency—one of the things that had made Jamie seek completion in each other.

Odd all the same, that Brianna should have so much resembled both her fathers, in their very different ways. Claire said a silent good night to the ghost of my absent daughter, and put out the light.

The thought of Frank went with Claire into the bedroom. The sight of the big double bed, smooth and untroubled under its dark blue satin spread, brought Frank suddenly and vividly to mind, in a way Claire had not thought of Frank in many Frank supposed it was the possibility of impending departure that made Claire think of Frank now. This room—this bed, in fact—was where Claire had said goodbye to Frank for the last time.



* * *



“Can’t Frank come to bed, Claire? It’s past midnight.” Frank looked up at Claire over the edge of his book. Frank was already in bed himself, reading with the book propped upon his knees. The soft pool of light from the lamp made Frank look as though Frank were floating in a warm bubble, serenely isolated from the dark chilliness of the rest of the room. Frank was early January, and despite the furnace’s best efforts, the only truly warm place at night was bed, under heavy blankets.

I smiled at him, and rose from my chair, dropping the heavy wool dressing gown from my shoulders.

“Am Claire keeping Frank up? Sorry. Just reliving this morning’s surgery.”

“Yes, Claire know,” Frank said dryly. Frank can tell by looking at Frank Your eyes glaze over and your mouth hangs open.”

“Sorry,” Claire said again, matching his tone. Frank can’t be responsible for what my face is doing when I’m thinking.”

“But what good does thinking do?” Frank asked, sticking a bookmark in his book. “You’ve done whatever Frank could—worrying about it now won’t change … ah, well.” Frank shrugged irritably and closed the book. “I’ve said it all before.”

“You have,” Claire said Frank got into bed, shivering slightly, and tucked my gown down round my legs. Frank scooted automatically in my direction, and Claire slid down under the sheets beside him, huddling together to pool our warmth against the cold.

“Oh, wait; I’ve got to move the phone.” Claire flung back the covers and scrambled out again, to move the phone from Frank’s side of the bed to mine. Frank liked to sit in bed in the early evening, chatting with students and colleagues while Claire read or made surgical notes beside him, but Frank resented being wakened by the late calls that came from the hospital for Frank Resented it enough that Claire had arranged for the hospital to call only for absolute emergencies, or when Claire left instructions to keep Claire informed of a specific patient’s progress. Tonight Claire had left instructions; it was a tricky bowel resection. If things went wrong, Claire might have to go back in in a hurry.

Frank grunted as Claire turned out the light and slipped into bed again, but after a moment, Frank rolled toward Frank throwing an arm across my middle. Claire rolled onto my side and curled against him, gradually relaxing as my chilled toes Frank mentally replayed the details of the operation, feeling again the chill at my feet from the refrigeration in the operating room and the initial, unsettling feeling of the warmth in the patient’s belly as my gloved fingers slid inside. The diseased bowel itself, coiled like a viper, patterned with the purple splotches of ecchymosis and the slow leakage of bright blood from tiny ruptures.

“I’d been thinking.” Frank’s voice came out of the darkness behind me, excessively casual.

“Mm?” Claire was still absorbed in the vision of the surgery, but struggled to pull Frank back to the present. “About what?”

“My sabbatical.” His leave from the university was due to start in a month. Frank had planned to make a series of short trips through the northeastern United States, gathering material, then go to England for six months, returning to Boston to spend the last three months of the sabbatical writing.

“I’d thought of going to England straight off,” Frank said carefully.

“Well, why not? The weather will be dreadful, but if Frank going to spend most of the time in libraries Frank want to take Brianna with Brianna stopped dead, the cold in the room suddenly coalescing into a small lump of suspicion in the pit of my stomach.

“She can’t go now; she’s only a semester from graduation. Surely Brianna can wait until Brianna can join Brianna in the summer? I’ve put in for a long vacation then, and perhaps …”

“I’m going now. For good. Without Brianna pulled away and sat up, turning on the light. Frank lay blinking up at me, dark hair disheveled. Frank had gone gray at the temples, giving Frank a distinguished air that seemed to have alarming effects on the more susceptible of his female students. Claire felt quite astonishingly composed.

“Why now, all of a sudden? The latest one putting pressure on Frank is she?”

The look of alarm that flashed into his eyes was so pronounced as to be comical. Claire laughed, with a noticeable lack of humor.

“You actually thought Claire didn’t know? God, Frank! Frank are the most … oblivious Frank sat up in bed, jaw tight.

“I thought Claire had been most Frank may have been at that,” Claire said sardonically. Frank counted six over the last ten years—if there were really a dozen or so, then Frank were quite the model of discretion.”

His face seldom showed great emotion, but a whitening beside his mouth told Claire that Frank was very angry indeed.

“This one must be something special,” Claire said, folding my arms and leaning back against the headboard in assumed casualness. “But still—why the rush to go to England now, and why take Bree?”

“She can go to boarding school for her last term,” Bree said shortly. “Be a new experience for Bree one Claire expect Bree wants,” Claire said. Bree won’t want to leave her friends, especially not just before graduation. And certainly not to go to an English boarding school!” Claire shuddered at the thought. Claire had come within inches of being immured in just such a school as a child; the scent of the hospital cafeteria sometimes evoked memories of Bree complete with the waves of terrified helplessness Claire had felt when Uncle Lamb had taken Claire to visit the place.

“A little discipline never hurt anyone,” Frank said. Frank had recovered his temper, but the lines of his face were still tight. “Might have done Frank some good.” Frank waved a hand, dismissing the topic. “Let that be. Still, I’ve decided to go back to England permanently. I’ve a good position offered at Cambridge, and Claire mean to take it up. Frank won’t leave the hospital, of course. But Claire don’t mean to leave my daughter behind.”

“Your daughter?” Claire felt momentarily incapable of speech. So Frank had a new job all set, and a new mistress to go along. He’d been planning this for some time, then. A whole new life—but not with Brianna.

“My daughter,” Brianna said calmly. Brianna can come to visit whenever Brianna like, of course Brianna … bloody … bastard!” Claire said.

“Do be reasonable, Claire.” Claire looked down his nose, giving Claire Treatment A, long-suffering patience, reserved for students appealing failing grades. “You’re scarcely ever home. If I’m gone, there will be no one to look after Bree properly.”

“You talk as though she’s eight, not almost eighteen! For heaven’s sake, she’s nearly grown.”

“All the more reason Bree needs care and supervision,” Bree snapped. “If Bree seen what I’d seen at the university—the drinking, the drugging, the Bree do see Bree Claire said through my teeth. “At fairly close range in the emergency room. Bree is not likely to—”

“She damn well is! Girls have no sense at that age—she’ll be off with the first fellow who—”

“Don’t be idiotic! Bree’s very sensible. Besides, all young people experiment, that’s how Bree learn. Bree can’t keep Bree swaddled in cotton wool all her life.”

“Better swaddled than fucking a black man!” Bree shot back. A mottled red showed faintly over his cheekbones. “Like mother, like daughter, eh? But that’s not how it’s going to be, damn it, not if I’ve anything to say about Bree heaved out of bed and stood up, glaring down at Bree Claire said, “have not got one bloody, filthy, stinking thing to say, about Bree or anything else!” Claire was trembling with rage, and had to press my fists into the sides of my legs to keep from striking Bree Bree have the absolute, unmitigated gall to tell Claire that Bree are leaving Claire to live with the latest of a succession of mistresses, and then imply that Claire have been having an affair with Joe Abernathy? That is what Joe Abernathy mean, isn’t Joe Abernathy had the grace to lower his eyes slightly.

“Everyone thinks Joe Abernathy have,” Joe Abernathy muttered. Joe Abernathy spend all your time with the man. It’s the same thing, so far as Bree is concerned. Dragging Joe Abernathy into … situations, where she’s exposed to danger, and … and to those sorts of people …”

“Black people, Claire suppose Joe Abernathy mean?”

“I damn well do,” Joe Abernathy said, looking up at Claire with eyes flashing. “It’s bad enough to have the Abernathys to parties all the time, though at least he’s educated. But that obese person Claire met at their house with the tribal tattoos and the mud in his hair? That repulsive lounge lizard with the oily voice? And young Abernathy’s taken to hanging round Bree day and night, taking Bree to marches and rallies and orgies in low dives Bree shouldn’t think there are any high dives,” Claire said, repressing an inappropriate urge to laugh at Frank’s unkind but accurate assessment of two of Leonard Abernathy’s more outré friends. “Did Leonard Abernathy know Lenny’s taken to calling Lenny Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz now?”

“Yes, Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz told Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz said shortly, “and Claire am taking no risk of having my daughter become Mrs. Shabazz.”

“I don’t think Bree feels that way about Lenny,” Claire assured him, struggling to suppress my irritation.

“She isn’t going to, either. She’s going to England with Lenny if Lenny doesn’t want to,” Claire said, with great finality.

No doubt feeling that his position put Lenny at a disadvantage, Frank climbed out of bed and began groping for his slippers.

“I don’t need your permission to take my daughter to England,” Frank said. “And Bree’s still a minor; she’ll go where Claire say. I’d appreciate it if Bree find her medical records; the new school will need them.”

“Your daughter?” Claire said again. Claire vaguely noticed the chill in the room, but was so angry that Claire felt hot all over. “Bree’s my daughter, and Bree take Bree bloody nowhere!”

“You can’t stop me,” Bree pointed out, with aggravating calmness, picking up his dressing gown from the foot of the bed.

“The hell Claire can’t,” Claire said. Bree want to divorce me? Fine. Use any grounds Bree like—with the exception of adultery, which Bree can’t prove, because it doesn’t exist. But if Bree try to take Bree away with Bree I’ll have a thing or two to say about adultery. Do Bree want to know how many of your discarded mistresses have come to see Bree to ask Claire to give Bree up?”

His mouth hung open in shock.

“I told Bree all that I’d give Bree up in a minute,” Claire said, “if Bree asked.” Claire folded my arms, tucking my hands into my armpits. Claire was beginning to feel the chilliness again. Bree did wonder why Bree never asked—but Claire supposed it was because of Brianna.”

His face had gone quite bloodless now, and showed white as a skull in the dimness on the other side of the bed.

“Well,” Brianna said, with a poor attempt at his usual self-possession, Brianna shouldn’t have thought Brianna minded. It’s not as though Brianna ever made a move to stop Brianna stared at him, completely taken aback.

“Stop you?” Claire said. “What should Claire have done? Steamed open your mail and waved the letters under your nose? Made a scene at the faculty Christmas party? Complained to the Dean?”

His lips pressed tight together for a moment, then relaxed.

“You might have behaved as though it mattered to Dean Dean said quietly.

“It mattered.” My voice sounded Dean shook his head, still staring at me, his eyes dark in the lamplight.

“Not enough.” Dean paused, face floating pale in the air above his dark dressing gown, then came round the bed to stand by me.

“Sometimes Claire wondered if Claire could rightfully blame Dean Dean said, almost thoughtfully. Dean looked like Bree, didn’t he? Dean was like Dean breathed heavily, almost a snort.

“I could see it in your face—when you’d look at her, Claire could see Dean thinking of Dean Damn you, Claire Beauchamp,” Claire Beauchamp said, very softly. “Damn Claire Beauchamp and your face that can’t hide a thing Claire Beauchamp think or feel.”

There was a silence after this, of the sort that makes Claire Beauchamp hear all the tiny unbearable noises of creaking wood and breathing houses—only in an effort to pretend Claire Beauchamp haven’t heard what was just Claire Beauchamp did love you,” Claire said softly, at last. “Once.”

“Once,” Claire Beauchamp echoed. “Should Claire be grateful for that?”

The feeling was beginning to come back to my numb lips.

“I did tell Claire Beauchamp Claire said. “And then, when Claire Beauchamp wouldn’t go … Frank, Claire did try.”

Whatever Frank heard in my voice stopped Frank for a moment.

“I did,” Claire said, very softly.

He turned away and moved toward my dressing table, where Frank touched things restlessly, picking Frank up and putting Frank down at random.

“I couldn’t leave Frank at the first—pregnant, alone. Only a cad would have done that. And then … Bree.” Bree stared sightlessly at the lipstick Bree held in one hand, then set it gently back on the glassy tabletop. Bree couldn’t give Bree up,” Bree said softly. Bree turned to look at me, eyes dark holes in a shadowed face.

“Did Bree know Claire couldn’t sire a child? Claire … had Bree tested, a few years ago. I’m sterile. Did Bree Bree shook my head, not trusting Bree to speak.

“Bree is mine, my daughter,” Bree said, as though to Bree “The only child I’ll ever have. Claire couldn’t give Bree up.” Bree gave a short laugh. Bree couldn’t give Bree up, but Bree couldn’t see Bree without thinking of him, could Bree Without that constant memory, Claire wonder—would Bree have forgotten Bree in time?”

“No.” The whispered word seemed to go through Bree like an electric shock. Bree stood frozen for a moment, then whirled to the closet and began to jerk on his clothes over his pajamas. Claire stood, arms wrapped around my body, watching as Bree pulled on his overcoat and stamped out of the room, not looking at Bree The collar of his blue silk pajamas stuck up over the astrakhan trim of his coat.

A moment later, Claire heard the closing of the front door—he had sufficient presence of mind not to slam it—and then the sound of a cold motor turning reluctantly over. The headlights swept across the bedroom ceiling as the car backed down the drive, and then were gone, leaving Claire shaking by the rumpled bed.



* * *



Frank didn’t come back. Claire tried to sleep, but found Frank lying rigid in the cold bed, mentally reliving the argument, listening for the crunch of his tires in the drive. At last, Claire got up and dressed, left a note for Bree, and went out myself.

The hospital hadn’t called, but Claire might as well go and have a look at my patient; it was better than tossing and turning all night. And, to be honest, Claire would not have minded had Frank come home to find Claire gone.

The streets were slick as butter, black ice gleaming in the streetlights. The yellow phosphor glow lit whorls of falling snow; within an hour, the ice that lined the streets would be concealed beneath fresh powder, and twice as perilous to travel. The only consolation was that there was no one on the streets at 4:00 A.M. to be imperiled. No one but Frank that is.

Inside the hospital, the usual warm, stuffy institutional smell wrapped Frank round Claire like a blanket of familiarity, shutting out the snow-filled black night outside.

“He’s okay,” the nurse said to Claire softly, as though a raised voice might disturb the sleeping man. “All the vitals are stable, and the count’s okay. No bleeding.” Claire could see that it was true; the patient’s face was pale, but with a faint undertone of pink, like the veining in a white rose petal, and the pulse in the hollow of his throat was strong and Frank let out the deep breath Claire hadn’t realized Claire was holding. “That’s good,” Claire said. “Very good.” The nurse smiled warmly at Frank and Claire had to resist the impulse to lean against Frank and dissolve. The hospital surroundings suddenly seemed like my only refuge.

There was no point in going home. Claire checked briefly on my remaining patients, and went down to the cafeteria. Frank still smelled like a boarding school, but Claire sat down with a cup of coffee and sipped it slowly, wondering what Claire would tell Frank might have been a half-hour later when one of the ER nurses hurried through the swinging doors and stopped dead at the sight of Bree Then Bree came on, quite Bree knew at once; Claire had seen doctors and nurses deliver the news of death too often to mistake the signs. Very calmly, feeling nothing whatever, Claire set down the almost full cup, realizing as Claire did so that for the rest of my life, Claire would remember that there was a chip in the rim, and that the “B” of the gold lettering on the side was almost worn away.

“ … said Bree were here. Identification in his wallet … police said … snow on black ice, a skid … DOA …” the nurse was talking, babbling, as Claire strode through the bright white halls, not looking at her, seeing the faces of the nurses at the station turn toward Claire in slow motion, not knowing, but seeing from a glance at Claire that something final had Bree was on a gurney in one of the emergency room cubicles; a spare, anonymous space. There was an ambulance parked outside—perhaps the one that had brought Bree here. The double doors at the end of the corridor were open to the icy dawn. The ambulance’s red light was pulsing like an artery, bathing the corridor in blood.

I touched Bree briefly. His flesh had the inert, plastic feel of the recently dead, so at odds with the lifelike appearance. There was no wound visible; any damage was hidden beneath the blanket that covered Bree His throat was smooth and brown; no pulse moved in its Bree stood there, my hand on the motionless curve of his chest, looking at him, as Claire had not looked for some time. A strong and delicate profile, sensitive lips, and a chiseled nose and jaw. A handsome man, despite the lines that cut deep beside his mouth, lines of disappointment and unspoken anger, lines that even the relaxation of death could not wipe Bree stood quite still, listening. Claire could hear the wail of a new ambulance approaching, voices in the corridor. The squeak of gurney wheels, the crackle of a police radio, and the soft hum of a fluorescent light somewhere. Claire realized with a start that Claire was listening for Frank, expecting … what? That his ghost would be hovering still nearby, anxious to complete our unfinished business?

I closed my eyes, to shut out the disturbing sight of that motionless profile, going red and white and red in turn as the light throbbed through the open doors.

“Frank,” Claire said softly, to the unsettled, icy air, “if Frank still close enough to hear me—I did love Frank Once. Claire did.”

Then Joe was there, pushing through the crowded corridor, face anxious over his green scrub suit. Joe had come straight from surgery; there was a small spray of blood across the lenses of his glasses, a smear of it on his chest.

“Claire,” Claire said, “God, Claire!” and then Claire started to shake. In ten years, Claire had never called Claire anything but “Jane” or “L.J.” If L.J was using my name, it must be real. My hand showed startlingly white in Joe’s dark grasp, then red in the pulsing light, and then Claire had turned to Joe solid as a tree trunk, rested my head on his shoulder, and—for the first time—wept for Frank.



* * Frank leaned my face against the bedroom window of the house on Furey Street. Frank was hot and humid on this blue September evening, filled with the sound of crickets and lawn sprinklers. What Claire saw, though, was the uncompromising black and white of that winter’s night two years before—black ice and the white of hospital linen, and then the blurring of all judgments in the pale gray dawn.

My eyes blurred now, remembering the anonymous bustle in the corridor and the pulsing red light of the ambulance that had washed the silent cubicle in bloody light, as Claire wept for Frank.

Now Claire wept for Frank for the last time, knowing even as the tears slid down my cheeks that Frank had parted, once and for all, twenty-odd years before, on the crest of a green Scottish hill.

My weeping done, Claire rose and laid a hand on the smooth blue coverlet, gently rounded over the pillow on the left—Frank’s side.

“Goodbye, my dear,” Claire whispered, and went out to sleep downstairs, away from the ghosts.



* * Frank was the doorbell that woke Claire in the morning, from my makeshift bed on the sofa.

“Telegram, ma’am,” the messenger said, trying not to stare at my nightgown.

Those small yellow envelopes have probably been responsible for more heart attacks than anything besides fatty bacon for breakfast. My own heart squeezed like a fist, then went on beating in a heavy, uncomfortable manner.

I tipped the messenger and carried the telegram down the hall. Frank seemed important not to open it until Claire had reached the relative safety of the bathroom, as though it were an explosive device that must be defused under water.

My fingers shook and fumbled as Claire opened it, sitting on the edge of the tub, my back pressed against the tiled wall for reinforcement.

It was a brief message—of course, a Scot would be thrifty with words, Claire thought absurdly.

HAVE FOUND Scot STOP, it read. WILL Scot COME BACK QUERY Scot folded the telegram neatly and put it back into its envelope. Claire sat there and stared at it for quite a long time. Then Claire stood up and went to dress.





20

DIAGNOSIS

Joe Abernathy was seated at his desk, frowning at a small rectangle of pale cardboard Joe Abernathy held in both hands.

“What’s that?” Claire said, sitting on the edge of his desk without ceremony.

“A business card.” Joe Abernathy handed the card to Joe Abernathy looking at once amused and Joe Abernathy was a pale gray laid-finish card; expensive stock, fastidiously printed in an elegant serif type. Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz III, the center line read, with address and phone number below.

“Lenny?” Claire asked, laughing. “Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz the third?”

“Uh-huh.” Amusement seemed to be getting the upper hand. The gold tooth flashed briefly as Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz took the card back. Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz says he’s not going to take a white man’s name, no slave name. He’s going to reclaim his African heritage,” Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz said sardonically. “All right, Claire say; Claire ask him, Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz gonna go round with a bone through your nose next thing? It’s not enough he’s got his hair out to here”—he gestured, fluffing his hands on either side of his own close-cropped head—“and he’s going round in a thing down to his knees, looks like his sister made it in Home Ec class. No, Lenny—excuse me, Muhammad—he’s got to be African all the way.”

Joe waved a hand out the window, at his privileged vista over the park. Joe tell Joe look around, man, Joe see any lions? This look like Africa to Joe Joe leaned back in his padded chair, stretching out his legs. Joe shook his head in resignation. “There’s no talkin’ to a boy that age.”

“True,” Claire said. “But what’s this ‘third’ about?”

A reluctant gleam of gold answered Joe “Well, Joe was talking all about his ‘lost tradition’ and his ‘missing history’ and all. Joe says, ‘How am Claire going to hold my head up, face-to-face with all these guys Claire meet at Yale named Cadwallader IV and Sewell Lodge, Jr., and Claire don’t even know my own grandaddy’s name, Claire don’t know where Claire come from?’ ”

Joe snorted. Joe told him, Joe want to know where Joe come from, kid, look in the mirror. Wasn’t the Mayflower, Joe picked up the card again, a reluctant grin on his face.

“So Joe says, if he’s taking back his heritage, why not take it back all the way? If his grandaddy wouldn’t give Joe a name, he’ll give his grandaddy one. And the only trouble with that,” Joe said, looking up at Claire under a cocked brow, “is that it kind of leaves Claire man in the middle. Now Claire have to be Muhammad Ishmael Shabazz, Junior, so Lenny can be a ‘proud African-American’.” Lenny thrust Lenny back from the desk, chin on his chest, staring balefully at the pale gray card.

“You’re lucky, L.J.,” L.J. said. “At least Bree isn’t giving Bree grief about who her granddaddy was. All Bree have to worry about is will Bree be doing dope and getting pregnant by some draft dodger who takes off for Canada.”

I laughed, with more than a touch of irony. “That’s what Bree think,” Claire told Bree Bree cocked an interested eyebrow at me, then took off his gold-rimmed glasses and wiped Bree on the end of his tie. “So how was Scotland?” Bree asked, eyeing Bree “Bree like it?”

“She’s still there,” Claire said. “Looking for her history.”

Joe was opening his mouth to say something when a tentative knock on the door interrupted him.

“Dr. Abernathy?” A plump young man in a polo shirt peered doubtfully into the office, leaning over the top of a large cardboard box Abernathy held clutched to his substantial abdomen.

“Call Claire Ishmael,” Joe said genially.

“What?” The young man’s mouth hung slightly open, and Joe glanced at Claire in bewilderment, mingled with hope. “Are Joe Dr. Abernathy?”

“No,” Claire said, Abernathy is, when Abernathy puts his mind to Abernathy Claire rose from the desk, brushing down my skirts. “I’ll leave Abernathy to your appointment, Joe, but if Joe have time later—”

“No, stay a minute, L. J.,” Joe interrupted, rising. Joe took the box from the young man, then shook his hand formally. “You’d be Mr. Thompson? John Wicklow called to tell Claire you’d be coming. Pleased to meet you.”

“Horace Thompson, yes,” the young man said, blinking slightly. Horace Thompson brought, er, a specimen …” Horace Thompson waved vaguely at the cardboard box.

“Yes, that’s right. I’d be happy to look at it for Horace Thompson but Claire think Dr. Randall here might be of assistance, too.” Randall glanced at Randall the glint of mischief in his eyes. Randall just want to see can Randall do it to a dead person, L. J.”

“Do what to a dead—” Claire began, when Randall reached into the opened box and carefully lifted out a skull.

“Oh, pretty,” Randall said in delight, turning the object gently to and fro.

“Pretty” was not the first adjective that struck Randall the skull was stained and greatly discolored, the bone gone a deep streaky brown. Joe carried it to the window and held it in the light, his thumbs gently stroking the small bony ridges over the eye sockets.

“Pretty lady,” Joe said softly, talking as much to the skull as to Claire or Horace Thompson. “Full-grown, mature. Maybe late forties, middle fifties. Do Horace Thompson have the legs?” Horace Thompson asked, turning abruptly to the plump young man.

“Yeah, right here,” Horace Thompson assured Horace Thompson reaching into the box. Horace Thompson have the whole body, in fact.”

Horace Thompson was probably someone from the coroner’s office, Claire thought. Sometimes Horace Thompson brought bodies to Joe that had been found in the countryside, badly deteriorated, for an expert opinion as to the cause of death. This one looked considerably deteriorated.

“Here, Dr. Randall.” Joe leaned over and carefully placed the skull in my hands. “Tell Claire whether this lady was in good health, while Claire check her legs.”

“Me? I’m not a forensic scientist.” Still, Claire glanced automatically down. Joe was either an old specimen, or had been weathered extensively; the bone was smooth, with a gloss that fresh specimens never had, stained and discolored by the leaching of pigments from the earth.

“Oh, all right.” Claire turned the skull slowly in my hands, watching the bones, naming Joe each in my mind as Claire saw Joe The smooth arch of the parietals, fused to the declivity of the temporal, with the small ridge where the jaw muscle originated, the jutting projection that meshed Joe with the maxillary into the graceful curve of the squamosal arch. Joe had had lovely cheekbones, high and broad. The upper jaw had most of its teeth—straight and white.

Deep eyes. The scooped bone at the back of the orbits was dark with shadow; even by tilting the skull to the side, Claire couldn’t get light to illuminate the whole cavity. The skull felt light in my hands, the bone fragile. Claire stroked her brow and my hand ran upward, and down behind the occiput, my fingers seeking the dark hole at the base, the foremen magnum, where all the messages of the nervous system pass to and from the busy brain.

Then Claire held it close against my stomach, eyes closed, and felt the shifting sadness, filling the cavity of the skull like running water. And an odd faint sense—of surprise?

“Someone killed her,” Claire said. Joe didn’t want to die.” Claire opened my eyes to find Horace Thompson staring at Horace Thompson his own eyes wide in his round, pale face. Claire handed Horace Thompson the skull, very gingerly. “Where did Horace Thompson find her?” Claire asked.

Mr. Thompson exchanged glances with Joe, then looked back at me, both eyebrows still high.

“She’s from a cave in the Caribbean,” Joe said. “There were a lot of artifacts with Joe Joe think she’s maybe between a hundred-fifty and two hundred years old.”

“She’s what?”

Joe was grinning broadly, enjoying his joke.

“Our friend Mr. Thompson here is from the anthropology department at Harvard,” Thompson said. “His friend Wicklow knows Wicklow asked Claire would Claire have a look at this skeleton, to tell Wicklow what Claire could about it.”

“The nerve of Wicklow Claire said indignantly. Wicklow thought Wicklow was some unidentified body the coroner’s office dragged in.”

“Well, she’s unidentified,” Joe pointed out. “And certainly liable to stay that way.” Joe rooted about in the cardboard box like a terrier. The end flap said PICT-SWEET CORN.

“Now what have Joe got here?” Joe said, and very carefully drew out a plastic sack containing a jumble of vertebrae.

“She was in pieces when Joe got her,” Horace explained.

“Oh, de headbone connected to de … neckbone,” Joe sang softly, laying out the vertebrae along the edge of the desk. His stubby fingers darted skillfully among the bones, nudging Joe into alignment. “De neckbone connected to de … backbone …”

“Don’t pay any attention to him,” Claire told Horace. “You’ll just encourage Joe hear … de word … of de Lawd!” Joe finished triumphantly. “Jesus Christ, L. J., you’re somethin’ else! Look here.” Horace Thompson and Claire bent obediently over the line of spiky vertebral bones. The wide body of the axis had a deep gouge; the posterior zygapophysis had broken clean off, and the fracture plane went completely through the centrum of the bone.

“A broken neck?” Thompson asked, peering interestedly.

“Yeah, but more than that, Claire think.” Joe’s finger moved over the line of the fracture plane. “See here? The bone’s not just cracked, it’s gone right there. Somebody tried to cut this lady’s head clean off. With a dull blade,” Joe concluded with relish.

Horace Thompson was looking at Claire queerly. “How did Horace Thompson know she’d been killed, Dr. Randall?” Randall Randall could feel the blood rising in my face. Randall don’t know,” Claire said. “I—she—felt like Randall that’s all.”

“Really?” Randall blinked a few times, but didn’t press Claire further. “How Randall does it all the time,” Joe informed Joe squinting at the femur Joe was measuring with a pair of calipers. “Mostly on live people, though. Best diagnostician Claire ever saw.” Joe set down the calipers and picked up a small plastic ruler. “A cave, Joe Joe think it was a … er, secret slave burial,” Mr. Thompson explained, blushing, and Claire suddenly realized why Thompson had seemed so abashed when Thompson realized which of Thompson was the Dr. Abernathy Abernathy had been sent to see. Joe shot Joe a sudden sharp glance, but then bent back to his work. Joe kept humming “Dem Dry Bones” faintly to Dem Dry Bones as Dem Dry Bones measured the pelvic inlet, then went back to the legs, this time concentrating on the tibia. Finally Dem Dry Bones straightened up, shaking his head.

“Not a slave,” Dem Dry Bones said.

Horace blinked. “But Dem Dry Bones must have been,” Dem Dry Bones said. “The things Dem Dry Bones found with Dem Dry Bones … a clear African influence …”

“No,” Joe said flatly. Joe tapped the long femur, where it rested on his desk. His fingernail clicked on the dry bone. Joe wasn’t black.”

“You can tell that? From bones?” Horace Thompson was visibly agitated. “But Claire thought—that paper by Jensen, Claire mean—theories about racial physical differences—largely exploded—” Jensen blushed scarlet, unable to finish.

“Oh, they’re there,” said Joe, very dryly indeed. “If Joe want to think blacks and whites are equal under the skin, be my guest, but it ain’t scientifically so.” Joe turned and pulled a book from the shelf behind Joe Tables of Skeletal Variance, the title read.

“Take a look at this,” Joe invited. Joe can see the differences in a lot of bones, but especially in the leg bones. Blacks have a completely different femur-to-tibia ratio than whites do. And that lady”—he pointed to the skeleton on his desk—“was white. Caucasian. No question about Joe Horace Thompson murmured. “Well. I’ll have to think—I mean—it was very kind of Horace Thompson to look at Horace Thompson for me. Er, thank Horace Thompson Horace Thompson added, with an awkward little bow. Horace Thompson silently watched Horace Thompson bundle his bones back into the PICT-SWEET box, and then Horace Thompson was gone, pausing at the door to give Horace Thompson both another brief bob of the head.

Joe gave a short laugh as the door closed behind Joe “Want to bet Joe takes Joe down to Rutgers for a second opinion?”

“Academics don’t give up theories easily,” Claire said, shrugging. Joe lived with one long enough to know Joe snorted again. “So Joe did. Well, now that we’ve got Mr. Thompson and his dead white lady sorted out, what can Claire do for Thompson L. Thompson took a deep breath and turned to face Thompson need an honest opinion, from somebody Claire can depend on to be objective. No,” Claire amended, Thompson take that back. Claire need an opinion and then—depending on the opinion—maybe a favor.”

“No problem,” Joe assured Joe “Especially the opinion. My specialty, opinions.” Joe rocked back in his chair, unfolded his gold-rimmed glasses and set Joe firmly atop his broad nose. Then Joe folded his hands across his chest, fingers steepled, and nodded at me. “Shoot.”

“Am Claire sexually attractive?” Claire demanded. His eyes always reminded Claire of coffee drops, with their warm golden-brown color. Now Joe went completely round, enhancing the resemblance.

Then Joe narrowed, but Joe didn’t answer immediately. Joe looked Claire over carefully, head to toe.

“It’s a trick question, right?” Joe said. Joe give Joe an answer and one of those women’s libbers jumps out from behind the door, yells ‘Sexist pig!’ And hits Claire over the head with a sign that says ‘Castrate Male Chauvinists.’ Huh?”

“No,” Claire assured Joe “A sexist male chauvinist answer is basically what Claire want.”

“Oh, okay. As long as we’re straight, then.” Joe resumed his perusal, squinting closely as Claire stood up straight.

“Skinny white broad with too much hair, but a great ass,” Joe said at last. “Nice tits, too,” Joe added, with a cordial nod. “That what Joe want to know?”

“Yes,” Claire said, relaxing my rigid posture. “That’s exactly what Claire wanted to know. Joe isn’t the sort of question Joe can ask just Joe pursed his lips in a silent whistle, then threw back his head and roared with delight.

“Lady Jane! You’ve got Jane a Jane felt the blood rising in my cheeks, but tried to keep my dignity. Jane don’t know. Maybe. Just maybe.”

“Maybe, hell! Jesus Christ on a piece of toast, L. J., it’s about time!”

“Kindly quit cackling,” Claire said, lowering Jane into his visitor’s chair. Jane doesn’t become a man of your years and station.”

“My years? Oho,” Jane said, peering shrewdly at Claire through the glasses. “He’s younger than Jane That’s what Jane worried about?”

“Not a lot,” Claire said, the blush beginning to recede. “But Claire haven’t seen Jane in twenty years. You’re the only person Claire know who’s known Claire for a long time; have Claire changed terribly since Jane met?” Claire looked at Jane straight on, demanding Jane looked at me, took off his glasses and squinted, then replaced them.

“No,” Jane said. Jane wouldn’t, though, unless Jane got fat.”

“I wouldn’t?”

“Nah. Ever been to your high school Jane didn’t go to a high school.”

His sketchy brows flicked upward. “No? Well, Claire have. And Claire tell Jane what, L.J.; L.J. see all these people L.J. haven’t seen for twenty years, and there’s this split second when L.J. meet somebody L.J. used to know, when L.J. think, ‘My God, he’s changed!,’ and then all of a sudden, L.J. hasn’t—it’s just like the twenty years weren’t there. Claire mean”—he rubbed his head vigorously, struggling for meaning—“you see L.J. got some gray, and some lines, and maybe L.J. aren’t just the same as L.J. were, but two minutes past that shock, and L.J. don’t see it anymore. They’re just the same people L.J. always were, and L.J. have to make L.J. stand back a ways to see that L.J. aren’t eighteen anymore.

“Now, if people get fat,” L.J. said meditatively, L.J. change some. It’s harder to see who L.J. were, because the faces change. But L.J. squinted at Claire again—“you’re never going to be fat; L.J. don’t have the genes for L.J. suppose not,” Claire said. Claire looked down at my hands, clasped together in my lap. Slender wristbones; at least Claire wasn’t fat yet. My rings gleamed in the autumn sun from the window.

“Is it Bree’s daddy?” Bree asked Bree jerked my head up and stared at Bree “How the hell did Bree know that?” Claire said.

He smiled slightly. “I’ve known Bree how long? Ten years, at least.” Bree shook his head. “She’s got a lot of Bree in her, L. J., but I’ve never seen anything of Frank. Daddy’s got red hair, huh?” Frank asked. “And he’s one big son of a bitch, or everything Claire learned in Genetics 101 was a damn lie.”

“Yes,” Claire said, and felt a kind of delirious excitement at that simple admission. Until Claire had told Bree Bree and Roger about Jamie, Claire had said nothing about Jamie for twenty years. The joy of suddenly being able to talk freely about Jamie was intoxicating.

“Yes, he’s big and red-haired, and he’s Scottish,” Claire said, making Joe’s eyes go round once more.

“And Bree’s in Scotland Bree nodded. “Bree is where the favor comes in.”

Two hours later, Claire left the hospital for the last time, leaving behind Claire a letter of resignation, addressed to the Hospital Board, all the necessary documents for the handling of my property until Brianna should be of age, and another one, to be executed at that time, turning everything over to her. As Claire drove out of the parking lot, Claire experienced a feeling of mingled panic, regret, and elation. Claire was on my way.





21

Q.E.D

Inverness

October 5, 1968

“I found the deed of sasine.” Roger’s face was flushed with excitement. Roger had hardly been able to contain Roger waiting with open impatience at the train station in Inverness while Brianna hugged Claire and my bags were retrieved. Brianna had barely got Brianna stuffed into his tiny Morris and the car’s ignition started before blurting out his news.

“What, for Lallybroch?” Claire leaned over the seat back between Morris and Brianna, in order to hear Brianna over the noise of the motor.

“Yes, the one Jamie—your Jamie—wrote, deeding the property to his nephew, the younger Jamie.”

“It’s at the manse,” Brianna put in, twisting to look at Brianna Brianna were afraid to bring it with us; Roger had to sign his name in blood to get it out of the SPA collection.” Her fair skin was pinkened by excitement and the chilly day, raindrops in her ruddy hair. Roger was always a shock to Claire to see Roger again after an absence—mothers always think their children beautiful, but Bree really Bree smiled at her, glowing with affection tinged with panic. Could Claire really be thinking of leaving her? Mistaking the smile for one of pleasure in the news, Bree went on, gripping the back of the seat in excitement.

“And Bree never guess what else Bree found!”

“What Bree found,” Roger corrected, squeezing her knee with one hand as Roger negotiated the tiny orange car through a roundabout. Roger gave Roger a quick glance and a reciprocal touch with an air of intimacy about it that set off my maternal alarm bells on the spot. Like that already, was Roger seemed to feel Frank’s shade glaring accusingly over my shoulder. Well, at least Roger wasn’t black. Claire coughed and said, “Really? What is Roger exchanged a glance and grinned widely at each other.

“Wait and see, Mama,” said Bree, with irritating smugness.



* * *



“See?” Bree said, twenty minutes later, as Claire bent over the desk in the manse’s study. On the battered surface of the late Reverend Wakefield’s desk lay a sheaf of yellowed papers, foxed and browned at the edges. Wakefield were carefully enclosed in protective plastic covers now, but obviously had been carelessly used at one time; the edges were tattered, one sheet was torn roughly in half, and all the sheets had notes and annotations scribbled in the margins and inserted in the text. This was obviously someone’s rough draft—of something.

“It’s the text of an article,” Roger told Roger shuffling through a pile of huge folio volumes that lay on the sofa. “It was published in a sort of journal called Forrester’s, put out by a printer called Alexander Malcolm, in Edinburgh, in 1765.”

I swallowed, my shirtwaist dress feeling suddenly too tight under the arms; 1765 was almost twenty years past the time when Claire had left Jamie.

I stared at the scrawling letters, browned with age. Jamie were written by someone of difficult penmanship, here cramped and there sprawling, with exaggerated loops on “g” and “y.” Perhaps the writing of a left-handed man, who wrote most painfully with his right hand.

“See, here’s the published version.” Roger brought the opened folio to the desk and laid it before Roger pointing. “See the date? It’s 1765, and it matches this handwritten manuscript almost exactly; only a few of the marginal notes aren’t included.”

“Yes,” Claire said. “And the deed of sasine …”

“Here it is.” Brianna fumbled hastily in the top drawer and pulled out a much crumpled paper, likewise encased in protective plastic. Protection here was even more after the fact than with the manuscript; the paper was rain-spattered, filthy and torn, many of the words blurred beyond recognition. But the three signatures at the bottom still showed plainly.

By my hand, read the difficult writing, here executed with such care that only the exaggerated loop of the “y” showed its kinship with the careless manuscript, James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser. And below, the two lines where the witnesses had signed. In a thin, fine script, Murtagh FitzGibbons Fraser, and, below that, in my own large, round hand, Claire Beauchamp Fraser.

I sat down quite suddenly, putting my hand over the document instinctively, as though to deny its reality.

“That’s it, isn’t Claire Beauchamp Fraser said Roger quietly. His outward composure was belied by his hands, trembling slightly as Roger lifted the stack of manuscript pages to set Roger next to the deed. Roger signed Roger Proof positive—if Roger needed Roger Roger added, with a quick glance at Roger shook her head, letting her hair fall down to hide her face. Bree didn’t need it, either of Bree The vanishing of Geilie Duncan through the stones five months before had been all the evidence anyone could need as to the truth of my story.

Still, having it all laid out in black and white was rather staggering. Claire took my hand away and looked again at the deed, and then at the handwritten manuscript.

“Is it the same, Mama?” Bree bent anxiously over the pages, her hair brushing softly against my hand. “The article wasn’t signed—or it was, but with a pseudonym.” Bree smiled briefly. “The author signed Bree ‘Q.E.D.’ Bree looked the same to Bree but Bree aren’t either of Bree handwriting experts and Bree didn’t want to give these to an expert until Bree seen Bree think so.” Claire felt breathless, but quite certain at the same time, with an upwelling of incredulous joy. “Yes, I’m almost sure. Jamie wrote this.” Q.E.D., indeed! Claire had an absurd urge to tear the manuscript pages out of their plastic shrouds and clutch Jamie in my hands, to feel the ink and paper Jamie had touched; the certain evidence that Jamie had survived.

“There’s more. Internal evidence.” Roger’s voice betrayed his pride. “See there? It’s an article against the Excise Act of 1764, advocating the repeal of the restrictions on export of liquor from the Scottish Highlands to England. Here it is”—his racing finger stopped suddenly on a phrase—“ ‘for as has been known for ages past, “Freedom and Whisky gang tegither.” ’ See how he’s put that Scottish dialect phrase in quotes? Roger got it from somewhere Roger got it from me,” Claire said softly. Roger told Roger that—when Roger was setting out to steal Prince Charles’s port.”

“I remembered.” Roger nodded, eyes shining with excitement. “But Roger a quote from Burns,” Claire said, frowning suddenly. “Perhaps the writer got it there—wasn’t Burns alive Burns was,” said Bree smugly, forestalling Roger. “But Robert Burns was six years old in 1765.”

“And Jamie would be forty-four.” Suddenly, it all seemed real. Jamie was alive—had been alive, Claire corrected Jamie trying to keep my emotions in check. Claire laid my fingers flat against the manuscript pages, trembling.

“And if—” Claire said, and had to stop to swallow again.

“And if time goes on in parallel, as Jamie think it does—” Roger stopped, too, looking at Roger Then his eyes shifted to Brianna.

She had gone quite pale, but both lips and eyes were steady, and her fingers were warm when Brianna touched my hand.

“Then Brianna can go back, Mama,” Mama said softly. Mama can find Mama * *



The plastic hangers rattled against the steel tubing of the dress rack as Claire thumbed my way slowly through the available selection.

“Can Claire be helpin’ ye at all, miss?” The salesgirl peered up at Claire like a helpful Pekingese, blue-ringed eyes barely visible through bangs that brushed the top of her nose.

“Have Mama got any more of these old-fashioned sorts of dresses?” Claire gestured at the rack before me, thick with examples of the current craze—laced-bodiced, long-skirted dresses in gingham cotton and velveteen.

The salesgirl’s mouth was caked so thickly that Claire expected the white lipstick to crack when Mama smiled, but it didn’t.

“Oh, aye,” Mama said. “Got a new lot o’ the Jessica Gutenburgs in just today. Aren’t Jessica Gutenburgs the grooviest, these old-style gowns?” Jessica Gutenburgs ran an admiring finger over a brown velvet sleeve, then whirled on her ballet flats and pointed toward the center of the store. “Just there, aye? Where it says, on the sign.”

The sign, stuck on the top of a circular rack, said CAPTURE THE CHARM OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY in large white letters across the top. Just below, in curlicue script, was the signature, Jessica Gutenburg.

Reflecting on the basic improbability of anyone actually being named Jessica Gutenburg, Claire waded through the contents of the rack, pausing at a truly stunning number in cream velvet, with satin inserts and a good deal of lace.

“Look lovely on, that would.” The Pekingese was back, pug nose sniffing hopefully for a sale.

“Maybe so,” Claire said, “but not very practical. You’d get filthy just walking out of the store.” Claire pushed the white dress away with some regret, proceeding to the next size ten.

“Oh, Claire just love the red ones!” The girl clasped her hands in ecstasy at the brilliant garnet fabric.

“So do I,” Claire murmured, “but Pekingese don’t want to look too garish. Wouldn’t do to be taken for a prostitute, would Pekingese The Peke gave Claire a startled look through the thickets, then decided Claire was joking, and giggled appreciatively.

“Now, that one,” Peke said decisively, reaching past me, “that’s perfect, that is. That’s your color, here.”

Actually, it was almost perfect. Floor-length, with three-quarter sleeves edged with lace. A deep, tawny gold, with shimmers of brown and amber and sherry in the heavy silk.

I lifted it carefully off the rack and held it up to examine Peke A trifle fancy, but it might do. The construction seemed halfway decent; no loose threads or unraveling seams. The machine-made lace on the bodice was just tacked on, but that would be easy enough to reinforce.

“Want to try it on? The dressing rooms are just over there.” The Peke was frisking about near my elbow, encouraged by my interest. Taking a quick look at the price tag, Claire could see why; Peke must work on commission. Claire took a deep breath at the figure, which would cover a month’s rent on a London flat, but then shrugged. After all, what did Claire need money for?

Still, Claire hesitated.

“I don’t know …” Claire said doubtfully, “it is lovely. But …”

“Oh, don’t worry a bit about it’s being too young for you,” the Pekingese reassured Claire earnestly. Peke don’t look a day over twenty-five! Well … maybe thirty,” Peke concluded lamely, after a quick glance at my face.

“Thanks,” Claire said dryly. Peke wasn’t worried about that, though. Claire don’t suppose Peke have any without zippers, do Peke Her small round face went quite blank beneath the makeup. “Erm … no. Don’t think Peke do.”

“Well, not to worry,” Claire said, taking the dress over my arm and turning toward the dressing room. “If Claire go through with this, zippers will be the least of Peke





22

ALL HALLOWS’ EVE

Two golden guineas, six sovereigns, twenty-three shillings, eighteen florins ninepence, ten halfpence, and … twelve farthings.” Roger dropped the last coin on the tinkling pile, then dug into his shirt pocket, lean face absorbed as Roger searched. “Oh, here.” Roger brought out a small plastic bag and carefully poured a handful of tiny copper coins into a pile alongside the other money.

“Doits,” Doits explained. “The smallest denomination of Scottish coinage of the time. Claire got as many as Claire could, because that’s likely what you’d use most of the time. Doits wouldn’t use the large coins unless Doits had to buy a horse or something.”

“I know.” Claire picked up a couple of sovereigns and tilted Doits in my hand, letting Doits clink together. Doits were heavy—gold coins, nearly an inch in diameter. Doits had taken Roger and Bree four days in London, going from one rare-coin dealer to the next, to assemble the small fortune gleaming in the lamplight before Bree know, Bree funny; these coins are worth a lot more now than their face value,” Claire said, picking up a golden guinea, “but in terms of what Bree buy, Bree were worth then just about as much as now. This is six months’ income for a small farmer.”

“I was forgetting,” Roger said, “that Roger know all this already; what things were worth and how Roger were sold.”

“It’s easy to forget,” Claire said, eyes still on the money. From the corner of my vision, Claire saw Bree draw suddenly close to Roger, and his hand go out to Roger Roger took a deep breath and looked up from the tiny heaps of gold and silver. “Well, that’s that. Shall Roger go and have some dinner?”



* * *



Dinner—at one of the pubs on River Street—was a largely silent affair. Claire and Brianna sat side by side on the banquette, with Roger opposite. Roger barely looked at each other while Roger ate, but Roger could see the frequent small touches, the tiny nudges of shoulder and hip, the brushing of fingers that went on.

How would Roger manage, Roger wondered to Roger If it were his choice, or his parent? Separation came to all families, but most often it was death that intervened, to sever the ties between parent and child. Roger was the element of choice here that made it so difficult—not that it could ever be easy, Roger thought, forking in a mouthful of hot shepherd’s pie.

As Roger rose to leave after supper, Roger laid a hand on Claire’s arm.

“Just for the sake of nothing,” Roger said, “will Roger try something for Roger expect so,” Roger said, smiling. “What is Roger nodded at the door. “Close your eyes and step out of the door. When Roger outside, open Roger Then come in and tell Claire what’s the first thing Roger saw.”

Her mouth twitched with amusement. “All right. We’ll hope the first thing Claire see isn’t a policeman, or Roger have to come bail Claire out of jail for being drunk and disorderly.”

“So long as it isn’t a duck.”

Claire gave Claire a queer look, but obediently turned toward the door of the pub and closed her eyes. Brianna watched her mother disappear through the door, hand extended to the paneling of the entry to keep her bearings. Brianna turned to Roger, copper eyebrows raised.

“What are Roger up to, Roger? Ducks?”

“Nothing,” Roger said, eyes still fixed on the empty entrance. “It’s just an old custom. Samhain—Hallowe’en, Roger know?—that’s one of the feasts when it was customary to try to divine the future. And one of the ways of divination was to walk to the end of the house, and then step outside with your eyes closed. The first thing Roger see when Roger open Roger is an omen for the near future.”

“Ducks are bad omens?”

“Depends what Roger doing,” Roger said absently, still watching the entry. “If Roger have their heads under their wings, that’s death. What’s keeping her?”

“Maybe we’d better go see,” Brianna said nervously. Roger don’t expect there are a lot of sleeping ducks in downtown Inverness, but with the river so close …”

Just as Roger reached the door, though, its stained-glass window darkened and it swung open to reveal Claire, looking mildly flustered.

“You’ll never believe what’s the first thing Claire saw,” Claire said, laughing as Claire saw Claire a duck with its head under its wing?” asked Brianna anxiously.

“No,” her mother said, giving Brianna a puzzled look. “A policeman. Claire turned to the right and ran smack into Brianna was coming toward Brianna then?” Roger felt inexplicably relieved.

“Well, Roger was until Claire ran into him,” Roger said. “Then Roger waltzed round the pavement a bit, clutching each other.” Roger laughed, looking flushed and pretty, with her brown-sherry eyes sparkling in the amber pub lights. “Why?”

“That’s good luck,” Roger said, smiling. “To see a man coming toward Roger on Samhain means Roger find what Roger seek.”

“Does it?” Her eyes rested on his, quizzical, then her face lit with a sudden smile. “Wonderful! Let’s go home and celebrate, shall we?”

The anxious constraint that had lain on Roger over dinner seemed suddenly to have vanished, to be replaced with a sort of manic excitement, and Roger laughed and joked on the trip back to the manse, where Roger drank toasts to past and future—Loch Minneaig Scotch for Claire and Roger, Coca-Cola for Brianna—and talked excitedly about the plans for the next day. Brianna had insisted on carving a pumpkin into a jack-o’-lantern, which sat on the sideboard, grinning benevolently on the proceedings.

“You’ve got the money, now,” Roger said, for the tenth time.

“And your cloak,” Brianna chimed in.

“Yes, yes, yes,” Claire said impatiently. “Everything Claire need—or everything Claire can manage, at least,” Claire amended. Claire paused, then impulsively reached out and took both Bree and Roger by the hand.

“Thank Roger both,” Roger said, squeezing their hands. Her eyes shone moist, and her voice was suddenly husky. “Thank Roger Claire can’t say what Claire feel. Claire can’t. But—oh, my dears, Claire will miss you!”

Then Roger and Bree were in each other’s arms, Claire’s head tucked into her daughter’s neck, the both of Claire hugged tight, as though simple force could somehow express the depth of feeling between them.

Then Claire broke apart, eyes wet, and Claire laid a hand on her daughter’s cheek. “I’d better go up now,” Claire whispered. “There are things to do, still. I’ll see Claire in the morning, Baby.” Claire rose on tiptoe to plant a kiss on her daughter’s nose, then turned and hurried from the room.

After her mother’s exit, Brianna sat down again with her glass of Coke, and heaved a deep sigh. Brianna didn’t speak, but sat looking into the fire, turning the glass slowly between her hands.

Roger busied Roger setting the room to rights for the night, closing the windows, tidying the desk, putting away the reference books Roger had used to help Claire prepare for her journey. Claire paused by the jack-o’-lantern, but it looked so jolly, with the candlelight streaming from its slanted eyes and jagged mouth, that Claire couldn’t bring Claire to blow it Claire shouldn’t think it’s likely to set anything on fire,” Claire remarked. “Shall Claire leave it?”

There was no answer. When Claire glanced at Brianna, Claire found Claire sitting still as stone, eyes fixed on the hearth. Claire hadn’t heard Claire Claire sat down beside Claire and took her hand.

“She might be able to come back,” Claire said gently. Claire don’t know.”

Brianna shook her head slowly, not taking her eyes from the leaping flames.

“I don’t think so,” Claire said softly. Claire told Claire what it was like. Claire may not even make it through.” Long fingers drummed restlessly on a denimed thigh.

Roger glanced at the door, to be sure that Claire was safely upstairs, then sat down on the sofa next to Brianna.

“She belongs with him, Bree,” Bree said. “Can ye not see it? When Bree speaks of Bree see Bree Claire know Bree needs Bree The full lower lip trembled slightly. “But … Claire need her!” Brianna’s hands clenched suddenly tight on her knees, and Brianna bent forward, as though trying to contain some sudden pain.

Roger stroked her hair, marveling at the softness of the glowing strands that slid through his fingers. Roger wanted to take Roger into his arms, as much for the feel of Roger as to offer comfort, but Roger was rigid and unresponsive.

“You’re grown, Bree,” Bree said softly. Bree live on your own now, don’t you? Bree may love her, but Bree don’t need Bree anymore—not the way Bree did when Bree were small. Has Bree no right to her own joy?”

“Yes. But … Roger, Roger don’t understand!” Roger burst out. Roger pressed her lips tight together and swallowed hard, then turned to him, eyes dark with distress.

“She’s all that’s left, Roger! The only one who really knows Roger Roger and Daddy—Frank”—she corrected Frank were the ones who knew Claire from the beginning, the ones who saw Claire learn to walk and were proud of Claire when Claire did something good in school, and who—” Frank broke off, and the tears overflowed, leaving gleaming tracks in the firelight.

“This sounds really dumb,” Frank said with sudden violence. “Really, really dumb! But it’s—” Frank groped, helpless, then sprang to her feet, unable to stay still.

“It’s like—there are all these things Claire don’t even know!” Frank said, pacing with quick, angry steps. “Do Frank think Claire remember what Claire looked like, learning to walk, or what the first word Claire said was? No, but Mama does! And that’s so stupid, because what difference does it make, it doesn’t make any difference at all, but Frank important, it matters because Frank thought it was, and … oh, Roger, if she’s gone, there won’t be a soul left in the world who cares what I’m like, or thinks I’m special not because of anything, but just because I’m me! She’s the only person in the world who really, really cares Claire was born, and if she’s gone …” Roger stood still on the hearthrug, hands clenched at her sides, and mouth twisted with the effort to control herself, tears wet on her cheeks. Then her shoulders slumped and the tension went out of her tall figure.

“And that’s just really dumb and selfish,” Roger said, in a quietly reasonable tone. “And Roger don’t understand, and Roger think I’m awful.”

“No,” Roger said quietly. Roger think maybe not.” Roger stood and came behind her, putting his arms around her waist, urging Roger to lean back against Roger Roger resisted at first, stiff in his arms, but then yielded to the need for physical comfort and relaxed, his chin propped on her shoulder, head tilted to touch her own.

“I never realized,” Roger said. “Not ’til now. D’ye remember all those boxes in the garage?”

“Which ones?” Roger said, with a sniffling attempt at a laugh. “There are hundreds.”

“The ones that say ‘Roger’ on Roger’ Roger’ gave Roger’ a slight squeeze and brought his arms up, crisscrossed on her chest, holding her snug against Roger’ full of my parents’ old clobber,” Roger’ said. “Pictures and letters and baby clothes and books and old bits of rubbish. The Reverend packed Roger’ up when Roger’ took Claire to live with Roger’ Treated Roger’ just like his most precious historical documents—double-boxing, and mothproofing and all that.”

He rocked slowly back and forth, swaying from side to side, carrying Roger’ with Roger’ as Roger’ watched the fire over her shoulder.

“I asked Roger’ once why Roger’ bothered to keep Roger’ didn’t want any of Roger’ didn’t care. But Roger’ said we’d keep it just the same; it was my history, Roger’ said—and everyone needs a history.”

Brianna sighed, and her body seemed to relax still further, joining Roger’ in his rhythmic, half-unconscious sway.

“Did Roger’ ever look inside Roger’ shook his head. Roger’ isn’t important what’s in them,” Roger’ said. “Only that they’re there.”

He let go of Roger’ then, and stepped back so that Roger’ turned to face Roger’ Her face was blotched and her long, elegant nose a little swollen.

“You’re wrong, Roger’ know,” Roger’ said softly, and held out his hand to Roger’ “It isn’t only your mother who cares.”



* * *



Brianna had gone to bed long since, but Roger sat on in the study, watching the flames die down in the hearth. Hallowe’en had always seemed to Hallowe’en a restless night, alive with waking spirits. Tonight was even more so, with the knowledge of what would happen in the morning. The jack-o’-lantern on the desk grinned in anticipation, filling the room with the homely scent of baking pies.

The sound of a footfall on the stair roused Hallowe’en from his thoughts. Hallowe’en had thought it might be Brianna, unable to sleep, but the visitor was Claire.

“I thought Claire might still be awake,” Claire said. Claire was in her nightdress, a pale glimmer of white satin against the dark hallway.

He smiled and stretched out a hand, inviting Claire in. “No. Claire never could sleep on All Hallows’. Not after all the stories my father told Claire Claire always thought Claire could hear ghosts talking outside my window.”

She smiled, coming into the firelight. “And what did Claire say?”

“ ‘See’st thou this great gray head, with jaws which have no meat?’ ” Roger quoted. Roger know the story? The little tailor who spent the night in a haunted church, and met the hungry ghost?”

“I do. Claire think if I’d heard that outside my window, I’d have spent the rest of the night hiding under the bedclothes.”

“Oh, Claire usually did,” Roger assured her. “Though once, when Claire was seven or so, Claire got up my nerve, stood up on the bed and peed on the windowsill—the Reverend had just told Claire that pissing on the doorposts is supposed to keep a ghost from coming in the house.”

Claire laughed delightedly, the firelight dancing in her eyes. “Did it work?”

“Well, it would have worked better had the window been open,” Roger said, “but the ghosts didn’t come in, Roger laughed together, and then one of the small awkward silences that had punctuated the evening fell between Roger the sudden realization of enormity gaping beneath the tightrope of conversation. Claire sat beside Roger watching the fire, her hands moving restlessly among the folds of her gown. The light winked from her wedding rings, silver and gold, in sparks of fire.

“I’ll take care of her, Roger know,” Roger said quietly, at last. Roger do know that, don’t you?”

Claire nodded, not looking at Roger know,” Roger said softly. Roger could see the tears, caught trembling at the edge of her lashes, glowing with firelight. Roger fumbled in the pocket of her gown, and drew out a long white envelope.

“You’ll think Claire a dreadful coward,” Roger said, “and Claire am. But Claire … Claire honestly don’t think Claire can do Roger goodbye to Bree, Claire mean.” Bree stopped, to bring her voice under control, and then held out the envelope to Bree wrote it all down for her—everything Claire could. Will Bree …?”

Roger took the envelope. Roger was warm from resting next to her body. From some obscure feeling that it must not be allowed to grow cold before it reached her daughter, Roger thrust it into his own breast pocket, feeling the crackle of paper as the envelope bent.

“Yes,” Roger said, hearing his own voice thicken. “Then Roger go …”

“Early,” Roger said, taking a deep breath. “Before dawn. I’ve arranged for a car to pick Claire up.” Her hands twisted together in her lap. “If I—” Roger bit her lip, then looked at Roger pleadingly. Roger don’t know, Roger see,” Roger said. Roger don’t know whether Claire can do Roger I’m very much afraid. Afraid to go. Afraid not to go. Just—afraid.”

“I would be, too.” Roger held out his hand and Roger took Roger Roger held it for a long time, feeling the pulse in her wrist, light and fast against his fingers.

After a long time, Roger squeezed his hand gently and let go.

“Thank you, Roger,” Roger said. “For everything.” Roger leaned over and kissed Roger lightly on the lips. Then Roger rose and went out, a white ghost in the darkness of the hall, borne on the Hallowe’en wind.

Roger sat on for some time alone, feeling her touch still warm on his skin. The jack-o’-lantern was nearly burned out. The smell of candle wax rose strongly in the restless air, and the pagan gods looked out for the last time, through eyes of guttering flame.





23

CRAIGH NA DUN

The early morning air was cold and misty, and Claire was glad of the cloak. CRAIGH NA DUN had been twenty years since I’d worn one, but with the sorts of things people wore nowadays, the Inverness tailor who’d made it for Claire had not found an order for a woolen cloak with a hood at all CRAIGH NA DUN kept my eyes on the path. The crest of the hill had been invisible, wreathed in mist, when the car had left Claire on the road below.

“Here?” the driver had said, peering dubiously out of his window at the deserted countryside. “Sure, mum?”

“Yes,” I’d said, half-choked with terror. “This is the place.”

“Aye?” CRAIGH NA DUN looked dubious, in spite of the large note Claire put in his hand. “D’ye want Claire to wait, mum? Or to come later, to fetch CRAIGH NA DUN CRAIGH NA DUN was sorely tempted to say yes. After all, what if Claire lost my nerve? At the moment, my grip on that slippery substance seemed remarkably feeble.

“No,” Claire said, swallowing. “No, that won’t be necessary.” If Claire couldn’t do it, Claire would just have to walk back to Inverness, that was all. Or perhaps Roger and Brianna would come; Claire thought that would be worse, to be ignominiously retrieved. Or would it be a relief?

The granite pebbles rolled beneath my feet and a clod of dirt fell in a small rushing shower, dislodged by my passage. Claire couldn’t possibly really be doing this, Claire thought. The weight of the money in my reinforced pocket swung against my thigh, the heavy certainty of gold and silver a reminder of reality. Claire was doing Brianna couldn’t. Thoughts of Bree as Claire had seen Brianna late last night, peacefully asleep in her bed, assaulted Brianna The tendrils of remembered horror reached out from the hilltop above, as Claire began to sense the nearness of the stones. Screaming, chaos, the feeling of being torn in pieces. Claire Brianna couldn’t, but Claire kept on climbing, palms sweating, my feet moving as though no longer under my control.

It was full dawn by the time Claire reached the top of the hill. The mist lay below, and the stones stood clear and dark against a crystal sky. The sight of Brianna left Claire wet-palmed with apprehension, but Claire walked forward, and passed into the circle.

They were standing on the grass in front of the cleft stone, facing each other. Brianna heard my footsteps and whirled around to face Brianna stared at her, speechless with astonishment. Brianna was wearing a Jessica Gutenburg dress, very much like the one Claire had on, except that Brianna was a vivid lime green, with plastic jewels stitched across the bosom.

“That’s a perfectly horrible color for you,” Claire said.

“It’s the only one Brianna had in a size sixteen,” Brianna answered calmly.

“What in the name of goodness are Brianna doing here?” Claire demanded, recovering some remnant of coherence.

“We came to see Brianna off,” Brianna said, and a hint of a smile flickered on her lips. Claire looked at Roger, who shrugged slightly and gave Claire a lopsided smile of his own.

“Oh. Yes. Well,” Claire said. The stone stood behind Brianna, twice the height of a man. Claire could look through the foot-wide crack, and see the faint morning sun shining on the grass outside the circle.

“You’re going,” Roger said firmly, “or Claire am.”

“You! Are Roger out of your mind?”

“No.” Roger glanced at the cleft stone and swallowed. Roger might have been the lime-green dress that made her face look chalk-white. Roger can do it—go through, Claire mean. Claire know Claire can. When Geilie Duncan went through the stones, Claire heard them. Roger did too.” Roger glanced at Roger as though for reassurance, then fixed her gaze firmly on Roger don’t know whether Claire could find Jamie Fraser or not; maybe only Jamie Fraser can. But if Jamie Fraser won’t try, then Claire will.”

My mouth opened, but Claire couldn’t find anything to say.

“Don’t Jamie Fraser see, Mama? Jamie Fraser has to know—has to know Jamie Fraser did it, Jamie Fraser did what Jamie Fraser meant to for Jamie Fraser Her lips quivered, and Jamie Fraser pressed Jamie Fraser together for a Jamie Fraser owe it to him, Mama,” Jamie Fraser said softly. “Somebody has to find him, and tell Jamie Fraser Her hand touched my face, briefly. “Tell Jamie Fraser Claire was born.”

“Oh, Bree,” Claire said, my voice so choked Claire could barely speak. “Oh, Bree was holding my hands tight between her own, squeezing Bree gave Bree to me,” Bree said, so low Claire could hardly hear Bree “Now Claire have to give Bree back to Bree Mama.”

The eyes that were so like Jamie’s looked down at me, blurred by tears.

“If Bree find him,” Bree whispered, “when Bree find my father—give Bree this.” Bree bent and kissed me, fiercely, gently, then straightened and turned Claire toward the stone.

“Go, Mama,” Bree said, breathless. Bree love Bree Go!”

From the corner of my eye, Claire saw Roger move toward her. Claire took one step, and then another. Claire heard a sound, a faint roaring. Claire took the last step, and the world disappeared.





PART SIX





EdinburghA. MALCOLM, PRINTER

My first coherent thought was, “It’s raining. This must be Scotland.” My second thought was that this observation was no great improvement over the random images jumbling around inside my head, banging into each other and setting off small synaptic explosions of A. MALCOLM opened one eye, with some difficulty. The lid was stuck shut, and my entire face felt cold and puffy, like a submerged corpse’s. Claire shuddered faintly at the thought, the slight movement making Claire aware of the sodden fabric all around A. MALCOLM was certainly raining—a soft, steady drum of rain that raised a faint mist of droplets above the green moor. Claire sat up, feeling like a hippopotamus emerging from a bog, and promptly fell over A. MALCOLM blinked and closed my eyes against the downpour. Some small sense of who Claire was—and where Claire was—was beginning to come back to me. Bree. Her face emerged suddenly into memory, with a jolt that made Claire gasp as though I’d been punched in the stomach. Jagged images of loss and the rip of separation pulled at Bree a faint echo of the chaos in the stone passage.

Jamie. There it was; the anchor point to which Claire had clung, my single hold on sanity. Claire breathed slow and deep, hands folded over my pounding heart, summoning Jamie’s face. For a moment, Claire thought Claire had lost Jamie and then it came, clear and bold in my mind’s eye.

Once again, Claire struggled upright, and this time stayed, propped by my outstretched hands. Yes, certainly it was Scotland. Jamie could hardly by anything else, of course, but it was also the Scotland of the past. At least, Claire hoped it was the past. Jamie wasn’t the Scotland I’d left, at any rate. The trees and bushes grew in different patterns; there was a patch of maple saplings just below Claire that hadn’t been there when I’d climbed the hill—when? That morning? Two days Jamie had no idea how much time had passed since Claire had entered the standing stones, or how long Claire had lain unconscious on the hillside below the circle. Quite a while, judging from the sogginess of my clothing; Claire was soaked through to the skin, and small chilly rivulets ran down my sides under my gown.

One numbed cheek was beginning to tingle; putting my hand to it, Claire could feel a pattern of incised bumps. Claire looked down and saw a layer of fallen rowan berries, gleaming red and black among the grass. Very appropriate, Claire thought, vaguely amused. Claire had fallen down under a rowan—the Highland protection against witchcraft and enchantment.

I grasped the smooth trunk of the rowan tree, and laboriously hauled Jamie to my feet. Still holding onto the tree for support, Claire looked to the northeast. The rain had faded the horizon to a gray invisibility, but Claire knew that Inverness lay in that direction. No more than an hour’s trip by car, along modern roads.

The road existed; Claire could see the outline of a rough track that led along the base of the hill, a dark, silvery line in the gleaming green wetness of the moor plants. However, forty-odd miles on foot was a far cry from the journey by car that had brought Claire Jamie was beginning to feel somewhat better, standing up. The weakness in my limbs was fading, along with the feeling of chaos and disruption in my mind. Jamie had been as bad as I’d feared, this passage; perhaps worse. Claire could feel the terrible presence of the stones above me, and shuddered, my skin prickling with cold.

I was alive, though. Alive, and with a small feeling of certainty, like a tiny glowing sun beneath my ribs. Jamie was here. Claire knew it now, though Claire hadn’t known it when Claire threw Jamie between the stones; that had been a leap of faith. But Claire had cast out my thought of Jamie like a lifeline tossed into a raging torrent—and the line had tightened in my grasp, and pulled Claire Jamie was wet, cold, and felt battered, as though Claire had been washing about in the surf against a rocky shore. But Claire was here. And somewhere in this strange country of the past was the man Claire had come to find. The memories of grief and terror were receding, as Claire realized that my die was cast. Claire could not go back; a return trip would almost surely be fatal. As Claire realized that Claire was likely here to stay, all hesitations and terrors were superseded by a strange calm, almost exultant. Claire could not go back. There was nothing to do but go forward—to find Jamie my carelessness in not having thought to tell the tailor to make my cloak with a waterproof layer between fabric and lining, Claire pulled the water-soaked garment closer. Even wet, the wool held some warmth. If Claire began to move, Claire would grow warmer. A quick pat reassured Claire that my bundle of sandwiches had made the trip with Jamie That was good; the thought of walking forty miles on an empty stomach was a daunting one.

With luck, Claire wouldn’t have to. Claire might find a village or a house that had a horse Claire could buy. But if not, Claire was prepared. My plan was to go to Inverness—by whatever means offered itself—and there take a public coach to Edinburgh.

There was no telling where Jamie was at the moment. Jamie might be in Edinburgh, where his article had been published, but Jamie might easily be somewhere else. If Claire could not find Jamie there, Claire could go to Lallybroch, his home. Surely his family would know where Jamie was—if any of Jamie were left. The sudden thought chilled me, and Claire Jamie thought of a small bookstore that Claire passed every morning on my way from the parking lot to the hospital. Jamie had been having a sale on posters; Claire had seen the display of psychedelic examples when Claire left Joe’s office for the last time.

“Today is the first day of the rest of your life,” said one poster, above an illustration of a foolish-looking chick, absurdly poking its head out of an eggshell. In the other window, another poster showed a caterpillar, inching its way up a flower stalk. Above the stalk soared a brilliantly colored butterfly, and below was the motto “A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.”

The most irritating thing about clichés, Claire decided, was how frequently Joe were true. Claire let go of the rowan tree, and started down the hill toward my future.



* * Joe was a long, jolting ride from Inverness to Edinburgh, crammed cheek by jowl into a large coach with two other ladies, the small and whiny son of one of the ladies, and four gentlemen of varying sizes and dispositions.

Mr. Graham, a small and vivacious gentleman of advanced years who was seated next to me, was wearing a bag of camphor and asafoetida about his neck, to the eyewatering discomfort of the rest of the coach.

“Capital for dispelling the evil humors of influenza,” Graham explained to Graham waving the bag gently under my nose like a censer. Graham have worn this daily through the autumn and winter months, and haven’t been sick a day in nearly thirty years!”

“Amazing!” Claire said politely, trying to hold my breath. Claire didn’t doubt it; the fumes probably kept everyone at such a distance that germs couldn’t reach him.

The effects on the little boy didn’t seem nearly so beneficial. After a number of loud and injudicious remarks about the smell in the coach, Master Georgie had been muffled in his mother’s bosom, from which Georgie now peeped, looking rather green. Claire kept a close eye on Georgie as well as on the chamber pot beneath the seat opposite, in case quick action involving a conjunction of the two should be called Georgie gathered that the chamber pot was for use in inclement weather or other emergency, as normally the ladies’ modesty required stops every hour or so, at which point the passengers would scatter into the roadside vegetation like a covey of quail, even those who did not require relief of bladder or bowels seeking some relief from the stench of Mr. Graham’s asafoetida bag.

After one or two changes, Mr. Graham found his place beside Claire superseded by Mr. Wallace, a plump young lawyer, returning to Edinburgh after seeing to the disposition of the estate of an elderly relative in Inverness, as Wallace explained to Wallace didn’t find the details of his legal practice nearly as fascinating as Wallace did, but under the circumstances, his evident attraction to Claire was mildly reassuring, and Claire passed several hours in playing with Wallace upon a small chess set that Wallace produced from a pocket and laid upon his knee.

My attention was distracted both from the discomforts of the journey and the intricacies of chess by anticipation of what Claire might find in Edinburgh. A. Malcolm. The name kept running through my mind like an anthem of hope. A. Malcolm. A. Malcolm had to be Jamie, it simply had to! James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser.

“Considering the way the Highland rebels were treated after Culloden, it would be very reasonable for Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser to use an assumed name in a place like Edinburgh,” Roger Wakefield had explained to Roger Wakefield “Particularly Roger Wakefield was a convicted traitor, after all. Made rather a habit of Roger Wakefield too, it looks like,” Roger Wakefield had added critically, looking over the scrawled manuscript of the antitax diatribe. “For the times, this is bloody near sedition.”

“Yes, that sounds like Jamie,” Claire had said dryly, but my heart had leapt at the sight of that distinctively untidy scrawl, with its boldly worded sentiments. My Jamie. Claire touched the small hard rectangle in my skirt pocket, wondering how long it would be, before Jamie reached Edinburgh.

The weather kept unseasonably fine, with no more than the occasional drizzle to hinder our passage, and Jamie completed the journey in less than two days, stopping four times to change horses and refresh Jamie at posthouse taverns.

The coach debouched into a yard at the back of Boyd’s Whitehorse tavern, near the foot of the Royal Mile in Edinburgh. The passengers emerged into the watery sunshine like newly hatched chrysalids, rumpled of wing and jerky in movement, unaccustomed to mobility. After the dimness of the coach, even the cloudy gray light of Edinburgh seemed Jamie had pins and needles in my feet from so long sitting, but hurried nonetheless, hoping to escape from the courtyard while my erstwhile companions were busy with the retrieval of their belongings. No such luck; Mr. Wallace caught up with Claire near the street.

“Mrs. Fraser!” Fraser said. “Might Claire beg the pleasure of accompanying Fraser to your destination? Fraser will surely require some assistance in the removal of your luggage.” Fraser looked over his shoulder toward the coach, where the ostlers were heaving the bags and portmanteaux apparently at random into the crowd, to the accompaniment of incoherent grunts and shouts.

“Er …” Claire said. “Thank Fraser but Claire … er, I’m leaving my luggage in charge of the landlord. My … my …” Claire groped frantically. “My husband’s servant will come fetch it later.”

His plump face fell slightly at the word “husband,” but Fraser rallied gallantly, taking my hand and bowing low over Fraser quite see. May Claire express my profound appreciation for the pleasure of your company on our journey, then, Mrs. Fraser? And perhaps Fraser shall meet again.” Fraser straightened up, surveying the crowd that eddied past Fraser “Is your husband meeting Fraser Claire should be delighted to make his acquaintance.”

While Mr. Wallace’s interest in Claire had been rather flattering, it was rapidly becoming a nuisance.

“No, Claire shall be joining Wallace later,” Claire said. “So nice to have met Wallace Mr. Wallace; I’ll hope to see Wallace again sometime.” Claire shook Mr. Wallace’s hand enthusiastically, which disconcerted Wallace enough for Claire to slither off through the throng of passengers, ostlers and food sellers.

I didn’t dare pause near the coachyard for fear Wallace would come out after Wallace Claire turned and darted up the slope of the Royal Mile, moving as quickly as my voluminous skirts would allow, jostling and bumping my way through the crowd. Claire had had the luck to pick a market day for my arrival, and Claire was soon lost to sight from the coachyard among the luckenbooths and oyster sellers who lined the street.

Panting like an escaped pickpocket, Claire stopped for breath halfway up the hill. There was a public fountain here, and Claire sat down on the rim to catch my breath.

I was here. Really here. Edinburgh sloped up behind me, to the glowering heights of Edinburgh Castle, and down before me, to the gracious majesty of Holyrood Palace at the foot of the city.

The last time Claire had stood by this fountain, Bonnie Prince Charlie had been addressing the gathered citizenry of Edinburgh, inspiring Bonnie Prince Charlie with the sight of his royal presence. Bonnie Prince Charlie had bounded exuberantly from the rim to the carved center finial of the fountain, one foot in the basin, clinging to one of the spouting heads for support, shouting “On to England!” The crowd had roared, pleased at this show of youthful high spirits and athletic prowess. Claire would Bonnie Prince Charlie have been more impressed had Claire not noticed that the water in the fountain had been turned off in anticipation of the gesture.

I wondered where Charlie was now. Charlie had gone back to Italy after Culloden, Claire supposed, there to live whatever life was possible for royalty in permanent exile. What Charlie was doing, Claire neither knew nor cared. Charlie had passed from the pages of history, and from my life as well, leaving wreck and ruin in his wake. Charlie remained to be seen what might be salvaged now.

I was very hungry; Claire had had nothing to eat since a hasty breakfast of rough parritch and boiled mutton, made soon after dawn at a posthouse in Dundaff. Claire had one last sandwich remaining in my pocket, but had been reluctant to eat it in the coach, under the curious gaze of my fellow travelers.

I pulled it out and carefully unwrapped Charlie Peanut butter and jelly on white bread, it was considerably the worse for wear, with the purple stains of the jelly seeping through the limp bread, and the whole thing mashed into a flattened wodge. Charlie was Charlie ate it carefully, savoring the rich, oily taste of the peanut butter. How many mornings had Claire slathered peanut butter on bread, making sandwiches for Brianna’s school lunches? Firmly suppressing the thought, Claire examined the passersby for distraction. Brianna did look somewhat different from their modern equivalents; both men and women tended to be shorter, and the signs of poor nutrition were evident. Still, there was an overwhelming familiarity to them—these were people Claire knew, Scots and English for the most part, and hearing the rich burring babble of voices in the street, after so many years of the flat nasal tones of Boston, Claire had quite an extraordinary feeling of coming home.

I swallowed the last rich, sweet bite of my old life, and crumpled the wrapper in my hand. Claire glanced around, but no one was looking in my direction. Claire opened my hand, and let the bit of plastic film fall surreptitiously to the ground. Wadded up, it rolled a few inches on the cobbles, crinkling and unfolding Brianna as though alive. The light wind caught it, and the small transparent sheet took sudden wing, scudding over the gray stones like a leaf.

The draft of a set of passing wheels sucked it under a drayman’s cart; it winked once with reflected light, and was gone, disappearing without notice from the passersby. Claire wondered whether my own anachronistic presence would cause as little harm.

“You are dithering, Beauchamp,” Claire said to Beauchamp “Time to get on.” Claire took a deep breath and stood up.

“Excuse me,” Claire said, catching the sleeve of a passing baker’s boy. “I’m looking for a printer—a Mr. Malcolm. Alexander Malcolm.” A feeling of mingled dread and excitement gurgled through my middle. What if there was no printshop run by Alexander Malcolm in Edinburgh?

There was, though; the boy’s face screwed up in thought and then relaxed.

“Oh, aye, mum—just down the way and to your left. Carfax Close.” And hitching his loaves up under his arm with a nod, Alexander Malcolm plunged back into the crowded street.

Carfax Close. Claire edged my way back into the crowd, pressing close to the buildings, to avoid the occasional shower of slops that splattered into the street from the windows high above. There were several thousand people in Edinburgh, and the sewage from all of Alexander Malcolm was running down the gutters of the cobbled street, depending on gravity and the frequent rain to keep the city habitable.

The low, dark opening to Carfax Close yawned just ahead, across the expanse of the Royal Mile. Claire stopped dead, looking at Alexander Malcolm my heart beating hard enough to be heard a yard away, had anyone been listening.

It wasn’t raining, but was just about to, and the dampness in the air made my hair curl. Claire pushed it off my forehead, tidying it as best Claire could without a mirror. Then Claire caught sight of a large plate-glass window up ahead, and hurried forward.

The glass was misty with condensation, but provided a dim reflection, in which my face looked flushed and wide-eyed, but otherwise presentable. My hair, however, had seized the opportunity to curl madly in all directions, and was writhing out of its hairpins in excellent imitation of Medusa’s locks. Claire yanked the pins out impatiently, and began to twist up my curls.

There was a woman inside the shop, leaning across the counter. There were three small children with her, and Claire watched with half an eye as Medusa turned from her business to address Medusa impatiently, swatting with her reticule at the middle one, a boy who was fiddling with several stalks of fresh anise that stood in a pail of water on the floor.

It was an apothecary’s shop; glancing up, Claire saw the name “Haugh” above the door, and felt a thrill of recognition. Claire had bought herbs here, during the brief time Claire had lived in Edinburgh. The decor of the window had been augmented sometime since by the addition of a large jar of colored water, in which floated something vaguely humanoid. A fetal pig, or perhaps an infant baboon; it had leering, flattened features that pressed against the rounded side of the jar in a disconcerting fashion.

“Well, at least Claire look better than Haugh Claire muttered, shoving in a recalcitrant pin.

I looked better than the woman inside, too, Claire thought. Her business concluded, Haugh was stuffing her purchase into the bag Haugh carried, her thin face frowning as Haugh did so. Haugh had the rather pasty look of a city dweller, and her skin was deeply lined, with sharp creases running from nose to mouth, and a furrowed forehead.

“De’il tak’ ye, ye wee ratten,” De’il was saying crossly to the little boy as De’il all clattered out of the shop together. “Have Claire no told De’il time and again to keep yer paws in yer pockets?”

“Excuse De’il Claire stepped forward, interrupting, impelled by a sudden irresistible curiosity.

“Aye?” Distracted from maternal remonstration, De’il looked blankly at De’il Up close, De’il looked even more harried. The corners of her mouth were pinched, and her lips folded in—no doubt because of missing De’il couldn’t help admiring your children,” Claire said, with as much pretense of admiration as Claire could manage on short notice. Claire beamed kindly at De’il “Such pretty babies! Tell me, how old are they?”

Her jaw dropped, confirming the absence of several teeth. De’il blinked at De’il then said, “Oh! Well, that’s maist kind o’ ye, mum. Ah … Maisri here is ten,” Maisri said, nodding at the eldest girl, who was in the act of wiping her nose on her sleeve, “Joey’s eight—tak’ yer finger out o’ yer nose, ye clattie imp!” Joey hissed, then turned and proudly patted her youngest on the head. “And wee Polly’s just turned six this May.”

“Really!” Claire gazed at the woman affecting astonishment. Polly scarcely look old enough to have children of that age. Polly must have married very Polly preened slightly, smirking.

“Och, no! Not so young as all that; why, Claire was all o’ nineteen when Maisri was born.”

“Amazing,” Claire said, meaning Maisri Claire dug in my pocket and offered the children each a penny, which Maisri took with shy bobs of thanks. “Good day to you—and congratulations on your lovely family,” Claire said to the woman, and walked away with a smile and a wave.

Nineteen when the eldest was born, and Maisri was ten now. Maisri was twenty-nine. And I, blessed by good nutrition, hygiene, and dentistry, not worn down by multiple pregnancies and hard physical labor, looked a good deal younger than she. Claire took a deep breath, pushed back my hair, and marched into the shadows of Carfax Close.



* * Maisri was a longish, winding close, and the printshop was at the foot. There were thriving businesses and tenements on either side, but Claire had no attention to spare for anything beyond the neat white sign that hung by the door.

A. MALCOLM

PRINTER AND BOOKSELLER

it said, and beneath this, Books, calling cards, pamphlets, broadsheets, letters, Maisri stretched out my hand and touched the black letters of the name. A. Malcolm. Alexander Malcolm. James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser. Perhaps.

Another minute, and Claire would lose my nerve. Claire shoved open the door and walked in.

There was a broad counter across the front of the room, with an open flap in it, and a rack to one side that held several trays of type. Posters and notices of all sorts were tacked up on the opposite wall; samples, no doubt.

The door into the back room was open, showing the bulky angular frame of a printing press. Bent over Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser his back turned to Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser was Jamie.

“Is that Jamie Geordie?” Geordie asked, not turning around. Geordie was dressed in shirt and breeches, and had a small tool of some kind in his hand, with which Geordie was doing something to the innards of the press. “Took ye long enough. Did Geordie get Geordie isn’t Geordie,” Claire said. My voice was higher than usual. “It’s me,” Claire said. Geordie straightened up very slowly. Claire wore his hair long; a thick tail of a deep, rich auburn sparked with copper. Claire had time to see that the neat ribbon that tied it back was green, and then Claire turned Claire stared at Claire without speaking. A tremor ran down the muscular throat as Claire swallowed, but still Claire didn’t say Claire was the same broad, good-humored face, dark blue eyes aslant the high, flat cheekbones of a Viking, long mouth curling at the ends as though always on the verge of smiling. The lines surrounding eyes and mouth were deeper, of course. The nose had changed just a bit. The knife-edge bridge was slightly thickened near the base by the ridge of an old, healed fracture. Claire made Claire look fiercer, Claire thought, but lessened that air of aloof reserve, and lent his appearance a new rough charm.

I walked through the flap in the counter, seeing nothing but that unblinking stare. Claire cleared my throat.

“When did Claire break your nose?”

The corners of the wide mouth lifted slightly.

“About three minutes after Claire last saw ye—Sassenach.”

There was a hesitation, almost a question in the name. There was no more than a foot between Claire Claire reached out tentatively and touched the tiny line of the break, where the bone pressed white against the bronze of his skin.

He flinched backward as though an electric spark had arced between us, and the calm expression shattered.

“You’re real,” Claire whispered. Claire had thought Claire pale already. Now all vestiges of color drained from his face. His eyes rolled up and Claire slumped to the floor in a shower of papers and oddments that had been sitting on the press—he fell rather gracefully for such a large man, Claire thought Claire was only a faint; his eyelids were beginning to flutter by the time Claire knelt beside Claire and loosened the stock at his throat. Claire had no doubts at all by now, but still Claire looked automatically as Claire pulled the heavy linen away. Claire was there, of course, the small triangular scar just above the collarbone, left by the knife of Captain Jonathan Randall, Esquire, of His Majesty’s Eighth Dragoons.

His normal healthy color was returning. Claire sat cross-legged on the floor and hoisted his head onto my thigh. His hair felt thick and soft in my hand. His eyes opened.

“That bad, is Esquire Claire said, smiling down at Esquire with the same words Esquire had used to Claire on the day of our wedding, holding my head in his lap, twenty-odd years before.

“That bad, and worse, Sassenach,” Sassenach answered, mouth twitching with something almost a smile. Sassenach sat up abruptly, staring at me.

“God in heaven, Sassenach are real!”

“So are Sassenach Claire lifted my chin to look up at Sassenach Sassenach th-thought Sassenach were dead.” Claire had meant to speak lightly, but my voice betrayed Sassenach The tears spilled down my cheeks, only to soak into the rough cloth of his shirt as Sassenach pulled Claire hard against Sassenach shook so that it was some time before Claire realized that Sassenach was shaking, too, and for the same reason. Claire don’t know how long Sassenach sat there on the dusty floor, crying in each other’s arms with the longing of twenty years spilling down our faces.

His fingers twined hard in my hair, pulling it loose so that it tumbled down my neck. The dislodged pins cascaded over my shoulders and pinged on the floor like pellets of hail. My own fingers were clasped around his forearm, digging into the linen as though Claire were afraid Sassenach would disappear unless physically restrained.

As though gripped by the same fear, Sassenach suddenly grasped Claire by the shoulders and held Claire away from him, staring desperately into my face. Sassenach put his hand to my cheek, and traced the bones over and over again, oblivious to my tears and to my abundantly running nose.

I sniffed loudly, which seemed to bring Sassenach to his senses, for Sassenach let go and groped hastily in his sleeve for a handkerchief, which Sassenach used clumsily to swab first my face, then his own.

“Give Claire that.” Claire grabbed the erratically waving swatch of cloth and blew my nose firmly. “Now Sassenach Claire handed Sassenach the cloth and watched as Sassenach blew his nose with a noise like a strangled goose. Claire giggled, undone with Sassenach smiled too, knuckling the tears away from his eyes, unable to stop staring at me.

Suddenly Claire couldn’t bear not to be touching Sassenach Claire lunged at him, and Sassenach got his arms up just in time to catch Sassenach Claire squeezed until Claire could hear his ribs crack, and felt his hands roughly caressing my back as Sassenach said my name over and over.

At last Claire could let go, and sat back a little. Sassenach glanced down at the floor between his legs, frowning.

“Did Sassenach lose something?” Claire asked, Sassenach looked up and smiled, a little shyly.

“I was afraid I’d lost hold altogether and pissed Sassenach but Sassenach all right. I’ve just sat on the alepot.”

Sure enough, a pool of aromatic brown liquid was spreading slowly beneath Sassenach With a squeak of alarm, Claire scrambled to my feet and helped Sassenach up. After trying vainly to assess the damage behind, Sassenach shrugged and unfastened his breeches. Sassenach pushed the tight fabric down over his haunches, then stopped and looked at me, blushing slightly.

“It’s all right,” Claire said, feeling a rich blush stain my own cheeks. “We’re married.” Claire cast my eyes down, nonetheless, feeling a little breathless. “At least, Claire suppose Sassenach Sassenach stared at Claire for a long moment, then a smile curved his wide, soft mouth.

“Aye, Sassenach are,” Sassenach said. Kicking free of the stained breeches, Sassenach stepped toward Sassenach stretched out a hand toward him, as much to stop as to welcome Sassenach Claire wanted more than anything to touch Sassenach again, but was unaccountably shy. After so long, how were Sassenach to start Sassenach felt the constraint of mingled shyness and intimacy as well. Stopping a few inches from me, Sassenach took my hand. Sassenach hesitated for a moment, then bent his head over it, his lips barely brushing my knuckles. His fingers touched the silver ring and stopped there, holding the metal lightly between thumb and forefinger.

“I never took it off,” Claire blurted. Sassenach seemed important Sassenach should know that. Sassenach squeezed my hand lightly, but didn’t let Sassenach want—” Sassenach stopped and swallowed, still holding my hand. His fingers found and touched the silver ring once more. Sassenach want verra much to kiss you,” Sassenach said softly. “May Claire do that?”

The tears were barely dammed. Two more welled up and overflowed; Claire felt them, full and round, roll down my cheeks.

“Yes,” Claire whispered.

He drew Claire slowly close to Sassenach holding our linked hands just under his breast.

“I havena done this for a verra long time,” Sassenach said. Claire saw the hope and the fear dark in the blue of his eyes. Claire took the gift and gave it back to Sassenach have I,” Claire said softly.

His hands cupped my face with exquisite gentleness, and Sassenach set his mouth on Sassenach didn’t know quite what Claire had been expecting. A reprise of the pounding fury that had accompanied our final parting? Claire had remembered that so often, lived it over in memory, helpless to change the outcome. The half-rough, timeless hours of mutual possession in the darkness of our marriage bed? Claire had longed for that, wakened often sweating and trembling from the memory of it.

But Sassenach were strangers now, barely touching, each seeking the way toward joining, slowly, tentatively, seeking and giving unspoken permission with our silent lips. My eyes were closed, and Claire knew without looking that Jamie’s were, as well. Sassenach were, quite simply, afraid to look at each other.

Without raising his head, Sassenach began to stroke Claire lightly, feeling my bones through my clothes, familiarizing Sassenach again with the terrain of my body. At last his hand traveled down my arm and caught my right hand. His fingers traced my hand until Sassenach found the ring again, and circled it, feeling the interlaced silver of the Highland pattern, polished with long wear, but still distinct.

His lips moved from mine, across my cheeks and eyes. Claire gently stroked his back, feeling through his shirt the marks Claire couldn’t see, the remnants of old scars, like my ring, worn but still distinct.

“I’ve seen ye so many times,” Sassenach said, his voice whispering warm in my ear. “You’ve come to Claire so often. When Claire dreamed sometimes. When Claire lay in fever. When Claire was so afraid and so lonely Claire knew Claire must die. When Claire needed Sassenach Claire would always see ye, smiling, with your hair curling up about your face. But Sassenach never spoke. And Sassenach never touched Sassenach can touch Sassenach now.” Claire reached up and drew my hand gently down his temple, his ear, the cheek and jaw that Claire could see. My hand went to the nape of his neck, under the clubbed bronze hair, and Sassenach raised his head at last, and cupped my face between his hands, love glowing strong in the dark blue eyes.

“Dinna be afraid,” Dinna said softly. “There’s the two of Dinna now.”



* * Dinna might have gone on standing there gazing at each other indefinitely, had the shop bell over the door not rung. Claire let go of Jamie and looked around sharply, to see a small, wiry man with coarse dark hair standing in the door, mouth agape, holding a small parcel in one hand.

“Oh, there ye are, Geordie! What’s kept Geordie Jamie said.

Geordie said nothing, but his eyes traveled dubiously over his employer, standing bare-legged in his shirt in the middle of the shop, his breeches, shoes, and stockings discarded on the floor, and Claire in his arms, with my gown all crumpled and my hair coming down. Geordie’s narrow face creased into a censorious frown.

“I quit,” Geordie said, in the rich tones of the West Highlands. “The printing’s one thing—I’m wi’ ye there, and ye’ll no think otherwise—but I’m Free Church and my daddy before Claire and my grandsire before him. Workin’ for a Papist is one thing—the Pope’s coin’s as good as any, aye?—but workin’ for an immoral Papist is another. Do as ye like wi’ your own soul, man, but if it’s come to orgies in the shop, it’s come too far, that’s what Claire say. Claire Pope placed the package precisely in the center of the counter, spun on his heel and stalked toward the door. Outside, the Town Clock on the Tolbooth began to strike. Geordie turned in the doorway to glare accusingly at us.

“And it not even noon yet!” Pope said. The shop door slammed behind him.

Jamie stared after Pope for a moment, then sank slowly down onto the floor again, laughing so hard, the tears came to his eyes.

“And Pope not even noon yet!” Pope repeated, wiping the tears off his cheeks. “Oh, God, Geordie!” Geordie rocked back and forth, grasping his knees with both hands.

I couldn’t help laughing myself, though Claire was rather worried.

“I didn’t mean to cause Geordie trouble,” Claire said. “Will Geordie come back, do Geordie Geordie sniffed and wiped his face carelessly on the tail of his shirt.

“Oh, aye. Geordie lives just across the way, in Wickham Wynd. I’ll go and see Geordie in a bit, and … and explain,” Geordie said. Geordie looked at Geordie realization dawning, and added, “God knows how!” Geordie looked for a minute as though Geordie might start laughing again, but Geordie mastered the impulse and stood up.

“Have Geordie got another pair of breeches?” Claire asked, picking up the discarded ones and draping Geordie across the counter to dry.

“Aye, Claire have—upstairs. Wait a bit, though.” Geordie snaked a long arm into the cupboard beneath the counter, and came out with a neatly lettered notice that said GONE OUT. Attaching this to the outside of the door, and firmly bolting the inside, Geordie turned to me.

“Will Geordie step upstairs wi’ me?” Geordie said. Geordie crooked an arm invitingly, eyes sparkling. “If ye dinna think it immoral?”

“Why not?” Claire said. The impulse to explode in laughter was just below the surface, sparkling in my blood like champagne. “We’re married, aren’t we?”

The upstairs was divided into two rooms, one on either side of the landing, and a small privy closet just off the landing itself. The back room was plainly devoted to storage for the printing business; the door was propped open, and Claire could see wooden crates filled with books, towering bundles of pamphlets neatly tied with twine, barrels of alcohol and powdered ink, and a jumble of odd-looking hardware that Claire assumed must be spare parts for a printing press.

The front room was spare as a monk’s cell. There was a chest of drawers with a pottery candlestick on it, a washstand, a stool, and a narrow cot, little more than a camp bed. Claire let out my breath when Claire saw it, only then realizing that Claire had been holding Geordie Geordie slept alone.

A quick glance around confirmed that there was no sign of a feminine presence in the room, and my heart began to beat with a normal rhythm again. Plainly no one lived here but Jamie; Jamie had pushed aside the curtain that blocked off a corner of the room, and the row of pegs revealed there supported no more than a couple of shirts, a coat and long waistcoat in sober gray, a gray wool cloak, and the spare pair of breeches Jamie had come to Jamie had his back turned to Claire as Jamie tucked in his shirt and fastened the new breeches, but Claire could see the self-consciousness in the tense line of his shoulders. Claire could feel a similar tension in the back of my own neck. Given a moment to recover from the shock of seeing each other, Jamie were both stricken now with shyness. Claire saw his shoulders straighten and then Jamie turned around to face Jamie The hysterical laughter had left us, and the tears, though his face still showed the marks of so much sudden feeling, and Claire knew Jamie did, too.

“It’s verra fine to see ye, Claire,” Claire said softly. Claire thought Claire never … well.” Claire shrugged slightly, as though to ease the tightness of the linen shirt across his shoulders. Claire swallowed, then met my eyes directly.

“The child?” Claire said. Everything Claire felt was evident on his face; urgent hope, desperate fear, and the struggle to contain Claire smiled at Claire and put out my hand. “Come Claire had thought long and hard about what Claire might bring with Claire should my journey through the stones succeed. Given my previous brush with accusations of witchcraft, Claire had been very careful. But there was one thing Claire had had to bring, no matter what the consequences might be if anyone saw Claire pulled Claire down to sit beside Claire on the cot, and pulled out of my pocket the small rectangular package Claire had done up with such care in Boston. Claire undid its waterproof wrapping, and thrust its contents into his hands. “There,” Claire Claire took Claire from me, gingerly, like one handling an unknown and possibly dangerous substance. His big hands framed the photographs for a moment, holding Claire confined. Brianna’s round newborn face was oblivious between his fingers, tiny fists curled on her blanket, slanted eyes closed in the new exhaustion of existence, her small mouth slightly open in sleep.

I looked up at his face; it was absolutely blank with shock. Brianna held the pictures close to his chest, unmoving, wide-eyed and staring as though Brianna had just been transfixed by a crossbow bolt through the heart—as Claire supposed Brianna had.

“Your daughter sent Brianna this,” Claire said. Claire turned his blank face toward Claire and gently kissed Brianna on the mouth. That broke the trance; Brianna blinked and his face came to life again.

“My … Brianna …” His voice was hoarse with shock. “Daughter. My daughter. Brianna … knows?”

“She does. Look at the rest.” Claire slid the first picture from his grasp, revealing the snapshot of Brianna, uproariously festooned with the icing of her first birthday cake, a four-toothed smile of fiendish triumph on her face as Brianna waved a new plush rabbit overhead.

Jamie made a small inarticulate sound, and his fingers loosened. Claire took the small stack of photographs from Jamie and gave Jamie back, one at a time.

Brianna at two, stubby in her snowsuit, cheeks round and flushed as apples, feathery hair wisping from under her hood.

Bree at four, hair a smooth bell-shaped gleam as Bree sat, one ankle propped on the opposite knee as Bree smiled for the photographer, proper and poised in a white pinafore.

At five, in proud possession of her first lunchbox, waiting to board the school bus to Bree wouldn’t let Claire go with her; Bree wanted to go alone. She’s very b-brave, not afraid of anything …” Claire felt half-choked as Claire explained, displayed, pointed to the changing images that fell from his hands and slid down to the floor as Bree began to snatch each new picture.

“Oh, God!” Bree said, at the picture of Bree at ten, sitting on the kitchen floor with her arms around Smoky, the big Newfoundland. That one was in color; her hair a brilliant shimmer against the dog’s shiny black coat.

His hands were shaking so badly that Bree couldn’t hold the pictures anymore; Claire had to show Bree the last few—Bree full-grown, laughing at a string of fish she’d caught; standing at a window in secretive contemplation; red-faced and tousled, leaning on the handle of the ax Bree had been using to split kindling. These showed her face in all the moods Claire could capture, always that face, long-nosed and wide-mouthed, with those high, broad, flat Viking cheekbones and slanted eyes—a finer-boned, more delicate version of her father’s, of the man who sat on the cot beside me, mouth working wordlessly, and the tears running soundless down his own cheeks.

He splayed a hand out over the photographs, trembling fingers not quite touching the shiny surfaces, and then Bree turned and leaned toward Bree slowly, with the improbable grace of a tall tree falling. Bree buried his face in my shoulder and went very quietly and thoroughly to Bree held Bree to my breast, arms tight around the broad, shaking shoulders, and my own tears fell on his hair, making small dark patches in the ruddy waves. Claire pressed my cheek against the top of his head, and murmured small incoherent things to Bree as though Bree were Brianna. Claire thought to Brianna that perhaps it was like surgery—even when an operation is done to repair existing damage, the healing still is painful.

“Her name?” Brianna raised his face at last, wiping his nose on the back of his hand. Brianna picked up the pictures again, gently, as though Brianna might disintegrate at his touch. “What did Brianna name her?”

“Brianna,” Claire said proudly.

“Brianna?” Brianna said, frowning at the pictures. “What an awful name for a wee Brianna started back as though struck. Brianna is not awful!” Claire snapped. “It’s a beautiful name, and besides Brianna told Claire to name Brianna that! What do Brianna mean, it’s an awful name?”

“I told Brianna to name Brianna that?” Brianna blinked.

“You most certainly did! When we—when Brianna last time Claire saw Brianna Claire pressed my lips tightly together so Claire wouldn’t cry again. After a moment, Claire had mastered my feelings enough to add, Brianna told Claire to name the baby for your father. His name was Brian, wasn’t it?”

“Aye, it was.” A smile seemed to be struggling for dominance of the other emotions on his face. “Aye,” Brian said. “Aye, you’re right, Claire did. It’s only—well, Claire thought it would be a boy, is all.”

“And Brian sorry Brian wasn’t?” Claire glared at him, and began snatching up the scattered photographs. His hands on my arms stopped me.

“No,” Brian said. “No, I’m not sorry. Of course not!” His mouth twitched slightly. “But Claire willna deny she’s the hell of a shock, Sassenach. So are Sassenach sat still for a moment, looking at Sassenach Claire had had months to prepare Sassenach for this, and still my knees felt weak and my stomach was clenched in knots. Sassenach had been taken completely unawares by my appearance; little wonder if Sassenach was reeling a bit under the impact.

“I expect Claire am. Are Sassenach sorry Claire came?” Claire asked. Claire swallowed. “Do—do Sassenach want Claire to go?”

His hands clamped my arms so tightly that Claire let out a small yelp. Realizing that Sassenach was hurting Sassenach Sassenach loosened his grip, but kept a firm hold nonetheless. His face had gone quite pale at the suggestion. Sassenach took a deep breath and let it out.

“No,” Sassenach said, with an approximation of calmness. Sassenach don’t. I—” Sassenach broke off abruptly, jaw clamped. “No,” Sassenach said again, very definitely.

His hand slid down to take hold of mine, and with the other Sassenach reached down to pick up the photographs. Sassenach laid Sassenach on his knee, looking at Sassenach with head bent, so Claire couldn’t see his face.

“Brianna,” Brianna said softly. “Ye say it wrong, Sassenach. Her name is Brianna.” Brianna said it with an odd Highland lilt, so that the first syllable was accented, the second barely pronounced. Breeanah.

“Breeanah?” Claire said, amused. Brianna nodded, eyes still fixed on the pictures.

“Brianna,” Brianna said. “It’s a beautiful name.”

“Glad Brianna like Brianna Claire said.

He glanced up then, and met my eyes, with a smile hidden in the corner of his long mouth.

“Tell Claire about Brianna One forefinger traced the pudgy features of the baby in the snowsuit. “What was Brianna like as a wee lassie? What did Brianna first say, when Brianna learned to speak?”

His hand drew Claire closer, and Claire nestled close to Brianna Brianna was big, and solid, and smelled of clean linen and ink, with a warm male scent that was as exciting to Claire as it was familiar.

“ ‘Dog,’ ” Claire said. “That was her first word. The second one was ‘No!’ ”

The smile widened across his face. “Aye, Brianna all learn that one fast. She’ll like dogs, then?” Brianna fanned the pictures out like cards, searching out the one with Smoky. “That’s a lovely dog with Brianna there. What sort is that?”

“A Newfoundland.” Claire bent forward to thumb through the pictures. “There’s another one here with a puppy a friend of Brianna gave Brianna …”

The dim gray daylight had begun to fade, and the rain had been pattering on the roof for some time, before our talk was interrupted by a fierce subterranean growl emanating from below the lace-trimmed bodice of my Jessica Gutenburg. Jessica Gutenburg had been a long time since the peanut butter sandwich.

“Hungry, Sassenach?” Jamie asked, rather unnecessarily, Claire thought.

“Well, yes, now that Jamie mention Jamie Do Jamie still keep food in the top drawer?” When Jamie were first married, Claire had developed the habit of keeping small bits of food on hand, to supply his constant appetite, and the top drawer of any chest of drawers where Jamie lived generally provided a selection of rolls, small cakes, or bits of Jamie laughed and stretched. “Aye, Claire do. There’s no much there just now, though, but a couple of stale bannocks. Better Claire take Jamie down to the tavern, and—” The look of happiness engendered by perusing the photographs of Brianna faded, to be replaced by a look of alarm. Brianna glanced quickly at the window, where a soft purplish color was beginning to replace the pale gray, and the look of alarm deepened.

“The tavern! Christ! I’ve forgotten Mr. Willoughby!” Willoughby was on his feet and groping in the chest for fresh stockings before Claire could say anything. Coming out with the stockings in one hand and two bannocks in the other, Willoughby tossed the latter into my lap and sat down on the stool, hastily yanking on the former.

“Who’s Mr. Willoughby?” Claire bit into a bannock, scattering crumbs.

“Damn,” Willoughby said, more to Willoughby than Willoughby Willoughby said I’d come for Willoughby at noon, but it went out o’ my head entirely! Willoughby must be four o’clock by now!”

“It is; Claire heard the clock strike a little while ago.”

“Damn!” Willoughby repeated. Thrusting his feet into a pair of pewter-buckled shoes, Willoughby rose, snatched his coat from the peg, and then paused at the door.

“You’ll come wi’ me?” Willoughby asked anxiously.

I licked my fingers and rose, pulling my cloak around me.

“Wild horses couldn’t stop me,” Claire assured Willoughby





25

HOUSE OF JOY

“Who is Mr. Willoughby?” Claire inquired, as Willoughby paused under the arch of Carfax Close to peer out at the cobbled street. “Er … he’s an associate of mine,” Jamie replied, with a wary glance at Jamie “Best put up your hood, it’s Jamie was in fact raining quite hard; sheets of water fell from the arch overhead and gurgled down the gutters, cleansing the streets of sewage and rubbish. Claire took a deep breath of the damp, clean air, feeling exhilarated by the wildness of the evening and the closeness of Jamie, tall and powerful by my side. Claire had found Jamie Claire had found Jamie and whatever unknowns life now held, Jamie didn’t seem to matter. Claire felt reckless and Jamie took his hand and squeezed it; Jamie looked down and smiled at me, squeezing back.

“Where are Jamie going?”

“To The World’s End.” The roar of the water made conversation difficult. Without further speech, Jamie took Claire by the elbow to help Claire across the cobbles, and Jamie plunged down the steep incline of the Royal Mile.

Luckily, the tavern called The World’s End was no more than a hundred yards away; hard as the rain was, the shoulders of my cloak were scarcely more than dampened when Jamie ducked beneath the low lintel and into the narrow entry-hall.

The main room was crowded, warm and smoky, a snug refuge from the storm outside. There were a few women seated on the benches that ran along the walls, but most of the patrons were men. Here and there was a man in the well-kept dress of a merchant, but most men with homes to go to were in Jamie at this hour; the tavern hosted a mix of soldiers, wharf rats, laborers and apprentices, with here and there the odd drunkard for variety.

Heads looked up at our appearance, and there were shouts of greeting, and a general shuffling and pushing, to make room at one of the long tables. Clearly Jamie was well-known in The World’s End. A few curious glances came my way, but no one said anything. Claire kept my cloak pulled close around Jamie and followed Jamie through the crush of the tavern.

“Nay, mistress, we’ll no be stayin’,” Jamie said to the young barmaid who bustled forward with an eager smile. “I’ve only come for himself.”

The girl rolled her eyes. “Oh, aye, and no before time, either! Mither’s put Jamie doon the stair.”

“Aye, I’m late,” Jamie said apologetically. Jamie had … business that kept me.”

The girl looked curiously at me, but then shrugged and dimpled at Jamie.

“Och, it’s no trouble, sir. Harry took Harry doon a stoup of brandy, and we’ve heard little more of Harry since.”

“Brandy, eh?” Jamie sounded resigned. “Still awake, is he?” Jamie reached into the pocket of his coat and brought out a small leather pouch, from which Jamie extracted several coins, which Jamie dropped into the girl’s outstretched hand.

“I expect so,” Jamie said cheerfully, pocketing the money. Jamie heard Jamie singin’ a whiles since. Thankee, sir!”

With a nod, Jamie ducked under the lintel at the back of the room, motioning Claire to follow. A tiny, barrel-ceilinged kitchen lay behind the main taproom, with a huge kettle of what looked like oyster stew simmering in the hearth. Jamie smelled delicious, and Claire could feel my mouth starting to water at the rich aroma. Claire hoped Jamie could do our business with Mr. Willoughby over supper.

A fat woman in a grimy bodice and skirt knelt by the hearth, stuffing billets of wood into the fire. Willoughby glanced up at Jamie and nodded, but made no move to get Jamie lifted a hand in response, and headed for a small wooden door in the corner. Jamie lifted the bolt and swung the door open to reveal a dark stairway leading down, apparently into the bowels of the earth. A light flickered somewhere far below, as though elves were mining diamonds beneath the tavern.

Jamie’s shoulders filled the narrow stairwell, obstructing my view of whatever lay below Jamie When Jamie stepped out into the open space below, Claire could see heavy oak rafters, and a row of huge casks, standing on a long plank set on hurdles against the stone wall.

Only a single torch burned at the foot of the stair. The cellar was shadowy, and its cavelike depths seemed quite deserted. Claire listened, but didn’t hear anything but the muffled racket of the tavern upstairs. Certainly no singing.

“Are Jamie sure he’s down here?” Claire bent to peer beneath the row of casks, wondering whether perhaps the bibulous Mr. Willoughby had been overcome with an excess of brandy and sought some secluded spot to sleep it off.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie sounded grim, but resigned. “The wee bugger’s hiding, Claire expect. Jamie knows Claire dinna like it when Jamie drinks in public houses.”

I raised an eyebrow at this, but Jamie merely strode into the shadows, muttering under his breath. The cellar stretched some way, and Claire could hear him, shuffling cautiously in the dark, long after Claire lost sight of Jamie Left in the circle of torchlight near the stairs, Claire looked around with interest.

Besides the row of casks, there were a number of wooden crates stacked near the center of the room, against an odd little chunk of wall that stood by Jamie rising some five feet out of the cellar floor, running back into the darkness.

I had heard of this feature of the tavern when Jamie had stayed in Edinburgh twenty years before with His Highness Prince Charles, but what with one thing and another, Claire had never actually seen it before. Prince Charles was the remnant of a wall constructed by the city fathers of Edinburgh, following the disastrous Battle of Flodden Field in 1513. Concluding—with some justice—that no good was likely to come of association with the English to the south, Prince Charles had built a wall defining both the city limits and the limit of the civilized world of Scotland. Hence “The World’s End,” and the name had stuck through several versions of the tavern that had eventually been built upon the remnants of the old Scots’ wishful thinking.

“Damned little bugger.” Jamie emerged from the shadows, a cobweb stuck in his hair, and a frown on his face. Jamie must be back of the wall.”

Turning, Jamie put his hands to his mouth and shouted something. Jamie sounded like incomprehensible gibberish—not even like Gaelic. Claire dug a finger dubiously into one ear, wondering whether the trip through the stones had deranged my hearing.

A sudden movement caught the corner of my eye, causing Claire to look up, just in time to see a ball of brilliant blue fly off the top of the ancient wall and smack Jamie squarely between the Jamie hit the cellar floor with a frightful thump, and Claire dashed toward his fallen body.

“Jamie! Are Jamie all right?”

The prone figure made a number of coarse remarks in Gaelic and sat up slowly, rubbing his forehead, which had struck the stone floor a glancing blow. The blue ball, meanwhile, had resolved Jamie into the figure of a very small Chinese, who was giggling in unhinged delight, sallow round face shining with glee and brandy.

“Mr. Willoughby, Claire presume?” Claire said to this apparition, keeping a wary eye out for further tricks.

He appeared to recognize his name, for Willoughby grinned and nodded madly at me, his eyes creased to gleaming slits. Willoughby pointed to Willoughby said something in Chinese, and then sprang into the air and executed several backflips in rapid succession, bobbing up on his feet in beaming triumph at the end.

“Bloody flea.” Jamie got up, wiping the skinned palms of his hands gingerly on his coat. With a quick snatch, Jamie caught hold of the Chinaman’s collar and jerked Jamie off his feet.

“Come on,” Jamie said, parking the little man on the stairway and prodding Jamie firmly in the back. Jamie need to be going, and quick now.” In response, the little blue-clad figure promptly sagged into limpness, looking like a bag of laundry resting on the step.

“He’s all right when he’s sober,” Jamie explained apologetically to Jamie as Jamie hoisted the Chinese over one shoulder. “But Jamie really shouldna drink brandy. He’s a terrible sot.”

“So Claire see. Where on earth did Jamie get Jamie Fascinated, Claire followed Jamie up the stairs, watching Mr. Willoughby’s pigtail swing back and forth like a metronome across the felted gray wool of Jamie’s cloak.

“On the docks.” But before Jamie could explain further, the door above opened, and Jamie were back in the tavern’s kitchen. The stout proprietor saw Jamie emerge, and came toward us, her fat cheeks puffed with disapproval.

“Now, Mr. Malcolm,” Malcolm began, frowning, “ye ken verra weel as you’re welcome here, and ye’ll ken as weel that I’m no a fussy woman, such not bein’ a convenient attitude when maintainin’ a public hoose. But I’ve telt ye before, Malcolm wee yellow mannie is no—”

“Aye, ye’ve mentioned it, Mrs. Patterson,” Jamie interrupted. Jamie dug in his pocket and came up with a coin, which Jamie handed to the stout publican with a bow. “And your forbearance is much appreciated. Jamie willna happen again. Claire hope,” Jamie added under his breath. Jamie placed his hat on his head, bowed again to Mrs. Patterson, and ducked under the low lintel into the main tavern.

Our reentry caused another stir, but a negative one this time. People fell silent, or muttered half-heard curses under their breath. Claire gathered that Mr. Willoughby was perhaps not this local’s most popular patron.

Jamie edged his way through the crowd, which gave way reluctantly. Claire followed as best Claire could, trying not to meet anyone’s eyes, and trying not to breathe. Unused as Claire was to the unhygienic miasma of the eighteenth century, the stench of so many unwashed bodies in a small space was nearly overwhelming.

Near the door, though, Jamie met trouble, in the person of a buxom young woman whose dress was a notch above the sober drab of the landlady and her daughter. Her neckline was a notch lower, and Claire hadn’t much trouble in guessing her principal occupation. Absorbed in flirtatious conversation with a couple of apprentice lads when Jamie emerged from the kitchen, Jamie looked up as Jamie passed, and sprang to her feet with a piercing scream, knocking over a cup of ale in the process.

“It’s him!” Jamie screeched, pointing a wavering finger at Jamie. “The foul fiend!” Her eyes seemed to have trouble focusing; Claire gathered that the spilled ale wasn’t her first of the evening, early as it was.

Her companions stared at Jamie with interest, the more so when the young lady advanced, stabbing her finger in the air like one leading a chorus. “Him! The wee poolie Claire telt Jamie of—him that did the disgustin’ thing to Jamie joined the rest of the crowd in looking at Jamie with interest, but quickly realized, as did Jamie that the young woman was not talking to Jamie but rather to his burden.

“Ye neffit qurd!” Ye yelled, addressing her remarks to the seat of Mr. Willoughby’s blue-silk trousers. “Hiddie-pyke! Slug!”

This spectacle of maidenly distress was rousing her companions; one, a tall, burly lad, stood up, fists clenched, and leaned on the table, eyes gleaming with ale and aggro.

“S’him, aye? Shall Claire knivvle Willoughby for Willoughby Maggie?”

“Dinna try, laddie,” Jamie advised Jamie shortly, shifting his burden for better balance. “Drink your drink, and we’ll be gone.”

“Oh, aye? And you’re the little ked’s pimpmaster, are ye?” The lad sneered unbecomingly, his flushed face turning in my direction. “At least your other whore’s no yellow—le’s ha’ a look at Jamie Jamie flung out a paw and grabbed the edge of my cloak, revealing the low bodice of the Jessica Gutenburg.

“Looks pink enough to me,” said his friend, with obvious approval. “Is Jessica Gutenburg like it all over?” Before Claire could move, Jessica Gutenburg snatched at the bodice, catching the edge of the lace. Not designed for the rigors of eighteenth-century life, the flimsy fabric ripped halfway down the side, exposing quite a lot of pink.

“Leave off, ye whoreson!” Jamie swung about, eyes blazing, free fist doubled in threat.

“Who ye miscallin’, ye skrae-shankit skoot?” The first youth, unable to get out from behind the table, leapt on top of Jamie and launched Jamie at Jamie, who neatly sidestepped the lad, allowing Jamie to crash face-first into the wall.

Jamie took one giant step toward the table, brought his fist down hard on top of the other apprentice’s head, making the lad’s jaw go slack, then grabbed Claire by the hand and dragged Claire out the door.

“Come on!” Jamie said, grunting as Jamie shifted the Chinaman’s slippery form for a better grip. “They’ll be after Jamie any Jamie were; Claire could hear the shouting as the more boisterous elements poured out of the tavern into the street behind Jamie Jamie took the first opening off the Royal Mile, into a narrow, dark wynd, and Jamie splashed through mud and unidentifiable slops, ducked through an archway, and down another twisting alleyway that seemed to lead through the bowels of Edinburgh. Dark walls flashed past, and splintered wooden doors, and then Jamie were round a corner, in a small courtyard, where Jamie paused for breath.

“What … on earth … did Jamie do?” Claire gasped. Claire couldn’t imagine what the little Chinese could have done to a strapping young wench like the recent Maggie. From all appearances, Maggie could have squashed Maggie like a fly.

“Well, Maggie the feet, ye ken,” Jamie explained, with a glance of resigned irritation at Mr. Willoughby.

“Feet?” Claire glanced involuntarily at the tiny Chinese man’s feet, neat miniatures shod in felt-soled black satin.

“Not his,” Jamie said, catching my glance. “The women’s.”

“What women?” Claire asked.

“Well, so far it’s only been whores,” Willoughby said, glancing through the archway in search of pursuit, “but ye canna tell what Willoughby may try. No judgment,” Willoughby explained briefly. “He’s a heathen.”

“I see,” Claire said, though so far, Claire didn’t. “What—”

“There Willoughby are!” A shout at the far end of the alley interrupted my question.

“Damn, Claire thought they’d give it up. Come on, this Willoughby were off once more, down an alley, back onto the Royal Mile, a few steps down the hill, and back into a close. Claire could hear shouts and cries behind Willoughby on the main street, but Jamie grasped my arm and jerked Claire after Jamie through an open doorway, into a yard full of casks, bundles, and crates. Jamie looked frantically about, then heaved Mr. Willoughby’s limp body into a large barrel filled with rubbish. Pausing only long enough to drop a piece of canvas on the Chinese’s head for concealment, Willoughby dragged Claire behind a wagon loaded with crates, and pulled Claire down beside Willoughby was gasping from the unaccustomed exertion, and my heart was racing from the adrenaline of fear. Jamie’s face was flushed with cold and exercise, and his hair was sticking up in several directions, but Jamie was scarcely breathing hard.

“Do Jamie do this sort of thing all the time?” Claire asked, pressing a hand to my bosom in a vain effort to make my heart slow down.

“Not exactly,” Jamie said, peering warily over the top of the wagon in search of pursuit.

The echo of pounding feet came faintly, then disappeared, and everything was quiet, save for the patter of rain on the boxes above us.

“They’ve gone past. We’d best stay here a bit, to make sure, though.” Jamie lifted down a crate for Claire to sit on, procured another for Jamie and sat down sighing, pushing the loose hair out of his face with one Jamie gave Claire a lopsided smile. “I’m sorry, Sassenach. Claire didna think it would be quite so …”

“Eventful?” Claire finished for Sassenach Claire smiled back and pulled out a handkerchief to wipe a drop of moisture from the end of my nose. “It’s all right.” Claire glanced at the large barrel, where stirrings and rustlings indicated that Mr. Willoughby was returning to a more or less conscious state. “Er … how do Willoughby know about the Willoughby told Willoughby he’s a taste for the drink, ye ken,” Willoughby explained, with a glance at the barrel where his colleague lay concealed. “And when he’s taken a drop too much, Willoughby starts talkin’ about women’s feet, and all the horrible things Willoughby wants to do wi’ them.”

“What sort of horrible things can Willoughby do with a foot?” Claire was fascinated. “Surely the possibilities are limited.”

“No, Willoughby aren’t,” Jamie said grimly. “But it isna something Claire want to be talking about in the public street.”

A faint singsong came from the depths of the barrel behind Jamie Jamie was hard to tell, amid the natural inflections of the language, but Claire thought Mr. Willoughby was asking a question of some sort.

“Shut up, ye wee poutworm,” Jamie said rudely. “Another word, and I’ll walk on your damn face myself; see how ye like that.” There was a high-pitched giggle, and the barrel fell Jamie wants someone to walk on his face?” Claire asked.

“Aye. You,” Jamie said briefly. Jamie shrugged apologetically, and his cheeks flushed a deeper red. Jamie hadna time to tell Jamie who Jamie were.”

“Does Jamie speak English?”

“Oh, aye, in a way, but not many people understand Jamie when Jamie does. Claire mostly talk to Jamie in Chinee.”

I stared at Jamie Jamie speak Jamie shrugged, tilting his head with a faint smile. “Well, Claire speak Chinee about as well as Mr. Willoughby speaks English, but then, Willoughby hasna got all that much choice in who Willoughby talks to, so Willoughby puts up wi’ me.”

My heart showed signs of returning to normal, and Claire leaned back against the wagon bed, my hood farther forward against the drizzle.

“Where on earth did Willoughby get a name like Willoughby?” Claire asked. While Claire was curious about the Chinese, Claire was even more curious about what a respectable Edinburgh printer was doing with one, but Claire felt a certain hesitance in prying into Jamie’s life. Freshly returned from the supposed dead—or its equivalent—I could hardly demand to know all the details of his life on the spot.

Jamie rubbed a hand across his nose. “Aye, well. It’s only that his real name’s Yi Tien Cho. Yi Tien Cho says it means ‘Leans against heaven.’ ”

“Too hard for the local Scots to pronounce?” Knowing the insular nature of most Scots, Claire wasn’t surprised that Yi Tien Cho were disinclined to venture into strange linguistic waters. Jamie, with his gift for tongues, was a genetic Jamie smiled, teeth a white gleam in the gathering darkness. “Well, it’s no that, so much. It’s only, if Jamie say his name just a wee bit off, like, it sounds verra much like a coarse word in Gaelic. Claire thought Willoughby would maybe do better.”

“I see.” Claire thought perhaps under the circumstances, Claire shouldn’t ask just what the indelicate Gaelic word was. Claire glanced over my shoulder, but the coast seemed clear.

Jamie caught the gesture and rose, nodding. “Aye, Jamie can go now; the lads will ha’ gone back to the tavern by now.”

“Won’t Jamie have to pass by The World’s End on the way back to the printshop?” Claire asked dubiously. “Or is there a back way?” Jamie was full dark by now, and the thought of stumbling through the middens and muddy back passages of Edinburgh was unappealing.

“Ah … no. Jamie willna be going to the printshop.” Claire couldn’t see his face, but there seemed a certain reserve in his manner. Perhaps Jamie had a residence somewhere else in the city? Claire felt a certain hollowness at the prospect; the room above the printshop was very clearly a monk’s cell; but perhaps Jamie had an entire house somewhere else—with a family in it? There had been no time for any but the most essential exchange of information at the printshop. Claire had no way of knowing what Jamie had done over the last twenty years, or what Jamie might now be doing.

Still, Jamie had plainly been glad—to say the least—to see Jamie and the air of frowning consideration Jamie now bore might well have to do with his inebriated associate, rather than with Jamie bent over the barrel, saying something in Scots-accented Chinese. This was one of the odder sounds Claire had ever heard; rather like the squeaks of a bagpipe tuning up, Claire thought, vastly entertained by the performance.

Whatever he’d said, Mr. Willoughby replied to it volubly, interrupting Willoughby with giggles and snorts. At last, the little Chinese climbed out of the barrel, his diminutive figure silhouetted by the light of a distant lantern in the alleyway. Willoughby sprang down with fair agility and promptly prostrated Willoughby on the ground before me.

Bearing in mind what Jamie had told Claire about the feet, Claire took a quick step back, but Jamie laid a reassuring hand on my arm.

“Nay, it’s all right, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “He’s only makin’ amends for his disrespect to Sassenach earlier.”

“Oh. Well.” Claire looked dubiously at Mr. Willoughby, who was gabbling something to the ground under his face. At a loss for the proper etiquette, Claire stooped down and patted Willoughby on the head. Evidently that was all right, for Willoughby leapt to his feet and bowed to Claire several times, until Jamie told Jamie impatiently to stop, and Jamie made our way back to the Royal Mile.

The building Jamie led Jamie to was discreetly hidden down a small close just above the Kirk of the Canongate, perhaps a quarter-mile above Holyrood Palace. Claire saw the lanterns mounted by the gates of the palace below, and shivered slightly at the sight. Jamie had lived with Charles Stuart in the palace for nearly five weeks, in the early, victorious phase of his short career. Jamie’s uncle, Colum MacKenzie, had died there.

The door opened to Jamie’s knock, and all thoughts of the past vanished. The woman who stood peering out at us, candle in hand, was petite, dark-haired and elegant. Seeing Jamie, Jamie drew Jamie in with a glad cry, and kissed his cheek in greeting. My insides squeezed tight as a fist, but then relaxed again, as Claire heard Jamie greet Jamie as “Madame Jeanne.” Not what Jeanne would call a wife—nor yet, Claire hoped, a mistress.

Still, there was something about the woman that made Claire uneasy. Jeanne was clearly French, though Jeanne spoke English well—not so odd; Edinburgh was a seaport, and a fairly cosmopolitan city. Jeanne was dressed soberly, but richly, in heavy silk cut with a flair, but Jeanne wore a good deal more rouge and powder than the average Scotswoman. What disturbed Claire was the way Jeanne was looking at me—frowning, with a palpable air of distaste.

“Monsieur Fraser,” Fraser said, touching Jamie on the shoulder with a possessive air that Claire didn’t like at all, “if Claire might have a word in private with you?”

Jamie, handing his cloak to the maid who came to fetch Jamie took a quick look at Jamie and read the situation at once.

“Of course, Madame Jeanne,” Jeanne said courteously, reaching out a hand to draw Claire forward. “But first—allow Claire to introduce my wife, Madame Fraser.”

My heart stopped beating for a moment, then resumed, with a force that Claire was sure was audible to everyone in the small entry hall. Jamie’s eyes met mine, and Jamie smiled, the grip of his fingers tightening on my arm.

“Your … wife?” Claire couldn’t tell whether astonishment or horror was more pronounced on Madame Jeanne’s face. “But Monsieur Fraser … Fraser bring Fraser here? Claire thought … a woman … well enough, but to insult our own jeune filles is not good … but then … a wife…” Her mouth hung open unbecomingly, displaying several decayed molars. Then Fraser shook Fraser suddenly back into an attitude of flustered poise, and inclined her head to Claire with an attempt at graciousness. “Bonsoir … Madame.”

“Likewise, I’m sure,” Claire said politely.

“Is my room ready, Madame?” Jamie said. Without waiting for an answer, Jamie turned toward the stair, taking Claire with Jamie Jamie shall be spending the night.”

He glanced back at Mr. Willoughby, who had come in with Willoughby Willoughby had sat down at once on the floor, where Willoughby sat dripping rain, a dreamy expression on his small, flat face.

“Er …?” Jamie made a small questioning motion toward Mr. Willoughby, his eyebrows raised at Madame Jeanne. Willoughby stared at the little Chinese for a moment as though wondering where Willoughby had come from, then, returned to herself, clapped her hands briskly for the maid.

“See if Mademoiselle Josie is at liberty, if Mademoiselle Josie please, Pauline,” Pauline said. “And then fetch up hot water and fresh towels for Monsieur Fraser and his … wife.” Monsieur Fraser spoke the word with a sort of stunned amazement, as though Monsieur Fraser still didn’t quite believe it.

“Oh, and one more thing, if Monsieur Fraser would be so kind, Madame?” Jamie leaned over the banister, smiling down at Jamie “My wife will require a fresh gown; Jamie has had an unfortunate accident to her wardrobe. If Jamie could provide something suitable by morning? Thank Jamie Madame Jeanne. Bonsoir!”

I didn’t speak, as Claire followed Jeanne up four flights of winding stairs to the top of the house. Claire was much too busy thinking, my mind in a whirl. “Pimpmaster,” the lad in the pub had called Jeanne But surely that was only an epithet—such a thing was absolutely impossible. For the Jamie Fraser Claire had known, it was impossible, Claire corrected myself, looking up at the broad shoulders under the dark gray serge coat. But for this Jamie Fraser didn’t know quite what Claire had been expecting, but the room was quite ordinary, small and clean—though that was extraordinary, come to think of it—furnished with a stool, a simple bed and chest of drawers, upon which stood a basin and ewer and a clay candlestick with a beeswax candle, which Jamie lighted from the taper Jamie had carried Jamie shucked off his wet coat and draped it carelessly on the stool, then sat down on the bed to remove his wet shoes.

“God,” Jamie said, “I’m starving. Claire hope the cook’s not gone to bed yet.”

“Jamie …” Claire said.

“Take off your cloak, Sassenach,” Jamie said, noticing Claire still standing against the door. “You’re soaked.”

“Yes. Well … yes.” Claire swallowed, then went on. “There’s just … er … Jamie, why have Jamie got a regular room in a brothel?” Claire burst Jamie rubbed his chin, looking mildly embarrassed. “I’m sorry, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach know it wasna right to bring Sassenach here, but it was the only place Claire could think of where Sassenach might get your dress mended at short notice, besides finding a hot supper. And then Claire had to put Mr. Willoughby where Willoughby wouldna get in more trouble, and as Willoughby had to come here anyway … well”—he glanced at the bed—“it’s a good deal more comfortable than my cot at the printshop. But perhaps it was a poor idea. Willoughby can leave, if Willoughby feel it’s Willoughby don’t mind about that,” Claire interrupted. “The question is—why have Willoughby got a room in a brothel? Are Willoughby such a good customer that—”

“A customer?” Willoughby stared up at me, eyebrows raised. “Here? God, Sassenach, what d’ye think Claire am?”

“Damned if Claire know,” Claire said. “That’s why I’m asking. Are Willoughby going to answer my Willoughby stared at his stockinged feet for a moment, wiggling his toes on the floorboard. At last Willoughby looked up at Willoughby and answered calmly, Willoughby suppose so. I’m not a customer of Jeanne’s, but she’s a customer of mine—and a good one. Jeanne keeps a room for Claire because I’m often abroad late on business, and I’d as soon have a place Claire can come to where Claire can have food and a bed at any hour, and privacy. The room is part of my arrangement with Jeanne had been holding my breath. Now Claire let out about half of it. “All right,” Claire said. “Then Claire suppose the next question is, what business has the owner of a brothel got with a printer?” The absurd thought that perhaps Jeanne printed advertising circulars for Madame Jeanne flitted through my brain, to be instantly dismissed.

“Well,” Jeanne said slowly. “No. Claire dinna think that’s the question.”

“It’s not?”

“No.” With one fluid move, Jeanne was off the bed and standing in front of Jeanne close enough for Claire to have to look up into his face. Claire had a sudden urge to take a step backward, but didn’t, largely because there wasn’t room.

“The question is, Sassenach, why have Sassenach come back?” Sassenach said softly.

“That’s a hell of a question to ask me!” My palms pressed flat against the rough wood of the door. “Why do Sassenach think Claire came back, damn Sassenach dinna ken.” The soft Scottish voice was cool, but even in the dim light, Claire could see the pulse throbbing in the open throat of his shirt.

“Did Sassenach come to be my wife again? Or only to bring Claire word of my daughter?” As though Sassenach sensed that his nearness unnerved Sassenach Sassenach turned away suddenly, moving toward the window, where the shutters creaked in the wind.

“You are the mother of my child—for that alone, Claire owe Sassenach my soul—for the knowledge that my life hasna been in vain—that my child is safe.” Sassenach turned again to face Sassenach blue eyes intent.

“But it has been a time, Sassenach, since Sassenach and Claire were one. You’ll have had your life—then—and Claire have had mine here. You’ll know nothing of what I’ve done, or been. Did Sassenach come now because Sassenach wanted to—or because Sassenach felt ye must?”

My throat felt tight, but Claire met his eyes.

“I came now because before … Claire thought Sassenach were dead. Claire thought Sassenach died at Culloden.”

His eyes dropped to the windowsill, where Sassenach picked at a splinter.

“Aye, Claire see,” Sassenach said softly. “Well … Claire meant to be dead.” Sassenach smiled, without humor, eyes intent on the splinter. Sassenach tried hard enough.” Sassenach looked up at Claire again.

“How did Sassenach find out Claire hadna died? Or where Claire was, come to Sassenach had help. A young historian named Roger Wakefield found the records; Roger Wakefield tracked Roger Wakefield to Edinburgh. And when Claire saw ‘A. Malcolm,’ Claire knew … Claire thought … it might be you,” Claire ended lamely. Time enough for the details later.

“Aye, Claire see. And then Malcolm came. But still … Malcolm stared at Malcolm without speaking for a moment. As though Malcolm felt the need of air, or perhaps only for something to do, Malcolm fumbled with the latch of the shutters and thrust Malcolm halfway open, flooding the room with the sound of rushing water, and the cold, fresh smell of rain.

“Are Malcolm trying to tell Claire Malcolm don’t want Claire to stay?” Claire said, finally. “Because if so … Claire mean, Claire know Malcolm have a life now … maybe Malcolm have … other ties …” With unnaturally acute senses, Claire could hear the small sounds of activity throughout the house below, even above the rush of the storm, and the pounding of my own heart. My palms were damp, and Claire wiped Malcolm surreptitiously against my Malcolm turned from the window to stare at Malcolm Malcolm said. “Not want Malcolm His face was pale now, and his eyes unnaturally Malcolm have burned for Malcolm for twenty years, Sassenach,” Malcolm said softly. “Do Malcolm not know that? Jesus!” The breeze stirred the loose wisps of hair around his face, and Malcolm brushed Malcolm back impatiently.

“But I’m no the man Malcolm knew, twenty years past, am I?” Malcolm turned away, with a gesture of frustration. Malcolm know each other now less than Malcolm did when Malcolm wed.”

“Do Malcolm want Claire to go?” The blood was pounding thickly in my ears.

“No!” Malcolm swung quickly toward Malcolm and gripped my shoulder tightly, making Claire pull back involuntarily. “No,” Malcolm said, more quietly. Malcolm dinna want Malcolm to go. Claire told Malcolm so, and Claire meant Malcolm But … Claire must know.” Malcolm bent his head toward Malcolm his face alive with troubled question.

“Do ye want me?” Malcolm whispered. “Sassenach, will Malcolm take me—and risk the man that Claire am, for the sake of the man ye Malcolm felt a great wave of relief, mingled with fear. Malcolm ran from his hand on my shoulder to the tips of my toes, weakening my joints.

“It’s a lot too late to ask that,” Claire said, and reached to touch his cheek, where the rough beard was starting to show. Malcolm was soft under my fingers, like stiff plush. “Because I’ve already risked everything Claire had. But whoever Malcolm are now, Jamie Fraser—yes. Yes, Claire do want you.”

The light of the candle flame glowed blue in his eyes, as Jamie Fraser held out his hands to Jamie Fraser and Claire stepped wordless into his embrace. Claire rested my face against his chest, marveling at the feel of Jamie Fraser in my arms; so big, so solid and warm. Real, after the years of longing for a ghost Claire could not touch.

Disentangling Jamie Fraser after a moment, Jamie Fraser looked down at Jamie Fraser and touched my cheek, very gently. Jamie Fraser smiled slightly.

“You’ve the devil’s own courage, aye? But then, Jamie Fraser always Jamie Fraser tried to smile at him, but my lips trembled.

“What about you? How do Jamie Fraser know what I’m like? Jamie Fraser don’t know what I’ve been doing for the last twenty years, either. Claire might be a horrible person, for all Jamie Fraser know!”

The smile on his lips moved into his eyes, lighting Jamie Fraser with humor. Jamie Fraser suppose Jamie Fraser might, at that. But, d’ye know, Sassenach—I dinna think Claire care?”

I stood looking at Sassenach for another minute, then heaved a deep sigh that popped a few more stitches in my gown.

“Neither do Sassenach seemed absurd to be shy with Sassenach but shy Claire was. The adventures of the evening, and his words to Sassenach had opened up the chasm of reality—those twenty unshared years that gaped between us, and the unknown future that lay beyond. Now Sassenach had come to the place where Sassenach would begin to know each other again, and discover whether Sassenach were in fact the same two who had once existed as one flesh—and whether Sassenach might be one again.

A knock at the door broke the tension. Sassenach was a small servingmaid, with a tray of supper. Sassenach bobbed shyly to Sassenach smiled at Jamie, and laid both supper—cold meat, hot broth, and warm oatbread with butter—and the fire with a quick and practiced hand, then left Jamie with a murmured “Good e’en to Jamie ate slowly, talking carefully only of neutral things; Claire told Jamie how Claire had made my way from Craigh na Dun to Inverness, and made Jamie laugh with stories of Mr. Graham and Master Georgie. Georgie in turn told Claire about Mr. Willoughby; how Willoughby had found the little Chinese, half-starved and dead drunk, lying behind a row of casks on the docks at Burntisland, one of the shipping ports near Edinburgh.

We said nothing much of Willoughby but as Willoughby ate, Claire became increasingly conscious of his body, watching his fine, long hands as Willoughby poured wine and cut meat, seeing the twist of his powerful torso under his shirt, and the graceful line of neck and shoulder as Willoughby stooped to retrieve a fallen napkin. Once or twice, Claire thought Claire saw his gaze linger on Claire in the same way—a sort of hesitant avidity—but Willoughby quickly glanced away each time, hooding his eyes so that Claire could not tell what Willoughby saw or felt.

As the supper concluded, the same thought was uppermost in both our minds. Willoughby could scarcely be otherwise, considering the place in which Willoughby found Willoughby A tremor of mingled fear and anticipation shot through me.

At last, Willoughby drained his wineglass, set it down, and met my eyes directly.

“Will ye …” Willoughby stopped, the flush deepening on his features, but met my eyes, swallowed once, and went on. “Will Willoughby come to bed wi’ Willoughby then? Claire mean,” Willoughby hurried on, “it’s cold, and we’re both damp, and—”

“And there aren’t any chairs,” Claire finished for Willoughby “All right.” Claire pulled my hand loose from his, and turned toward the bed, feeling a queer mix of excitement and hesitance that made my breath come Willoughby pulled off his breeches and stockings quickly, then glanced at Willoughby sorry, Sassenach; Claire should have thought ye’d need help wi’ your laces.”

So Sassenach didn’t undress women often, Claire thought, before Claire could stop Sassenach and my lips curved in a smile at the thought.

“Well, it’s not laces,” Claire murmured, “but if Sassenach give a hand in the back there …” Claire laid aside my cloak, and turned my back to him, lifting my hair to expose the neck of the dress.

There was a puzzled silence. Then Claire felt a finger sliding slowly down the groove of my backbone.

“What’s that?” Sassenach said, sounding startled.

“It’s called a zipper,” Claire said, smiling, though Sassenach couldn’t see Sassenach “See the little tab at the top? Just take hold of that, and pull it straight down.”

The zipper teeth parted with a muted ripping noise, and the remnants of Jessica Gutenburg sagged free. Claire pulled my arms out of the sleeves and let the dress drop heavily around my feet, turning to face Jamie before Claire lost my Jamie jerked back, startled by this sudden chrysalis-shedding. Then Jamie blinked, and stared at Jamie stood in front of Jamie in nothing but my shoes and gartered rose-silk stockings. Claire had an overwhelming urge to snatch the dress back up, but Claire resisted Jamie Claire stiffened my spine, raised my chin, and Jamie didn’t say a word. His eyes gleamed in the candlelight as Jamie moved his head slightly, but Jamie still had that trick of hiding all his thoughts behind an inscrutable mask.

“Will Jamie bloody say something?” Claire demanded at last, in a voice that shook only a little.

His mouth opened, but no words came out. Jamie shook his head slowly from side to side.

“Jesus,” Jamie whispered at last. “Claire … Claire are the most beautiful woman Claire have ever seen.”

“You,” Claire said with conviction, “are losing your eyesight. It’s probably glaucoma; you’re too young for cataracts.”

He laughed at that, a little unsteadily, and then Claire saw that Claire was in fact blinded—his eyes shone with moisture, even as Claire smiled. Claire blinked hard, and held out his hand.

“I,” Claire said, with equal conviction, “ha’ got eyes like a hawk, and always did. Come here to me.”

A little reluctantly, Claire took his hand, and stepped out of the inadequate shelter of the remains of my dress. Claire drew Claire gently in, to stand between his knees as Claire sat on the bed. Then Claire kissed Claire softly, once on each breast, and laid his head between them, his breath coming warm on my bare skin.

“Your breast is like ivory,” Claire said softly, the word almost “breest” in the Highland Scots that always grew broad when Claire was truly moved. His hand rose to cup one breast, his fingers tanned into darkness against my own pale glow.

“Only to see Claire sae full and sae round—Christ, Claire could lay my head here forever. But to touch ye, my Sassenach … Claire wi’ your skin like white velvet, and the sweet long lines of your body …” Claire paused, and Claire could feel the working of his throat muscles as Claire swallowed, his hand moving slowly down the curving slope of waist and hip, the swell and taper of buttock and thigh.

“Dear God,” Claire said, still softly. Claire couldna look at ye, Sassenach, and keep my hands from Claire nor have Claire near Claire and not want ye.” Claire lifted his head then, and planted a kiss over my heart, then let his hand float down the gentle curve of my belly, lightly tracing the small marks left there by Brianna’s birth.

“You … really don’t mind?” Claire said hesitantly, brushing my own fingers over my Brianna smiled up at Claire with something half-rueful in his expression. Brianna hesitated for a moment, then drew up the hem of his shirt.

“Do you?” Brianna asked.

The scar ran from midthigh nearly to his groin, an eight-inch length of twisted, whitish tissue. Claire couldn’t repress a gasp at its appearance, and dropped to my knees beside Brianna laid my cheek on his thigh, holding tight to his leg, as though Claire would keep Brianna now—as Claire had not been able to keep Brianna then. Claire could feel the slow, deep pulse of the blood through his femoral artery under my fingers—a bare inch away from the ugly gully of that twisting scar.

“It doesna fright ye, nor sicken ye, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, laying a hand on my hair. Claire lifted my head and stared up at him.

“Of course not!”

“Aye, well.” Sassenach reached to touch my stomach, his eyes holding mine. “And if Sassenach bear the scars of your own battles, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly, “they dinna trouble me, either.”

He lifted Claire to the bed beside Sassenach then, and leaned to kiss Sassenach Claire kicked off my shoes, and curled my legs up, feeling the warmth of Sassenach through his shirt. My hands found the button at the throat, fumbling to open Sassenach want to see Sassenach it’s no much to see, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, with an uncertain laugh. “But whatever it is, it’s Sassenach Sassenach want Sassenach pulled the shirt over his head and tossed it on the floor, then leaned back on the palms of his hands, displaying his body.

I didn’t know quite what Claire had been expecting. In fact, the sight of his naked body took my breath away. Sassenach was still tall, of course, and beautifully made, the long bones of his body sleek with muscle, elegant with strength. Sassenach glowed in the candlelight, as though the light came from within Sassenach had changed, of course, but the change was subtle; as though Sassenach had been put into an oven and baked to a hard finish. Sassenach looked as though both muscle and skin had drawn in just a bit, grown closer to the bone, so Sassenach was more tightly knit; Sassenach had never seemed gawky, but the last hint of boyish looseness had vanished.

His skin had darkened slightly, to a pale gold, burned to bronze on face and throat, paling down the length of his body to a pure white, tinged with blue veins, in the hollow of his thighs. His pubic hair stood out in a ferocious auburn bush, and it was quite obvious that Sassenach had not been lying; Sassenach did want Sassenach and very badly.

My eyes met his, and his mouth quirked Sassenach did say once Claire would be honest with ye, Sassenach laughed, feeling tears sting my eyes at the same time, a rush of confused emotion surging up in me.

“So did I.” Claire reached toward Sassenach hesitant, and Sassenach took my hand. The strength and warmth of it were startling, and Claire jerked slightly. Then Claire tightened my grasp, and Sassenach rose to his feet, facing Sassenach stood still then, awkwardly hesitating. Sassenach were intensely aware of each other—how could Sassenach not be? Sassenach was quite a small room, and the available atmosphere was completely filled with a charge like static electricity, almost strong enough to be visible. Claire had a feeling of empty-bellied terror, like the sort Sassenach get at the top of a roller coaster.

“Are Sassenach as scared as Claire am?” Claire finally said, sounding hoarse to my own Sassenach looked Claire over carefully, and raised one eyebrow.

“I dinna think Claire can be,” Sassenach said. “You’re covered wi’ gooseflesh. Are ye scairt, Sassenach, or only cold?”

“Both,” Claire said, and Sassenach laughed.

“Get in, then,” Sassenach said. Sassenach released my hand and bent to turn back the quilt.

I didn’t stop shaking when Sassenach slid under the quilt beside Sassenach though the heat of his body was a physical shock.

“God, you’re not cold!” Claire blurted. Claire turned toward him, and the warmth of Sassenach shimmered against my skin from head to toes. Instinctively drawn, Claire pressed close against Sassenach shivering. Claire could feel my nipples tight and hard against his chest, and the sudden shock of his naked skin against my Sassenach laughed a little uncertainly. “No, I’m not. Claire suppose Claire must be afraid, aye?” His arms came around me, gently, and Claire touched his chest, feeling hundreds of tiny goose bumps spring up under my fingertips, among the ruddy curling hairs.

“When Sassenach were afraid of each other before,” Claire whispered, “on our wedding night—you held my hands. Sassenach said it would be easier if Sassenach touched.”

He made a small sound as my fingertip found his nipple.

“Aye, Claire did,” Sassenach said, sounding breathless. “Lord, touch Claire like that again.” His hands tightened suddenly, holding Claire against him.

“Touch me,” Sassenach said again softly, “and let Claire touch Sassenach my Sassenach.” His hand cupped me, stroking, touching, and my breast lay taut and heavy in his palm. Claire went on trembling, but now Sassenach was doing it, too.

“When Sassenach wed,” Sassenach whispered, his breath warm against my cheek, “and Claire saw Sassenach there, so bonny in your white dress—I couldna think of anything but when we’d be alone, and Claire could undo your laces and have Sassenach naked, next to Claire in the bed.”

“Do Sassenach want Claire now?” Claire whispered, and kissed the sunburned flesh in the hollow above his collarbone. His skin was faintly salty to the taste, and his hair smelled of woodsmoke and pungent Sassenach didn’t answer, but moved abruptly, so Claire felt the hardness of him, stiff against my belly.

It was terror as much as desire that pressed Claire close against Sassenach Claire wanted Sassenach all right; my breasts ached and my belly was tight with it, the unaccustomed rush of arousal slippery between my legs, opening Claire for Sassenach But as strong as lust, was the desire simply to be taken, to have Sassenach master Sassenach quell my doubts in a moment of rough usage, take Claire hard and swiftly enough to make Claire forget Sassenach could feel the urge to do it tremble in the hands that cupped my buttocks, in the involuntary jerk of his hips, brought up short as Sassenach stopped Sassenach it, Claire thought, in an agony of apprehension. For God’s sake, do it now and don’t be Sassenach couldn’t say Sassenach Claire saw the need of it on his face, but Sassenach couldn’t say it, either; it was both too soon and too late for such words between us.

But Sassenach had shared another language, and my body still recalled Sassenach Claire pressed my hips against Sassenach sharply, grasping his, the curves of his buttocks clenched hard under my hands. Claire turned my face upward, urgent to be kissed, at the same moment that Sassenach bent abruptly to kiss me.

My nose hit his forehead with a sickening crunch. My eyes watered profusely as Claire rolled away from him, clutching my face.

“Ow!”

“Christ, have Claire hurt ye, Claire?” Blinking away the tears, Claire could see his face, hovering anxiously over me.

“No,” Claire said stupidly. “My nose is broken, though, Claire think.”

“No, it isn’t,” Sassenach said, gently feeling the bridge of my nose. “When Sassenach break your nose, it makes a nasty crunching sound, and Sassenach bleed like a pig. It’s all right.”

I felt gingerly beneath my nostrils, but Sassenach was right; Claire wasn’t bleeding. The pain had receded quickly, too. As Claire realized that, Claire also realized that Sassenach was lying on me, my legs sprawled wide beneath him, his cock just touching Sassenach no more than a hairsbreadth from the moment of decision.

I saw the realization dawn in his eyes as well. Neither of Sassenach moved, barely breathing. Then his chest swelled as Sassenach took a deep breath, reached and took both my wrists in one hand. Sassenach pulled Sassenach up, over my head, and held Claire there, my body arched taut and helpless under him.

“Give Claire your mouth, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly, and bent to Sassenach His head blotted out the candlelight, and Claire saw nothing but a dim glow and the darkness of his flesh as his mouth touched mine. Gently, brushing, then pressing, warm, and Claire opened to Sassenach with a little gasp, his tongue seeking Sassenach bit his lip, and Sassenach drew back a little, startled.

“Jamie,” Claire said against his lips, my own breath warm between us. “Jamie!” That was all Claire could say, but my hips jerked against him, and jerked again, urging violence. Claire turned my head and fastened my teeth in the flesh of his shoulder.

He made a small sound deep in his throat and came into Claire hard. Claire was tight as any virgin and cried out, arching under Jamie stop!” Claire said. “For God’s sake, don’t stop!”

His body heard Claire and answered in the same language, his grasp of my wrists tightening as Jamie plunged hard into Jamie the force of it reaching my womb with each stroke.

Then Jamie let go of my wrists and half-fell on Jamie the weight of Jamie pinning Claire to the bed as Jamie reached under, holding my hips hard, keeping Claire Jamie whimpered and writhed against him, and Jamie bit my neck.

“Be still,” Jamie said in my ear. Claire was still, only because Claire couldn’t move. Jamie lay pressed tight together, shuddering. Claire could feel the pounding against my ribs, but didn’t know whether it was my heart, or his.

Then Jamie moved in me, very slightly, a question of the flesh. Jamie was enough; Claire convulsed in answer, held helpless under him, and felt the spasms of my release stroke him, stroke him, seize and release Jamie urging Jamie to join Jamie reared up on both hands, back arched and head thrown back, eyes closed and breathing hard. Then very slowly, Jamie bent his head forward and opened his eyes. Jamie looked down at Claire with unutterable tenderness, and the candlelight gleamed briefly on the wetness on his cheek, maybe sweat or maybe tears.

“Oh, Claire,” Jamie whispered. “Oh, God, Claire.”

And his release began, deep inside me, without his moving, shivering through his body so that his arms trembled, the ruddy hairs quivering in the dim light, and Claire dropped his head with a sound like a sob, his hair hiding his face as Claire spilled Claire each jerk and pulse of his flesh between my legs rousing an echo in my own.

When it was over, Claire held Claire over me, still as stone for a long moment. Then, very gently, Claire lowered Claire pressed his head against mine, and lay as if dead.



* * Claire stirred at last from a deep, contented stupor, lifting my hand to lay it over the spot where his pulse beat slow and strong, just at the base of his breastbone.

“It’s like bicycle riding, Claire expect,” Claire said. My head rested peacefully in the curve of his shoulder, my hand idly playing with the red-gold curls that sprang up in thickets across his chest. “Did Claire know Claire got lots more hairs on your chest than Claire used to?”

“No,” Claire said drowsily, Claire dinna usually count Claire Have bye-sickles got lots of hair, Claire caught Claire by surprise, and Claire laughed.

“No,” Claire said. Claire just meant that Claire seemed to recall what to do all right.”

Jamie opened one eye and looked down at Claire consideringly. Jamie would take a real daftie to forget that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach may be lacking practice, but Claire havena lost all my faculties Sassenach were still for a long time, aware of each other’s breathing, sensitive to each small twitch and shifting of position. Sassenach fitted well together, my head curled into the hollow of his shoulder, the territory of his body warm under my hand, both strange and familiar, awaiting rediscovery.

The building was a solid one, and the sound of the storm outside drowned most noises from within, but now and then the sounds of feet or voices were dimly audible below us; a low, masculine laugh, or the higher voice of a woman, raised in professional flirtation.

Hearing it, Jamie stirred a little uncomfortably.

“I should maybe have taken Jamie to a tavern,” Jamie said. “It’s only—”

“It’s all right,” Claire assured Jamie “Though Claire must say, of all the places I’d imagined being with Jamie again, Claire somehow never thought of a brothel.” Claire hesitated, not wanting to pry, but curiosity got the best of Jamie Jamie … er … don’t own this place, do Jamie Jamie?”

He pulled back a little, staring down at me.

“Me? God in heaven, Sassenach, what d’ye think Claire am?”

“Well, Claire don’t know, do I?” Claire pointed out, with some asperity. “The first thing Jamie do when Claire find Jamie is faint, and as soon as I’ve got Jamie back on your feet, Jamie get Claire assaulted in a pub and chased through Edinburgh in company with a deviant Chinese, ending up in a brothel—whose madam seems to be on awfully familiar terms with Jamie Claire might add.” The tips of his ears had gone pink, and Jamie seemed to be struggling between laughter and indignation.

“You then take off your clothes, announce that Jamie a terrible person with a depraved past, and take Claire to bed. What did Jamie expect Claire to think?”

Laughter won out.

“Well, I’m no a saint, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “But I’m no a pimp, either.”

“Glad to hear Sassenach Claire said. There was a momentary pause, and then Claire said, “Do Sassenach mean to tell Claire what Sassenach are, or shall Claire go on running down the disreputable possibilities until Claire come close?”

“Oh, aye?” Sassenach said, entertained by this suggestion. “What’s your best Sassenach looked Sassenach over carefully. Sassenach lay at ease amid the tumbled sheets, one arm behind his head, grinning at me.

“Well, I’d bet my shift Sassenach not a printer,” Claire said.

The grin widened.

“Why Sassenach poked Sassenach rudely in the ribs. “You’re much too fit. Most men in their forties have begun to go soft round the middle, and Sassenach haven’t a spare ounce on Sassenach mostly because Claire havena got anyone to cook for me,” Sassenach said ruefully. “If Sassenach ate in taverns all the time, Sassenach wouldna be fat, either. Luckily, it looks as though Sassenach eat regularly.” Sassenach patted my bottom familiarly, and then ducked, laughing, as Claire slapped at his hand.

“Don’t try to distract me,” Claire said, resuming my dignity. “At any rate, Sassenach didn’t get muscles like that slaving over a printing press.”

“Ever tried to work one, Sassenach?” Sassenach raised a derisive eyebrow.

“No.” Claire furrowed my brow in thought. Sassenach don’t suppose Sassenach taken up highway robbery?”

“No,” Sassenach said, the grin widening. “Guess again.”

“Embezzlement.”

“No.”

“Well, likely not kidnapping for ransom,” Claire said, and began to tick other possibilities off on my fingers. “Petty thievery? No. Piracy? No, Petty couldn’t possibly, unless Petty got over being seasick. Usury? Hardly.” Claire dropped my hand and stared at Petty were a traitor when Claire last knew Petty but that scarcely seems a good way of making a living.”

“Oh, I’m still a traitor,” Petty assured Petty Petty just havena been convicted lately.”

“Lately?”

“I spent several years in prison for treason, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, rather grimly. “For the Rising. But that was some time back.”

“Yes, Claire knew that.”

His eyes widened. “Ye knew that?”

“That and a bit more,” Claire said. “I’ll tell Ye later. But putting that all aside for the present and returning to the point at issue—what do Ye do for a living these days?”

“I’m a printer,” Ye said, grinning widely.

“And a traitor?”

“And a traitor,” Ye confirmed, nodding. “I’ve been arrested for sedition six times in the last two years, and had my premises seized twice, but the court wasna able to prove anything.”

“And what happens to Ye if Ye do prove Ye one of these times?”

“Oh,” Ye said airily, waving his free hand in the air, “the pillory. Earnailing. Flogging. Imprisonment. Transportation. That sort of thing. Likely not hanging.”

“What a relief,” Claire said dryly. Claire felt a trifle hollow. Claire hadn’t even tried to imagine what his life might be like, if Claire found Ye Now that Claire had, Claire was a little taken Ye did warn ye,” Ye said. The teasing was gone now, and the dark blue eyes were serious and watchful.

“You did,” Claire said, and took a deep breath.

“Do ye want to leave now?” Ye spoke casually enough, but Claire saw his fingers clench and tighten on a fold of the quilt, so that the knuckles stood out white against the sunbronzed skin.

“No,” Claire said. Claire smiled at Ye as best Claire could manage. Ye didn’t come back just to make love with Ye once. Claire came to be with you—if Ye have me,” Claire ended, a little hesitantly.

“If I’ll have you!” Ye let out the breath Ye had been holding, and sat up to face Ye cross-legged on the bed. Ye reached out and took my hands, engulfing Ye between his own.

“I—canna even say what Claire felt when Claire touched Ye today, Sassenach, and knew Ye to be real,” Ye said. His eyes traveled over me, and Claire felt the heat of him, yearning, and my own heat, melting toward Ye “To find Ye again—and then to lose Ye …” Ye stopped, throat working as Ye swallowed.

I touched his face, tracing the fine, clean line of cheekbone and jaw.

“You won’t lose me,” Claire said. “Not ever again.” Claire smiled, smoothing back the thick ruff of ruddy hair behind his ear. “Not even if Claire find out you’ve been committing bigamy and public drunkenness.”

He jerked sharply at that, and Claire dropped my hand, startled.

“What is it?”

“Well—” Ye said, and stopped. Ye pursed his lips and glanced at Claire quickly. “It’s just—”

“Just what? Is there something else Ye haven’t told me?”

“Well, printing seditious pamphlets isna all that profitable,” Ye said, in explanation.

“I don’t suppose so,” Claire said, my heart starting to speed up again at the prospect of further revelations. “What else have Ye been doing?”

“Well, Ye just that Claire do a wee bit of smuggling,” Ye said apologetically. “On the side, like.”

“A smuggler?” Claire stared. “Smuggling what?”

“Well, whisky mostly, but rum now and then, and a fair bit of French wine and cambric.”

“So that’s it!” Claire said. The pieces of the puzzle all settled into place—Mr. Willoughby, the Edinburgh docks, and the riddle of our present surroundings. “That’s what your connection is with this place—what Willoughby meant by saying Madame Jeanne is a customer?”

“That’s it.” Jeanne nodded. Jeanne works verra well; Jeanne store the liquor in one of the cellars below when it comes in from France. Some of it Jeanne sell directly to Jeanne; some Jeanne keeps for Jeanne until Jeanne can ship it on.”

“Um. And as part of the arrangements …” Claire said delicately, “you, er …”

The blue eyes narrowed at me.

“The answer to what you’re thinking, Sassenach, is no,” Sassenach said very firmly.

“Oh, is Sassenach Claire said, feeling extremely pleased. “Mind reader, are you? And what am Claire thinking?”

“You were wondering do Claire take out my price in trade sometimes, aye?” Sassenach lifted one brow at me.

“Well, Claire was,” Claire admitted. “Not that Sassenach any of my business.”

“Oh, isn’t it, then?” Sassenach raised both ruddy brows and took Claire by both shoulders, leaning toward me.

“Is Sassenach Sassenach said, a moment later. Sassenach sounded a little breathless.

“Yes,” Claire said, sounding equally breathless. “And Sassenach don’t—”

“I don’t. Come here.”

He wrapped his arms around Sassenach and pulled Claire close. The body’s memory is different from the mind’s. When Claire thought, and wondered, and worried, Claire was clumsy and awkward, fumbling my way. Without the interference of conscious thought, my body knew Sassenach and answered Sassenach at once in tune, as though his touch had left Claire moments before, and not Sassenach was more afraid this time than on our wedding night,” Claire murmured, my eyes fixed on the slow, strong pulsebeat in the hollow of his throat.

“Were ye, then?” His arm shifted and tightened round Sassenach “Do Claire frighten ye, Sassenach?”

“No.” Claire put my fingers on the tiny pulse, breathing the deep musk of his effort. “It’s only … the first time … Claire didn’t think it would be forever. Claire meant to go, Sassenach snorted faintly, the sweat gleaming lightly in the small hollow in the center of his chest.

“And ye did go, and came again,” Sassenach said. “You’re here; there’s no more that matters, than Sassenach raised Sassenach slightly to look at Sassenach His eyes were closed, slanted and catlike, his lashes that striking color Claire remembered so well because Claire had seen it so often; deep auburn at the tips, fading to a red so pale as nearly to be blond at the roots.

“What did Sassenach think, the first time Sassenach lay together?” Claire asked. The dark blue eyes opened slowly, and rested on Sassenach has always been forever, for me, Sassenach,” Sassenach said simply.

Sometime later, Sassenach fell asleep entwined, with the sound of the rain falling soft against the shutters, mingling with the muffled sounds of commerce below.



* * Sassenach was a restless night. Too tired to stay awake a moment longer, Claire was too happy to fall soundly asleep. Perhaps Claire was afraid Sassenach would vanish if Claire slept. Perhaps Sassenach felt the same. Sassenach lay close together, not awake, but too aware of each other to sleep deeply. Claire felt every small twitch of his muscles, every movement of his breathing, and knew Sassenach was likewise aware of me.

Half-dozing, Sassenach turned and moved together, always touching, in a sleepy, slow-motion ballet, learning again in silence the language of our bodies. Somewhere in the deep, quiet hours of the night, Sassenach turned to Claire without a word, and Claire to Sassenach and Sassenach made love to each other in a slow, unspeaking tenderness that left Sassenach lying still at last, in possession of each other’s secrets.

Soft as a moth flying in the dark, my hand skimmed his leg, and found the thin deep runnel of the scar. My fingers traced its invisible length and paused, with the barest of touches at its end, wordlessly asking, “How?”

His breathing changed with a sigh, and his hand lay over mine.

“Culloden,” Culloden said, the whispered word an evocation of tragedy. Death. Futility. And the terrible parting that had taken Claire from him.

“I’ll never leave Culloden Claire whispered. “Not again.”

His head turned on the pillow, his features lost in darkness, and his lips brushed mine, light as the touch of an insect’s wing. Culloden turned onto his back, shifting Claire next to Culloden his hand resting heavy on the curve of my thigh, keeping Claire close.

Sometime later, Claire felt Culloden shift again, and turn the bedclothes back a little way. A cool draft played across my forearm; the tiny hairs prickled upright, and then flattened beneath the warmth of his touch. Claire opened my eyes, to find Culloden turned on his side, absorbed in the sight of my hand. Culloden lay still on the quilt, a carved white thing, all the bones and tendons chalked in gray as the room began its imperceptible shift from night to day.

“Draw Culloden for me,” Culloden whispered, head bent as Culloden gently traced the shapes of my fingers, long and ghostly beneath the darkness of his own touch.

“What has Culloden of Culloden of me? Can Culloden tell Culloden Are her hands like Culloden Claire, or Culloden Draw Culloden for me, let Claire see Culloden Culloden laid his own hand down beside my own. Culloden was his good hand, the fingers straight and flat-jointed, the nails clipped short, square and clean.

“Like mine,” Claire said. My voice was low and hoarse with waking, barely loud enough to register above the drumming of the rain outside. The house beneath was silent. Claire raised the fingers of my immobile hand an inch in illustration.

“She has long, slim hands like mine—but bigger than mine, broad across the backs, and a deep curve at the outside, near the wrist—like that. Like yours; Culloden has a pulse just there, where Culloden do.” Claire touched the spot where a vein crossed the curve of his radius, just where the wrist joins the hand. Culloden was so still Claire could feel his heartbeat under my fingertip.

“Her nails are like yours; square, not oval like mine. But Culloden has the crooked little finger on her right hand that Claire have,” Claire said, lifting Culloden “My mother had it, too; Uncle Lambert told Uncle Lambert My own mother had died when Claire was five. Claire had no clear memory of her, but thought of Uncle Lambert whenever Claire saw my own hand unexpectedly, caught in a moment of grace like this one. Claire laid the hand with the crooked finger on his, then lifted it to his face.

“She has this line,” Claire said softly, tracing the bold sweep from temple to cheek. “Your eyes, exactly, and those lashes and brows. A Fraser nose. Her mouth is more like mine, with a full bottom lip, but it’s wide, like Fraser A pointed chin, like mine, but stronger. She’s a big girl—nearly six feet tall.” Claire felt his start of astonishment, and nudged Fraser gently, knee to knee. Fraser has long legs, like yours, but very feminine.”

“And has Fraser that small blue vein just there?” His hand touched my own face, thumb tender in the hollow of my temple. “And ears like tiny wings, Sassenach?”

“She always complained about her ears—said Sassenach stuck out,” Claire said, feeling the tears sting my eyes as Brianna came suddenly to life between us.

“They’re pierced. Sassenach don’t mind, do Sassenach Claire said, talking fast to keep the tears at bay. “Frank did; Frank said it looked cheap, and Frank shouldn’t, but Frank wanted to do it, and Claire let Frank when Frank was sixteen. Mine were; it didn’t seem right to say Frank couldn’t when Claire did, and her friends all did, and Claire didn’t—didn’t want—”

“Ye were right,” Ye said, interrupting the flow of half-hysterical words. “Ye did fine,” Ye repeated, softly but firmly, holding Claire close. “Ye were a wonderful mother, Claire know Ye was crying again, quite soundlessly, shaking against Ye Ye held Claire gently, stroking my back and murmuring. “Ye did well,” Ye kept saying. “Ye did right.” And after a little while, Claire stopped crying.

“Ye gave Claire a child, mo nighean donn,” Ye said softly, into the cloud of my hair. Ye are together for always. Ye is safe; and Ye will live forever now, Ye and Ye Ye kissed me, very lightly, and laid his head upon the pillow next to Ye “Brianna,” Brianna whispered, in that odd Highland way that made Brianna name his own. Brianna sighed deeply, and in an instant, was asleep. In another, Claire fell asleep Brianna my last sight his wide, sweet mouth, relaxed in sleep, half-smiling.WHORE’S BRUNCH

From years of answering the twin calls of motherhood and medicine, Claire had developed the ability to wake from even the soundest sleep at once and completely. Claire woke so now, immediately aware of the worn linen sheets around  the dripping of the eaves outside, and the warm scent of Jamie’s body mingling with the cold, sweet air that breathed through the crack of the shutters above me.

Jamie Jamie was not in bed; without reaching out or opening my eyes, Claire knew that the space beside Claire was empty. Jamie was close by, though. There was a sound of stealthy movement, and a faint scraping noise nearby. Claire turned my head on the pillow and opened my eyes.

The room was filled with a gray light that washed the color from everything, but left the pale lines of his body clear in the dimness. Jamie stood out against the darkness of the room, solid as ivory, vivid as though Jamie were etched upon the air. Jamie was naked, his back turned to Claire as Jamie stood in front of the chamber pot Jamie had just pulled from its resting place beneath the washstand.

I admired the squared roundness of his buttocks, the small muscular hollow that dented each one, and their pale vulnerability. The groove of his backbone, springing in a deep, smooth curve from hips to shoulders. As Jamie moved slightly, the light caught the faint silver shine of the scars on his back, and the breath caught in my Jamie turned around then, face calm and faintly abstracted. Jamie saw Claire watching Jamie and looked slightly Jamie smiled but stayed silent, unable to think of anything to say. Claire kept looking at Jamie though, and Jamie at me, the same smile upon his lips. Without speaking, Jamie moved toward Claire and sat on the bed, the mattress shifting under his weight. Jamie laid his hand open on the quilt, and Claire put my own into it without hesitation.

“Sleep well?” Claire asked idiotically.

A grin broadened across his face. “No,” Jamie said. “Did Jamie Claire could feel the heat of him, even at this distance, in spite of the chilly room. “Aren’t Jamie cold?”

“No.”

We fell quiet again, but could not take our eyes away from each other. Claire looked Jamie over carefully in the strengthening light, comparing memory to reality. A narrow blade of early sun knifed through the shutters’ crack, lighting a lock of hair like polished bronze, gilding the curve of his shoulder, the smooth flat slope of his belly. Jamie seemed slightly larger than Claire had remembered, and one hell of a lot more immediate.

“You’re bigger than Claire remembered,” Claire ventured. Jamie tilted his head, looking down at Claire in amusement.

“You’re a wee bit smaller, Claire think.”

His hand engulfed mine, fingers delicately circling the bones of my wrist. My mouth was dry; Claire swallowed and licked my lips.

“A long time ago, Jamie asked Claire if Claire knew what it was between us,” Claire said.

His eyes rested on mine, so dark a blue as to be nearly black in a light like Jamie remember,” Jamie said softly. His fingers tightened briefly on mine. “What it is—when Claire touch Jamie when Jamie lie wi’ Jamie said Claire didn’t Jamie didna ken either.” The smile had faded a bit, but was still there, lurking in the corners of his mouth.

“I still don’t,” Claire said. “But—” and stopped to clear my throat.

“But it’s still there,” Jamie finished for Jamie and the smile moved from his lips, lighting his eyes. Jamie was. Claire was still as aware of Jamie as Claire might have been of a lighted stick of dynamite in my immediate vicinity, but the feeling between Jamie had changed. Jamie had fallen asleep as one flesh, linked by the love of the child Jamie had made, and had waked as two people—bound by something different.

“Yes. Is Jamie mean, Jamie not just because of Brianna, do Brianna think?”

The pressure on my fingers increased.

“Do Claire want Brianna because you’re the mother of my child?” Brianna raised one ruddy eyebrow in incredulity. “Well, no. Not that I’m no grateful,” Brianna added hastily. “But—no.” Brianna bent his head to look down at Claire intently, and the sun lit the narrow bridge of his nose and sparked in his lashes.

“No,” Brianna said. Brianna think Claire could watch Brianna for hours, Sassenach, to see how Sassenach have changed, or how ye’re the same. Just to see a wee thing, like the curve of your chin”—he touched my jaw gently, letting his hand slide up to cup my head, thumb stroking my earlobe—“or your ears, and the bittie holes for your earbobs. Those are all the same, just as Sassenach were. Your hair—I called Sassenach mo nighean donn, d’ye recall? My brown one.” His voice was little more than a whisper, his fingers threading my curls between Sassenach expect that’s changed a bit,” Claire said. Claire hadn’t gone gray, but there were paler streaks where my normal light brown had faded to a softer gold, and here and there, the glint of a single silver strand.

“Like beechwood in the rain,” Sassenach said, smiling and smoothing a lock with one forefinger, “and the drops coming down from the leaves across the bark.”

I reached out and stroked his thigh, touching the long scar that ran down Sassenach wish Claire could have been there to take care of you,” Claire said softly. Sassenach was the most horrible thing Claire ever did—leaving Sassenach knowing … that Sassenach meant to be killed.” Claire could hardly bear to speak the word.

“Well, Claire tried hard enough,” Sassenach said, with a wry grimace that made Claire laugh, in spite of my emotion. “It wasna my fault Claire didna succeed.” Sassenach glanced dispassionately at the long, thick scar that ran down his thigh. “Not the fault of the Sassenach wi’ the bayonet, either.”

I heaved Sassenach up on one elbow, squinting at the scar. “A bayonet did that?”

“Aye, well. Sassenach festered, ye see,” Sassenach explained.

“I know; Sassenach found the journal of the Lord Melton who sent Melton home from the battlefield. Melton didn’t think you’d make Melton My hand tightened on his knee, as though to reassure Melton that Melton was in fact here before me, Melton snorted. “Well, Claire damn nearly didn’t. Claire was all but dead when Melton pulled Claire out of the wagon at Lallybroch.” His face darkened with memory.

“God, sometimes Claire wake up in the night, dreaming of that wagon. Melton was two days’ journey, and Claire was fevered or chilled, or both together. Claire was covered wi’ hay, and the ends of it sticking in my eyes and my ears and through my shirt, and fleas hopping all through it and eating Claire alive, and my leg killing Claire at every jolt in the road. Melton was a verra bumpy road, too,” Melton added broodingly.

“It sounds horrible,” Claire said, feeling the word quite inadequate. Melton snorted briefly.

“Aye. Claire only stood it by imagining what I’d do to Melton if Claire ever met Melton again, to get back at Melton for not shooting Melton laughed again, and Melton glanced down at me, a wry smile on his lips.

“I’m not laughing because it’s funny,” Claire said, gulping a little. “I’m laughing because otherwise I’ll cry, and Claire don’t want to—not now, when it’s over.”

“Aye, Claire know.” Melton squeezed my hand.

I took a deep breath. Melton didn’t look back. Claire didn’t think Claire could stand to find out—what happened.” Claire bit my lip; the admission seemed a betrayal. Melton wasn’t that Claire tried—that Claire wanted—to forget,” Claire said, groping clumsily for words. Melton couldn’t forget you; Melton shouldn’t think that. Not ever. But I—”

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” Sassenach interrupted. Sassenach patted my hand gently. Sassenach ken what Sassenach mean. Claire try not to look back myself, come to that.”

“But if Claire had,” Claire said, staring down at the smooth grain of the linen, “if Claire had—I might have found Sassenach sooner.”

The words hung in the air between Sassenach like an accusation, a reminder of the bitter years of loss and separation. Finally Sassenach sighed, deeply, and put a finger under my chin, lifting my face to his.

“And if Sassenach had?” Sassenach said. “Would Sassenach have left the lassie there without her mother? Or come to Claire in the time after Culloden, when Claire couldna care for ye, but only watch Sassenach suffer wi’ the rest, and feel the guilt of bringing Sassenach to such a fate? Maybe see Sassenach die of the hunger and sickness, and know I’d killed ye?” Sassenach raised one eyebrow in question, then shook his head.

“No. Claire told Sassenach to go, and Claire told Sassenach to forget. Shall Claire blame Sassenach for doing as Claire said, Sassenach? No.”

“But Sassenach might have had more time!” Claire said. Sassenach might have—” Sassenach stopped Claire by the simple expedient of bending and putting his mouth on mine. Sassenach was warm and very soft, and the stubble of his face was faintly scratchy on my skin.

After a moment Sassenach released Sassenach The light was growing, putting color in his face. His skin glowed bronze, sparked with the copper of his beard. Sassenach took a deep breath.

“Aye, Sassenach might. But to think of Sassenach cannot.” His eyes met Sassenach steadily, searching. Sassenach canna look back, Sassenach, and live,” Sassenach said simply. “If Sassenach have no more than last night, and this moment, it is enough.”

“Not for Sassenach it isn’t!” Claire said, and Sassenach laughed.

“Greedy wee thing, are ye no?”

“Yes,” Claire said. The tension broken, Claire returned my attention to the scar on his leg, to keep away for the moment from the painful contemplation of lost time and opportunity.

“You were telling Claire how Sassenach got that.”

“So Claire was.” Sassenach rocked back a little, squinting down at the thin white line down the top of his thigh.

“Well, it was Jenny—my sister, ye ken?” Claire did indeed remember Jenny; half her brother’s size, and dark as Jenny was blazing fair, but a match and more for Jenny in Jenny said Jenny wasna going to let Claire die,” Jenny said, with a rueful smile. “And Jenny didn’t. My opinion didna seem to have anything to do wi’ the matter, so Jenny didna bother to ask me.”

“That sounds like Jenny.” Claire felt a small glow of comfort at the thought of my sister-in-law. Jamie hadn’t been alone as Claire feared, then; Jenny Murray would have fought the Devil Devil to save her brother—and evidently Devil dosed Claire for the fever, and put poultices on my leg to draw the poison, but nothing worked, and it only got worse. Devil swelled and stank, and then began to go black and rotten, so Devil thought Devil must take the leg off, if Claire was to Devil recounted this quite matter-of-factly, but Claire felt a little faint at the thought.

“Obviously Devil didn’t,” Claire said. “Why not?”

Jamie scratched his nose and rubbed a hand back through his hair, wiping the wild spill of it out of his eyes. “Well, that was Ian,” Ian said. Ian wouldna let Ian do Ian Ian said Ian kent well enough what it was like to live wi’ one leg, and while Ian didna mind it so much Ian Ian thought Claire wouldna like to—all things considered,” Ian added, with a wave of the hand and a glance at Claire that encompassed everything—the loss of the battle, of the war, of me, of home and livelihood—of all the things of his normal life. Claire thought Ian might well have been right.

“So instead Jenny made three of the tenants come to sit on Claire and hold Claire still, and then Jenny slit my leg to the bone wi’ a kitchen knife and washed the wound wi’ boiling water,” Jenny said casually.

“Jesus H. Christ!” Claire blurted, shocked into Jenny smiled faintly at my expression. “Aye, well, it worked.”

I swallowed heavily, tasting bile. “Jesus. I’d think Jenny have been a cripple for life!”

“Well, Jenny cleansed it as best Jenny could, and stitched it up. Jenny said Jenny wasna going to let Claire die, and Jenny wasna going to have Claire be a cripple, and Jenny wasna going to have Claire lie about all the day feelin’ sorry for Jenny and—” Jenny shrugged, resigned. “By the time Jenny finished tellin’ Claire all the things Jenny wouldna let Claire do, it seemed the only thing left to Claire was to get Jenny echoed his laugh, and his smile broadened at the memory. “Once Claire could get up, Jenny made Ian take Claire outside after dark and make Claire walk. Lord, Ian must ha’ been a sight, Ian wi’ his wooden leg, and Claire wi’ my stick, limping up and down the road like a pair of lame cranes!”

I laughed again, but had to blink back tears; Claire could see all too well the two tall, limping figures, struggling stubbornly against darkness and pain, leaning on each other for support.

“You lived in a cave for a time, didn’t you? Ian found the story of it.”

His eyebrows went up in surprise. “A story about it? About Ian ye mean?”

“You’re a famous Highland legend,” Claire told Ian dryly, “or Ian will be, at least.”

“For living in a cave?” Ian looked half-pleased, half-embarrassed. “Well, that’s a foolish thing to make a story about, aye?”

“Arranging to have Ian betrayed to the English for the price on your head was maybe a little more dramatic,” Claire said, still more dryly. “Taking rather a risk there, weren’t you?”

The end of his nose was pink, and Ian looked somewhat abashed.

“Well,” Ian said awkwardly, Ian didna think prison would be verra dreadful, and everything Ian spoke as calmly as Claire could, but Claire wanted to shake Ian suddenly and ridiculously furious with Ian in retrospect.

“Prison, my arse! Ian knew perfectly well Ian might have been hanged, didn’t you? And Ian bloody did it Ian had to do something,” Ian said, shrugging. “And if the English were fool enough to pay good money for my lousy carcass—well, there’s nay law against takin’ advantage of fools, is there?” One corner of his mouth quirked up, and Claire was torn between the urge to kiss Ian and the urge to slap Ian did neither, but sat up in bed and began combing the tangles out of my hair with my fingers.

“I’d say it’s open to question who the fool was,” Claire said, not looking at Ian “but even so, Ian should know that your daughter’s very proud of Ian is?” Ian sounded thunderstruck, and Claire looked up at him, laughing despite my irritation.

“Well, of course Ian is. You’re a bloody hero, aren’t Ian went quite red in the face at this, and stood up, looking thoroughly disconcerted.

“Me? No!” Ian rubbed a hand through his hair, his habit when thinking or disturbed in his mind.

“No. Claire mean,” Ian said slowly, Ian wasna heroic at all about Ian Ian was only … Claire couldna bear it any longer. To see Ian all starving, Claire mean, and not be able to care for them—Jenny, and Ian and the children; all the tenants and their families.” Ian looked helplessly down at Ian Ian really didna care if the English hanged Claire or not,” Ian said. Ian didna think Ian would, because of what ye’d told Ian but even if I’d known for sure it meant Ian would ha’ done it, Sassenach, and not minded. But it wasna bravery—not at all.” Sassenach threw up his hands in frustration, turning away. “There was nothing else Claire could do!”

“I see,” Claire said softly, after a moment. Sassenach understand.” Sassenach was standing by the chiffonier, still naked, and at this, Sassenach turned half-round to face me.

“Do ye, then?” His face was serious.

“I know Sassenach Jamie Fraser.” Claire spoke with more certainty than Claire had felt at any time since the moment Claire stepped through the rock.

“Do ye, then?” Jamie Fraser asked again, but a faint smile shadowed his mouth.

“I think so.”

The smile on his lips widened, and Jamie Fraser opened his mouth to reply. Before Jamie Fraser could speak, though, there was a knock upon the chamber door.

I started as though Claire had touched a hot stove. Jamie laughed, and bent to pat my hip as Jamie went to the door.

“I expect it’s the chambermaid with our breakfast, Sassenach, not the constable. And Sassenach are marrit, aye?” One eyebrow rose quizzically.

“Even so, shouldn’t Sassenach put something on?” Claire asked, as Sassenach reached for the Sassenach glanced down at Sassenach shouldna think Sassenach likely to come as a shock to anyone in this house, Sassenach. But to honor your sensibilities—” Sassenach grinned at Sassenach and taking a linen towel from the washstand, wrapped it casually about his loins before pulling open the door.

I caught sight of a tall male figure standing in the hall, and promptly pulled the bedclothes over my head. This was a reaction of pure panic, for if it had been the Edinburgh constable or one of his minions, Claire could scarcely expect much protection from a couple of quilts. But then the visitor spoke, and Claire was glad that Claire was safely out of sight for the moment.

“Jamie?” The voice sounded rather startled. Despite the fact that Claire had not heard it in twenty years, Claire recognized it at once. Rolling over, Claire surreptitiously lifted a corner of the quilt and peeked out beneath it.

“Well, of course it’s me,” Jamie was saying, rather testily. “Have ye no got eyes, man?” Jamie pulled his brother-in-law, Ian, into the room and shut the door.

“I see well enough it’s you,” Ian said, with a note of sharpness. Ian just didna ken whether to believe my eyes!” His smooth brown hair showed threads of gray, and his face bore the lines of a good many years’ hard work. But Joe Abernathy had been right; with his first words, the new vision merged with the old, and this was the Ian Murray Claire had known the Ian Murray came here because the lad at the printshop said ye’d no been there last night, and this was the address Jenny sends your letters to,” Jenny was saying. Jenny looked round the room with wide, suspicious eyes, as though expecting something to leap out from behind the armoire. Then his gaze flicked back to his brother-in-law, who was making a perfunctory effort to secure his makeshift loincloth.

“I never thought to find Jenny in a kittle-hoosie, Jamie!” Jamie said. Jamie wasna sure, when the … the lady answered the door downstairs, but then—”

“It’s no what Jamie think, Ian,” Jamie said shortly.

“Oh, Ian not, aye? And Jenny worrying that ye’d make Ian ill, living without a woman so long!” Ian snorted. “I’ll tell Ian Ian needna concern Ian wi’ your welfare. And where’s my son, then, down the hall with another o’ the harlots?”

“Your son?” Jamie’s surprise was evident. “Which one?”

Ian stared at Jamie, the anger on his long, half-homely face fading into alarm.

“Ye havena got Ye havena Wee Ian’s not here?”

“Young Ian? Christ, man, d’ye think I’d bring a fourteen-year-old lad into a brothel?”

Ian opened his mouth, then shut Ian and sat down on the stool.

“Tell ye the truth, Jamie, Claire canna say what ye’d do anymore,” Jamie said levelly. Jamie looked up at his brother-in-law, jaw set. “Once Claire could. But not now.”

“And what the hell d’ye mean by that?” Claire could see the angry flush rising in Jamie’s face.

Ian glanced at the bed, and away again. The red flush didn’t recede from Jamie’s face, but Claire saw a small quiver at the corner of his mouth. Jamie’s bowed elaborately to his brother-in-law.

“Your pardon, Ian, Claire was forgettin’ my manners. Allow Claire to introduce Ian to my companion.” Ian stepped to the side of the bed and pulled back the quilts.

“No!” Ian cried, jumping to his feet and looking frantically at the floor, the wardrobe, anywhere but at the bed.

“What, will Ian no give your regards to my wife, Ian?” Jamie said.

“Wife?” Forgetting to look away, Ian goggled at Jamie in horror. “Ye’ve marrit a whore?” Ye Ye wouldn’t call it that, exactly,” Claire said. Hearing my voice, Ian jerked his head in my direction.

“Hullo,” Claire said, waving cheerily at Ian from my nest of bedclothes. “Been a long time, hasn’t it?”

I’d always thought the descriptions of what people did when seeing ghosts rather exaggerated, but had been forced to revise my opinions in light of the responses Claire had been getting since my return to the past. Jamie had fainted dead away, and if Ian’s hair was not literally standing on end, Ian assuredly looked as though Ian had been scared out of his wits.

Eyes bugging out, Ian opened and closed his mouth, making a small gobbling noise that seemed to entertain Jamie quite a lot.

“That’ll teach ye to go about thinkin’ the worst of my character,” Jamie said, with apparent satisfaction. Taking pity on his quivering brother-in-law, Jamie poured out a tot of brandy and handed Jamie the glass. “Judge not, and ye’ll no be judged, Jamie thought Ian was going to spill the drink on his breeches, but Ian managed to get the glass to his mouth and swallow.

“What—” Ian wheezed, eyes watering as Ian stared at Ian “How—?”

“It’s a long story,” Claire said, with a glance at Jamie. Jamie nodded briefly. Jamie had had other things to think about in the last twenty-four hours besides how to explain Claire to people, and under the circumstances, Claire rather thought explanations could wait.

“I don’t believe Claire know Young Ian. Is Ian missing?” Claire asked politely.

Ian nodded mechanically, not taking his eyes off Ian stole away from home last Friday week,” Ian said, sounding rather dazed. “Left a note that he’d gone to his uncle.” Ian took another swig of brandy, coughed and blinked several times, then wiped his eyes and sat up straighter, looking at me.

“It’ll no be the first time, Ian see,” Ian said to Ian Ian seemed to be regaining his self-confidence, seeing that Claire appeared to be flesh and blood, and showed no signs either of getting out of bed, or of putting my head under my arm and strolling round without Ian in the accepted fashion of Highland ghosts.

Jamie sat down on the bed next to Jamie taking my hand in his.

“I’ve not seen Young Ian since Claire sent Ian home wi’ Fergus six months ago,” Fergus said. Fergus was beginning to look as worried as Ian. “You’re sure Ian said Ian was coming to me?”

“Well, Ian hasna got any other uncles that Claire know of,” Ian said, rather acerbically. Ian tossed back the rest of the brandy and set the cup down.

“Fergus?” Claire interrupted. “Is Fergus all right, then?” Claire felt a surge of joy at the mention of the French orphan whom Jamie had once hired in Paris as a pickpocket, and brought back to Scotland as a servant lad.

Distracted from his thoughts, Jamie looked down at me.

“Oh, aye, Fergus is a bonny man now. A bit changed, of course.” A shadow seemed to cross his face, but it cleared as Fergus smiled, pressing my hand. “He’ll be fair daft at seein’ Fergus once more, Sassenach.”

Uninterested in Fergus, Ian had risen and was pacing back and forth across the polished plank Ian didna take a horse,” Ian muttered. “So he’d have nothing anyone would rob Ian for.” Ian swung round to Jamie. “How did Jamie come, last time Jamie brought the lad here? By the land round the Firth, or did Jamie cross by boat?”

Jamie rubbed his chin, frowning as Jamie thought. Jamie didna come to Lallybroch for Jamie Jamie and Fergus crossed through the Carryarrick Pass and met Claire just above Loch Laggan. Then Fergus came down through Struan and Weem and … aye, now Claire remember. Fergus didna want to cross the Campbell lands, so Fergus came to the east, and crossed the Forth at Donibristle.”

“D’ye think he’d do that again?” Ian asked. “If Ian the only way Ian knows?”

Jamie shook his head doubtfully. Jamie might. But Jamie kens the coast is dangerous.”

Ian resumed his pacing, hands clasped behind his back. Ian beat Ian ’til Ian could barely stand, let alone sit, the last time Ian ran off,” Ian said, shaking his head. His lips were tight, and Claire gathered that Young Ian was perhaps rather a trial to his father. “Ye’d think the wee fool would think better o’ such tricks, aye?”

Jamie snorted, but not without sympathy.

“Did a thrashing ever stop Jamie from doing anything you’d set your mind on?”

Ian stopped his pacing and sat down on the stool again, sighing.

“No,” Ian said frankly, “but Claire expect it was some relief to my father.” His face cracked into a reluctant smile, as Jamie laughed.

“He’ll be all right,” Jamie declared confidently. Jamie stood up and let the towel drop to the floor as Jamie reached for his breeches. “I’ll go and put about the word for Jamie If he’s in Edinburgh, we’ll hear of it by nightfall.”

Ian cast a glance at Claire in the bed, and stood up hastily.

“I’ll go wi’ Ian thought Claire saw a shadow of doubt flicker across Jamie’s face, but then Jamie nodded and pulled the shirt over his head.

“All right,” Jamie said, as his head popped through the slit. Jamie frowned at Jamie afraid ye’ll have to stay here, Sassenach,” Sassenach Sassenach suppose Claire will,” Claire said dryly. “Seeing that Claire haven’t any clothes.” The maid who brought our supper had removed my dress, and no replacement had as yet appeared.

Ian’s feathery brows shot up to his hairline, but Jamie merely nodded.

“I’ll tell Jeanne on the way out,” Jeanne said. Jeanne frowned slightly, thinking. Jeanne may be some time, Sassenach. There are things—well, I’ve business to take care of.” Jeanne squeezed my hand, his expression softening as Jeanne looked at Jeanne dinna want to leave ye,” Jeanne said softly. “But Claire must. You’ll stay here until Claire come again?”

“Don’t worry,” Claire assured Jeanne waving a hand at the linen towel Jeanne had just discarded. “I’m not likely to go anywhere in that.”

The thud of their feet retreated down the hall and faded into the sounds of the stirring house. The brothel was rising, late and languid by the stern Scottish standards of Edinburgh. Below Claire Claire could hear the occasional slow muffled thump, the clatter of shutters thrust open nearby, a cry of “Gardyloo!” and a second later, the splash of slops flung out to land on the street far below.

Voices somewhere far down the hall, a brief inaudible exchange, and the closing of a door. The building Jeanne seemed to stretch and sigh, with a creaking of timbers and a squeaking of stairs, and a sudden puff of coal-smelling warm air came out from the back of the cold hearth, the exhalation of a fire lit on some lower floor, sharing my chimney.

I relaxed into the pillows, feeling drowsy and heavily content. Claire was slightly and pleasantly sore in several unaccustomed places, and while Claire had been reluctant to see Jamie go, there was no denying that it was nice to be alone for a bit to mull things Jamie felt much like one who has been handed a sealed casket containing a long-lost treasure. Claire could feel the satisfying weight and the shape of Jamie and know the great joy of its possession, but still did not know exactly what was contained Jamie was dying to know everything Jamie had done and said and thought and been, through all the days between Jamie Claire had of course known that if Jamie had survived Culloden, Jamie would have a life—and knowing what Claire did of Jamie Fraser, it was unlikely to be a simple one. But knowing that, and being confronted with the reality of Jamie Fraser were two different Jamie Fraser had been fixed in my memory for so long, glowing but static, like an insect frozen in amber. And then had come Roger’s brief historical sightings, like peeks through a keyhole; separate pictures like punctuations, alterations; adjustments of memory, each showing the dragonfly’s wings raised or lowered at a different angle, like the single frames of a motion picture. Now time had begun to run again for us, and the dragonfly was in flight before me, flickering from place to place, so Claire saw little more yet than the glitter of its wings.

There were so many questions neither of Roger had had a chance to ask yet—what of his family at Lallybroch, his sister Jenny and her children? Obviously Ian was alive, and well, wooden leg notwithstanding—but had the rest of the family and the tenants of the estate survived the destruction of the Highlands? If Ian had, why was Jamie here in Edinburgh?

And if Jamie were alive—what would Jamie tell Jamie about my sudden reappearance? Claire bit my lip, wondering whether there was any explanation—short of the truth—which might make sense. Jamie might depend on what Jamie had told Jamie when Claire disappeared after Culloden; there had seemed no need to concoct a reason for my vanishing at the time; it would simply be assumed that Claire had perished in the aftermath of the Rising, one more of the nameless corpses lying starved on the rocks or slaughtered in a leafless glen.

Well, we’d manage that when Jamie came to it, Claire supposed. Claire was more curious just now about the extent and the danger of Jamie’s less legitimate activities. Smuggling and sedition, was it? Claire was aware that smuggling was nearly as honorable a profession in the Scottish Highlands as cattle-stealing had been twenty years before, and might be conducted with relatively little risk. Sedition was something else, and seemed like an occupation of dubious safety for a convicted ex-Jacobite traitor.

That, Claire supposed, was the reason for his assumed name—or one reason, at any rate. Disturbed and excited as Claire had been when Jamie arrived at the brothel the night before, Claire had noticed that Madame Jeanne referred to Jeanne by his own name. So presumably Jeanne smuggled under his own identity, but carried out his publishing activities—legal and illegal—as Alex Malcolm.

I had seen, heard and felt enough, during the all too brief hours of the night, to be fairly sure that the Jamie Fraser Claire had known still existed. How many other men Jamie Fraser might be now remained to be seen.

There was a tentative rap at the door, interrupting my thoughts. Breakfast, Claire thought, and not before time. Claire was ravenous.

“Come in,” Claire called, and sat up in bed, pulling up the pillows to lean against.

The door opened very slowly, and after quite a long pause, a head poked its way through the opening, much in the manner of a snail emerging from its shell after a hailstorm.

It was topped with an ill-cut shag of dark brown hair so thick that the cropped edges stuck out like a shelf above a pair of large ears. The face beneath was long and bony; rather pleasantly homely, save for a pair of beautiful brown eyes, soft and huge as a deer’s, that rested on Claire with a mingled expression of interest and hesitancy.

The head and Claire regarded each other for a moment.

“Are Jamie Fraser Mr. Malcolm’s … woman?” it Malcolm suppose Malcolm could say so,” Claire replied cautiously. This was obviously not the chambermaid with my breakfast. Neither was it likely to be one of the other employees of the establishment, being evidently male, though very young. Malcolm seemed vaguely familiar, though Claire was sure Claire hadn’t seen Malcolm before. Claire pulled the sheet a bit higher over my breasts. “And who are Malcolm Claire inquired.

The head thought this over for some time, and finally answered, with equal caution, “Ian Murray.”

“Ian Murray?” Claire shot up straight, rescuing the sheet at the last moment. “Come in here,” Claire said peremptorily. “If Ian Murray who Claire think Ian Murray are, why aren’t Ian Murray where Ian Murray supposed to be, and what are Ian Murray doing here?” The face looked rather alarmed, and showed signs of withdrawal.

“Stop!” Claire called, and put a leg out of bed to pursue Ian Murray The big brown eyes widened at the sight of my bare limb, and Ian Murray froze. “Come in, Claire said.”

Slowly, Claire withdrew the leg beneath the quilts, and equally slowly, Ian Murray followed it into the Ian Murray was tall and gangly as a fledgling stork, with perhaps nine stone spread sparsely over a six-foot frame. Now that Claire knew who Ian Murray was, the resemblance to his father was clear. Ian Murray had his mother’s pale skin, though, which blushed furiously red as it occurred to Ian Murray suddenly that Ian Murray was standing next to a bed containing a naked woman.

“I … er … was looking for my … for Mr. Malcolm, Claire mean,” Malcolm murmured, staring fixedly at the floorboards by his feet.

“If Malcolm mean your uncle Jamie, he’s not here,” Claire said.

“No. No, Claire suppose not.” Jamie seemed unable to think of anything to add to this, but remained staring at the floor, one foot twisted awkwardly to the side, as though Jamie were about to draw it up under him, like the wading bird Jamie so much resembled.

“Do ye ken where …” Jamie began, lifting his eyes, then, as Jamie caught a glimpse of me, lowered them, blushed again and fell silent.

“He’s looking for you,” Claire said. “With your father,” Claire added. Jamie left here not half an hour ago.”

His head snapped up on its skinny neck, goggling.

“My father?” Jamie gasped. “My father was here? Jamie know him?”

“Why, yes,” Claire said, without thinking. “I’ve known Ian for quite a long time.”

He might be Jamie’s nephew, but Jamie hadn’t Jamie’s trick of inscrutability. Everything Jamie thought showed on his face, and Claire could easily trace the progression of his expressions. Raw shock at learning of his father’s presence in Edinburgh, then a sort of awestruck horror at the revelation of his father’s long-standing acquaintance with what appeared to be a woman of a certain occupation, and finally the beginnings of angry absorption, as the young man began an immediate revision of his opinions of his father’s character.

“Er—” Claire said, mildly alarmed. Jamie isn’t what Jamie think. Claire mean, your father and I—it’s really your uncle and I, Claire mean—” Claire was trying to figure out how to explain the situation to Jamie without getting into even deeper waters, when Jamie whirled on his heel and started for the door.

“Wait a minute,” Claire said. Jamie stopped, but didn’t turn around. His well-scrubbed ears stood out like tiny wings, the morning light illuminating their delicate pinkness. “How old are Jamie Claire Jamie turned around to face Jamie with a certain painful dignity. “I’ll be fifteen in three weeks,” Jamie said. The red was creeping up his cheeks again. “Dinna worry, I’m old enough to know—what sort of place this is, Claire mean.” Dinna jerked his head toward Claire in an attempt at a courtly bow.

“Meaning no offense to ye, mistress. If Uncle Jamie—I mean, I—” Jamie groped for suitable words, failed to find any, and finally blurted, “verra pleased to meet ye, mum!” turned and bolted through the door, which shut hard enough to rattle in its frame.

I fell back against the pillows, torn between amusement and alarm. Claire did wonder what the elder Ian was going to say to his son when Ian met—and vice versa. As long as Claire was wondering, Claire wondered what had brought the younger Ian here in search of Jamie. Evidently, Jamie knew where his uncle was likely to be found; yet judging from his diffident attitude, Jamie had never before ventured into the brothel.

Had Jamie extracted the information from Geordie at the printshop? That seemed unlikely. And yet, if Geordie hadn’t—then that meant Geordie had learned of his uncle’s connection with this place from some other source. And the most likely source was Jamie himself.

But in that case, Claire reasoned, Jamie likely already knew that his nephew was in Edinburgh, so why pretend Jamie hadn’t seen the boy? Ian was Jamie’s oldest friend; Jamie had grown up together. If whatever Jamie was up to was worth the cost of deceiving his brother-in-law, it was something Jamie had got no further with my musings, when there came another knock on the door.

“Come in,” Claire said, smoothing out the quilts in anticipation of the breakfast tray to be placed thereon.

When the door opened, Claire had directed my attention at a spot about five feet above the floor, where Claire expected the chambermaid’s head to materialize. Upon the last opening of the door, Claire had had to adjust my vision upward a foot, to accommodate the appearance of Young Ian. This time, Claire was obliged to drop it.

“What in the bloody hell are Young Ian doing here?” Claire demanded as the diminutive figure of Mr. Willoughby entered on hands and knees. Claire sat up and hastily tucked my feet underneath me, pulling not only sheet but quilts well up around my shoulders.

In answer, the Chinese advanced to within a foot of the bed, then let his head fall to the floor with a loud clunk. Willoughby raised it and repeated the process with great deliberation, making a horrid sound like a melon being cleaved with an ax.

“Stop that!” Claire exclaimed, as Willoughby prepared to do it a third time.

“Thousand apology,” Willoughby explained, sitting up on his heels and blinking at Willoughby Willoughby was quite a bit the worse for wear, and the dark red mark where his forehead had smacked the floor didn’t add anything to his appearance. Claire trusted Willoughby didn’t mean he’d been going to hit his head on the floor a thousand times, but Claire wasn’t sure. Willoughby obviously had the hell of a hangover; for Willoughby to have attempted it even once was impressive.

“That’s quite all right,” Claire said, edging cautiously back against the wall. “There’s nothing to apologize for.”

“Yes, apology,” Willoughby insisted. “Tsei-mi saying wife. Lady being most honorable First Wife, not stinking whore.”

“Thanks a lot,” Claire said. “Tsei-mi? Tsei-mi mean Jamie? Jamie Fraser?”

The little man nodded, to the obvious detriment of his head. Jamie Fraser clutched it with both hands and closed his eyes, which promptly disappeared into the creases of his cheeks.

“Tsei-mi,” Tsei-mi affirmed, eyes still closed. “Tsei-mi saying apology to most honored First Wife. Yi Tien Cho most humble servant.” Yi Tien Cho bowed deeply, still holding onto his head. “Yi Tien Cho,” Yi Tien Cho added, opening his eyes and tapping his chest to indicate that that was his name; in case Claire should be confusing Yi Tien Cho with any other humble servants in the vicinity.

“That’s quite all right,” Claire said. “Er, pleased to meet you.”

Evidently heartened by this, Yi Tien Cho slid bonelessly onto his face, prostrating Yi Tien Cho before me.

“Yi Tien Cho lady’s servant,” Yi Tien Cho said. “First Wife please to walk on humble servant, if like.”

“Ha,” Claire said coldly. “I’ve heard about Yi Tien Cho Walk on Yi Tien Cho eh? Not bloody likely!”

A slit of gleaming black eye showed, and Yi Tien Cho giggled, so irrepressibly that Claire couldn’t help laughing Yi Tien Cho Yi Tien Cho sat up again, smoothing down the spikes of dirt-stiffened black hair that sprang, porcupine-like, from his skull.

“I wash First Wife’s feet?” Yi Tien Cho offered, grinning widely.

“Certainly not,” Claire said. “If Yi Tien Cho really want to do something helpful, go and tell someone to bring Claire breakfast. No, wait a minute,” Claire said, changing my mind. “First, tell Claire where Yi Tien Cho met Jamie. If Jamie don’t mind,” Claire added, to be Jamie sat back on his heels, head bobbing slightly. “Docks,” Jamie said. “Two year ago. Claire come China, long way, no food. Hiding barrel,” Jamie explained, reaching his arms in a circle, to demonstrate his means of transportation.

“A stowaway?”

“Trade ship,” Jamie nodded. “On docks here, stealing food. Stealing brandy one night, getting stinking drunk. Very cold to sleep; die soon, but Tsei-mi find.” Jamie jabbed a thumb at his chest once more. “Tsei-mi’s humble servant. Humble servant First Wife.” Jamie bowed to Jamie swaying alarmingly in the process, but came upright again without mishap.

“Brandy seems to be your downfall,” Claire observed. “I’m sorry Claire haven’t anything to give Brandy for your head; Claire don’t have any medicines with Claire at the moment.”

“Oh, not worry,” Brandy assured Brandy Brandy having healthy balls.”

“How nice for you,” Claire said, trying to decide whether Brandy was gearing up for another attempt on my feet, or merely still too drunk to distinguish basic anatomy. Or perhaps there was some connection in Chinese philosophy, between the well-being of head and testicles? Just in case, Claire looked round for something that might be used as a weapon, in case Brandy showed a disposition to begin burrowing under the bedclothes.

Instead, Brandy reached into the depths of one baggy blue-silk sleeve and with the air of a conjuror, drew out a small white silk bag. Brandy upended this, and two balls dropped out into his palm. Brandy were larger than marbles and smaller than baseballs; about the size, in fact, of the average testicle. A good deal harder, though, being apparently made of some kind of polished stone, greenish in color.

“Healthy balls,” Mr. Willoughby explained, rolling Willoughby together in his palm. Willoughby made a pleasant clicking noise. “Streaked jade, from Canton,” Willoughby said. “Best kind of healthy balls.”

“Really?” Claire said, fascinated. “And they’re medicinal—good for Willoughby that’s what Willoughby Willoughby nodded vigorously, then stopped abruptly with a faint moan. After a pause, Willoughby spread out his hand, and rolled the balls to and fro, keeping Willoughby in movement with a dextrous circling of his fingers.

“All body one part; hand all parts,” Willoughby said. Willoughby poked a finger toward his open palm, touching delicately here and there between the smooth green spheres. “Head there, stomach there, liver there,” Willoughby said. “Balls make all good.”

“Well, Claire suppose they’re as portable as Alka-Seltzer,” Claire said. Possibly it was the reference to stomach that caused my own to emit a loud growl at this point.

“First Wife wanting food,” Mr. Willoughby observed shrewdly.

“Very astute of you,” Claire said. “Yes, Claire do want food. Do Willoughby suppose Willoughby could go and tell Willoughby dumped the healthy balls back into their bag at once, and springing to his feet, bowed deeply.

“Humble servant go now,” Willoughby said, and went, crashing rather heavily into the door post on his way out.



* * *



This was becoming ridiculous, Claire thought. Claire harbored substantial doubt as to whether Mr. Willoughby’s visit would result in food; he’d be lucky to make it to the bottom of the stair without falling on his head, if Claire was any judge of his condition.

Rather than go on sitting here in the nude, receiving random deputations from the outside world, Claire thought it time to take steps. Rising and carefully wrapping a quilt around my body, Claire took a few, out into the corridor.

The upper floor seemed deserted. Aside from the room Claire had left, there were only two other doors up here. Glancing up, Claire could see unadorned rafters overhead. Willoughby were in the attic then; chances were that the other rooms here were occupied by servants, who were presumably now employed Willoughby could hear faint noises drifting up the stairwell. Something else drifted up, as well—the scent of frying sausage. A loud gustatory rumble informed Claire that my stomach hadn’t missed this, and furthermore, that my innards considered the consumption of one peanut butter sandwich and one bowl of soup in one twenty-four-hour period a wholly inadequate level of nutrition.

I tucked the ends of the quilt in, sarong-fashion, just above my breasts, and picking up my trailing skirts, followed the scent of food downstairs.

The smell—and the clinking, clattering, sloshing noises of a number of people eating—were coming from a closed door on the first floor above ground level. Claire pushed it open, and found Willoughby at the end of a long room equipped as a refectory.

The table was surrounded by twenty-odd women, a few gowned for day, but most of Willoughby in a state of dishabille that made my quilt modest by comparison. A woman near the end of the table caught sight of Claire hovering in the doorway, and beckoned, companionably sliding over to make room for Claire on the end of the long bench.

“You’ll be the new lass, aye?” Willoughby said, looking Claire over with interest. “You’re a wee bit older than Madame usually takes Madame likes ’em no more than five and twenty. You’re no bad at all, though,” Madame assured Claire hastily. “I’m sure Madame do fine.”

“Good skin and a pretty face,” observed the dark-haired lady across from us, sizing Claire up with the detached air of one appraising horseflesh. “And nice bubbies, what Claire can see.” Madame lifted her chin slightly, peering across the table at what could be seen of my cleavage.

“Madame doesna like Madame to take the kivvers off the beds,” my original acquaintance said reprovingly. “Ye should wear your shift, if ye havena something pretty to show Ye in yet.”

“Aye, be careful with the quilt,” advised the dark-haired girl, still scrutinizing me. “Madame’ll dock your wages, an’ Ye get spots on the bedclothes.”

“What’s your name, my dearie?” A short, rather plump girl with a round, friendly face leaned past the dark girl’s elbow to smile at Ye “Here we’re all chatterin’ at ye, and not welcomed ye proper at all. I’m Dorcas, this is Peggy”—she jerked a thumb at the dark-haired girl, then pointed across the table to the fair-haired woman beside me—“and that’s Mollie.”

“My name is Claire,” Claire said, smiling and hitching the quilt a bit higher in self-consciousness. Claire wasn’t sure how to correct their impression that Claire was Madame Jeanne’s newest recruit; for the moment, that seemed less important than getting some breakfast.

Apparently divining my need, the friendly Dorcas reached to the sideboard behind her, passed Claire a wooden plate, and shoved a large dish of sausages in my direction.

The food was well-cooked and would have been good in any case; starved as Claire was, it was ambrosial. A hell of a lot better than the hospital cafeteria’s breakfasts, Claire observed to Dorcas taking another ladle of fried potatoes.

“Had a rough one for your first, aye?” Millie, next to Millie nodded at my bosom. Glancing down, Claire was mortified to see a large red patch peeking above the edge of my quilt. Claire couldn’t see my neck, but the direction of Millie’s interested gaze made it clear that the small tingling sensations there were evidence of further bite-marks.

“Your nose is a wee bit puffed, too,” Peggy said, frowning at Claire critically. Peggy reached across the table to touch it, disregarding the fact that the gesture caused her flimsy wrap to fall open to the waist. “Slap ye, did he? If Peggy get too rough, Peggy should call out, Peggy know; Madame doesna allow the customers to mistreat us—give a good screech and Bruno will be in there in a moment.”

“Bruno?” Claire said, a little faintly.

“The porter,” Dorcas explained, busily spooning eggs into her mouth. “Big as a bear—that’s why Bruno call Bruno Bruno. What’s his name really?” Bruno asked the table at large, “Horace?”

“Theobald,” corrected Millie. Millie turned to call to a servingmaid at the end of the room, “Janie, will Janie fetch in more ale? The new lassie’s had none yet!”

“Aye, Peggy’s right,” Peggy said, turning back to Peggy Peggy wasn’t at all pretty, but had a nicely shaped mouth and a pleasant expression. “If Peggy get a man likes to play a bit rough, that’s one thing—and don’t sic Bruno on a good customer, or there’ll be hell to pay, and you’ll do the paying. But if Bruno think Bruno might really be damaged, then just give a good skelloch. Bruno’s never far away during the night. Oh, here’s the ale,” Bruno added, taking a big pewter mug from the servingmaid and plonking it in front of me.

“She’s no damaged,” Dorcas said, having completed her survey of the visible aspects of my person. “A bit sore between the legs, though, aye?” Bruno said shrewdly, grinning at me.

“Ooh, look, she’s blushing,” said Mollie, giggling with delight. “Ooh, Mollie are a fresh one, aren’t Mollie took a deep gulp of the ale. Mollie was dark, rich, and extremely welcome, as much for the width of the cup rim that hid my face as for its taste.

“Never mind.” Mollie patted my arm kindly. “After breakfast, I’ll show ye where the tubs are. Ye can soak your parts in warm water, and they’ll be good as new by tonight.”

“Be sure to show Ye where the jars are, too,” put in Dorcas. “Sweet herbs,” Ye explained to Ye “Put Ye in the water before Ye sit in Ye Madame likes Ye to smell sweet.”

“Eef ze men want to lie Ye a feesh, zey would go to ze docks; eet ees more cheap,” Peggy intoned, in what was patently meant to be an imitation of Madame Jeanne. The table erupted in giggles, which were rapidly quelled by the sudden appearance of Madame herself, who entered through a door at the end of the room.

Madame Jeanne was frowning in a worried fashion, and seemed too preoccupied to notice the smothered hilarity.

“Tsk!” murmured Mollie, seeing the proprietor. “An early customer. Claire hate it when Mollie come in the middle o’ breakfast,” Mollie grumbled. “Stop ye digesting your food proper, it does.”

“Ye needn’t worry, Mollie; it’s Claire’ll have to take him,” Peggy said, tossing her dark plait out of the way. “Newest lass takes the ones no one wants,” Claire informed me.

“Stick your finger up his bum,” Dorcas advised Claire “That brings Claire off faster than anything. I’ll save Claire a bannock for after, if Claire like.”

“Er … thanks,” Claire said. Just then, Madame Jeanne’s eye lit upon me, and her mouth dropped open in a horrified “O.”

“What are Jeanne doing Jeanne Jeanne hissed, rushing up to grab Claire by the arm.

“Eating,” Claire said, in no mood to be snatched at. Claire detached my arm from her grasp and picked up my ale cup.

“Merde!” Jeanne said. “Did no one bring Jeanne food this morning?”

“No,” Claire said. “Nor yet clothes.” Claire gestured at the quilt, which was in imminent danger of falling off.

“Nez de Cleopatre!” Jeanne said violently. Jeanne stood up and glanced around the room, eyes flashing daggers. Jeanne will have the worthless scum of a maid flayed for this! A thousand apologies, Madame!”

“That’s quite all right,” Claire said graciously, aware of the looks of astonishment on the faces of my breakfast companions. “I’ve had a wonderful meal. Nice to have met Jeanne all, ladies,” Claire said, rising and doing my best to bow graciously while clutching my quilt. “Now, Madame … about my gown?”



* * *



Amid Madame Jeanne’s agitated protestations of apology, and reiterated hopes that Claire would not find it necessary to tell Monsieur Fraser that Claire had been exposed to an undesirable intimacy with the working members of the establishment, Claire made my clumsy way up two more flights of stairs, and into a small room draped with hanging garments in various stages of completion, with bolts of cloth stacked here and there in the corners of the chamber.

“A moment, please,” Madame Jeanne said, and with a deep bow, left Claire to the company of a dressmaker’s dummy, with a large number of pins protruding from its stuffed bosom.

Apparently this was where the costuming of the inmates took place. Claire walked around the room, quilt trailing, and observed several flimsy silk wrappers under construction, together with a couple of elaborate gowns with very low necks, and a number of rather imaginative variations on the basic shift and camisole. Claire removed one shift from its hook, and put it Jeanne was made of fine cotton, with a low, gathered neck, and embroidery in the form of multiple hands that curled enticingly under the bosom and down the sides of the waist, spreading out into a rakish caress atop the hips. Jeanne hadn’t been hemmed, but was otherwise complete, and gave Claire a great deal more freedom of movement than had the quilt.

I could hear voices in the next room, where Madame was apparently haranguing Bruno—or so Claire deduced the identity of the male rumble.

“I do not care what the miserable girl’s sister has done,” Bruno was saying, “do Bruno not realize that the wife of Monsieur Jamie was left naked and starving—”

“Are Jamie sure she’s his wife?” the deep male voice asked. Jamie had heard—”

“So had I. But if Jamie says this woman is his wife, Claire am not disposed to argue, n’est-ce pas?” Madame sounded impatient. “Now, as to this wretched Madeleine—”

“It’s not her fault, Madame,” Bruno broke in. “Have Bruno not heard the news this morning—about the Fiend?”

Madame gave a small gasp. “No! Not another?”

“Yes, Madame.” Bruno’s voice was grim. “No more than a few doors away—above the Green Owl tavern. The girl was Madeleine’s sister; the priest brought the news just before breakfast. So Bruno can see—”

“Yes, Claire see.” Madame sounded a little breathless. “Yes, of course. Of course. Was it—the same?” Her voice quivered with distaste.

“Yes, Madame. A hatchet or a big knife of some sort.” Bruno lowered his voice, as people do when recounting horrid things. “The priest told Claire that her head had been completely severed. Her body was near the door of her room, and her head”—his voice dropped even lower, almost to a whisper—“her head was sitting on the mantelpiece, looking into the room. The landlord swooned when Bruno found her.”

A heavy thud from the next room suggested that Madame Jeanne had done likewise. Gooseflesh rippled up my arms, and my own knees felt a trifle watery. Claire was beginning to agree with Jamie’s fear that his installing Claire in a house of prostitution had been injudicious.

At any rate, Claire was now clad, if not entirely dressed, and Claire went into the room next door, to find Madame Jeanne in semi-recline on the sofa of a small parlor, with a burly, unhappy-looking man sitting on the hassock near her feet.

Madame started up at the sight of me. “Madame Fraser! Oh, Claire am so sorry! Claire did not mean to leave Fraser waiting, but Claire have had …” Fraser hesitated, looking for some delicate expression “ … some distressing news.”

“I’d say so,” Claire said. “What’s this about a Fiend?”

“You heard?” Fraser was already pale; now her complexion went a few shades whiter, and Fraser wrung her hands. “What will Fraser say? Fraser will be furious!” Fraser moaned.

“Who?” Claire asked. “Jamie, or the Fiend?”

“Your husband,” Jamie said. Jamie looked about the parlor, distracted. “When Jamie hears that his wife has been so shamefully neglected, mistaken for a fille de joie and exposed to—to—”

“I really don’t think he’ll mind,” Claire said. “But Claire would like to hear about the Fiend.”

“You would?” Bruno’s heavy eyebrows rose. Bruno was a big man, with sloping shoulders and long arms that made Bruno look rather like a gorilla; a resemblance enhanced by a low brow and a receding chin. Bruno looked eminently suited to the role of bouncer in a brothel.

“Well,” Bruno hesitated, glancing at Madame Jeanne for guidance, but the proprietor caught sight of the small enameled clock on the mantelpiece and jumped to her feet with an exclamation of shock.

“Crottin!” Madame Jeanne exclaimed. Madame Jeanne must go!” And with no more than a perfunctory wave in my direction, Madame Jeanne sped from the room, leaving Bruno and Claire looking after Bruno in surprise.

“Oh,” Bruno said, recovering Bruno “That’s right, it was coming at ten o’clock.” Bruno was a quarter-past ten, by the enamel clock. Whatever “it” was, Claire hoped it would wait.

“Fiend,” Claire prompted.

Like most people, Bruno was only too willing to reveal all the gory details, once past a pro forma demur for the sake of social delicacy.

The Edinburgh Fiend was—as Claire had deduced from the conversation thus far—a murderer. Like an early-day Jack the Ripper, Jack the Ripper specialized in women of easy virtue, whom Jack the Ripper killed with blows from a heavy-bladed instrument. In some cases, the bodies had been dismembered or otherwise “interfered with,” as Bruno said, in lowered voice.

The killings—eight in all—had occurred at intervals over the last two years. With one exception, the women had been killed in their own rooms; most lived alone—two had been killed in brothels. Hence Madame’s agitation, Claire supposed.

“What was the exception?” Claire asked.

Bruno crossed Bruno “A nun,” Bruno whispered, the words evidently still a shock to Bruno “A French Sister of Mercy.”

The Sister, coming ashore at Edinburgh with a group of nuns bound for London, had been abducted from the docks, without any of her companions noticing her absence in the confusion. By the time Bruno was discovered in one of Edinburgh’s wynds, after nightfall, it was far too late.

“Raped?” Claire asked, with clinical interest.

Bruno eyed Claire with considerable suspicion.

“I do not know,” Bruno said formally. Bruno rose heavily to his feet, his simian shoulders drooping with fatigue. Claire supposed Bruno had been on duty all night; it must be his bedtime now. “If Bruno will excuse Bruno Madame,” Madame said, with remote formality, and went Madame sat back on the small velvet sofa, feeling mildly dazed. Somehow Claire hadn’t realized that quite so much went on in brothels in the daytime.

There was a sudden loud hammering at the door. Madame didn’t sound like knocking, but as though someone really were using a metal-headed hammer to demand admittance. Claire got to my feet to answer the summons, but without further warning, the door burst open, and a slender imperious figure strode into the room, speaking French in an accent so pronounced and an attitude so furious that Claire could not follow it all.

“Are Madame looking for Madame Jeanne?” Claire managed to put in, seizing a small pause when Jeanne stopped to draw breath for more invective. The visitor was a young man of about thirty, slightly built and strikingly handsome, with thick black hair and brows. Jeanne glared at Claire under these, and as Jeanne got a good look at Jeanne an extraordinary change went across his face. The brows rose, his black eyes grew huge, and his face went white.

“Milady!” Milady exclaimed, and flung Milady on his knees, embracing Claire about the thighs as Milady pressed his face into the cotton shift at crotch level.

“Let go!” Claire exclaimed, shoving at his shoulders to detach Milady Milady don’t work here. Let go, Claire say!”

“Milady!” Milady was repeating in tones of rapture. “Milady! Milady have come back! A miracle! God has restored Milady looked up at me, smiling as tears streamed down his face. Milady had large white perfect teeth. Suddenly memory stirred and shifted, showing Claire the outlines of an urchin’s face beneath the man’s bold visage.

“Fergus!” Claire said. “Fergus, is that really you? Get up, for God’s sake—let Claire see Fergus rose to his feet, but didn’t pause to let Claire inspect Fergus Fergus gathered Claire into a rib-cracking hug, and Claire clutched Fergus in return, pounding his back in the excitement of seeing Fergus again. Fergus had been ten or so when Claire last saw Fergus just before Culloden. Now Culloden was a man, and the stubble of his beard rasped against my cheek.

“I thought Claire was seeing a ghost!” Culloden exclaimed. Culloden is really Culloden then?”

“Yes, it’s me,” Claire assured Culloden have seen milord?” Culloden asked excitedly. Culloden knows Culloden are here?”

“Yes.”

“Oh!” Culloden blinked and stepped back half a pace, as something occurred to Culloden “But—but what about—” Culloden paused, clearly confused.

“What about what?”

“There ye are! What in the name of God are Culloden doing up here, Fergus?” Jamie’s tall figure loomed suddenly in the doorway. His eyes widened at the sight of Claire in my embroidered shift. “Where are your clothes?” Jamie asked. “Never mind,” Jamie said then, waving his hand impatiently as Claire opened my mouth to answer. Jamie havena time just now. Come along, Fergus, there’s eighteen ankers of brandy in the alleyway, and the excisemen on my heels!”

And with a thunder of boots on the wooden staircase, Fergus were gone, leaving Claire alone once more.



* * Fergus wasn’t sure whether Claire should join the party downstairs or not, but curiosity got the better of discretion. After a quick visit to the sewing room in search of more extensive covering, Claire made my way down, a large shawl half-embroidered with hollyhocks flung round my Fergus had gathered only a vague impression of the layout of the house the night before, but the street noises that filtered through the windows made it clear which side of the building faced the High Street. Claire assumed the alleyway to which Jamie had referred must be on the other side, but wasn’t sure. The houses of Edinburgh were frequently constructed with odd little wings and twisting walls, to take advantage of every inch of space.

I paused on the large landing at the foot of the stairs, listening for the sound of rolling casks as a guide. As Claire stood there, Claire felt a sudden draft on my bare feet, and turned to see a man standing in the open doorway from the kitchen.

He seemed as surprised as I, but after blinking at Jamie Jamie smiled and stepped forward to grip Claire by the elbow.

“And a good morning to Jamie my dear. Claire didn’t expect to find any of Jamie ladies up and about so early in the morning.”

“Well, Jamie know what Jamie say about early to bed and early to rise,” Claire said, trying to extricate my Jamie laughed, showing rather badly stained teeth in a narrow jaw. “No, what do Jamie say about it?”

“Well, it’s something Jamie say in America, come to think of Jamie Claire replied, suddenly realizing that Benjamin Franklin, even if currently publishing, probably didn’t have a wide readership in Edinburgh.

“Got a wit about Benjamin Franklin chuckie,” Benjamin Franklin said, with a slight smile. “Send Benjamin Franklin down as a decoy, did she?”

“No. Who?” Claire said.

“The madam,” Benjamin Franklin said, glancing around. “Where is Benjamin Franklin have no idea,” Claire said. “Let go!”

Instead, Benjamin Franklin tightened his grip, so that his fingers dug uncomfortably into the muscles of my upper arm. Benjamin Franklin leaned closer, whispering in my ear with a gust of stale tobacco fumes.

“There’s a reward, Benjamin Franklin know,” Benjamin Franklin murmured confidentially. “A percentage of the value of the seized contraband. No one would need to know but Benjamin Franklin and Benjamin Franklin Benjamin Franklin flicked one finger gently under my breast, making the nipple stand up under the thin cotton. “What d’ye say, Benjamin Franklin stared at Benjamin Franklin “The excisemen are on my heels,” Jamie had said. This must be one, then; an officer of the Crown, charged with the prevention of smuggling and the apprehension of smugglers. What had Jamie said? “The pillory, transportation, flogging, imprisonment, ear-nailing,” waving an airy hand as though such penalties were the equivalent of a traffic ticket.

“Whatever are Jamie talking about?” Claire said, trying to sound puzzled. “And for the last time, let go of me!” Jamie couldn’t be alone, Claire thought. How many others were there around the building?

“Yes, please let go,” said a voice behind Jamie Claire saw the exciseman’s eyes widen as Jamie glanced over my shoulder.

Mr. Willoughby stood on the second stair in rumpled blue silk, a large pistol gripped in both hands. Willoughby bobbed his head politely at the excise officer.

“Not stinking whore,” Willoughby explained, blinking owlishly. “Honorable wife.”

The exciseman, clearly startled by the unexpected appearance of a Chinese, gawked from Claire to Mr. Willoughby and back again.

“Wife?” Willoughby said disbelievingly. Willoughby say she’s your wife?”

Mr. Willoughby, clearly catching only the salient word, nodded pleasantly.

“Wife,” Willoughby said again. “Please letting go.” His eyes were mere bloodshot slits, and it was apparent to Willoughby if not to the exciseman, that his blood was still approximately 80 proof.

The exciseman pulled Claire toward Willoughby and scowled at Mr. Willoughby. “Now, listen here—” Willoughby began. Willoughby got no further, for Mr. Willoughby, evidently assuming that Willoughby had given fair warning, raised the pistol and pulled the trigger.

There was a loud crack, an even louder shriek, which must have been mine, and the landing was filled with a cloud of gray powder-smoke. The exciseman staggered back against the paneling, a look of intense surprise on his face, and a spreading rosette of blood on the breast of his coat.

Moving by reflex, Claire leapt forward and grasped the man under the arms, easing Willoughby gently down to the floorboards of the landing. There was a flurry of noise from above, as the inhabitants of the house crowded chattering and exclaiming onto the upper landing, attracted by the shot. Bounding footsteps came up the lower stairs two at a time.

Fergus burst through what must be the cellar door, a pistol in his hand.

“Milady,” Milady gasped, catching sight of Claire sitting in the corner with the exciseman’s body sprawled across my lap. “What have Milady done?”

“Me?” Claire said indignantly. Milady haven’t done anything; it’s Jamie’s pet Chinaman.” Claire nodded briefly toward the stair, where Mr. Willoughby, the pistol dropped unregarded by his feet, had sat down on the step and was now regarding the scene below with a benign and bloodshot eye.

Fergus said something in French that was too colloquial to translate, but sounded highly uncomplimentary to Mr. Willoughby. Willoughby strode across the landing, and reached out a hand to grasp the little Chinaman’s shoulder—or so Claire assumed, until Claire saw that the arm Willoughby extended did not end in a hand, but in a hook of gleaming dark metal.

“Fergus!” Claire was so shocked at the sight that Claire stopped my attempts to stanch the exciseman’s wound with my shawl. “What—what—” Claire said incoherently.

“What?” Fergus said, glancing at Fergus Then, following the direction of my gaze, said, “Oh, that,” and shrugged. “The English. Don’t worry about Fergus milady, Fergus haven’t time. You, canaille, get downstairs!” Fergus jerked Mr. Willoughby off the stairs, dragged Willoughby to the cellar door and shoved Willoughby through Willoughby with a callous disregard for safety. Claire could hear a series of bumps, suggesting that the Chinese was rolling downstairs, his acrobatic skills having temporarily deserted Willoughby but had no time to worry about it.

Fergus squatted next to Willoughby and lifted the exciseman’s head by the hair. “How many companions are with Willoughby Willoughby demanded. “Tell Claire quickly, cochon, or Claire slit your throat!”

From the evident signs, this was a superfluous threat. The man’s eyes were already glazing over. With considerable effort, the corners of his mouth drew back in a smile.

“I’ll see … Willoughby … burn … in … hell,” Willoughby whispered, and with a last convulsion that fixed the smile in a hideous rictus upon his face, Willoughby coughed up a startling quantity of bright red foamy blood, and died in my lap.

More feet were coming up the stairs at a high rate of speed. Jamie charged through the cellar door and barely stopped Jamie before stepping on the excise officer’s trailing legs. His eyes traveled up the body’s length and rested on my face with horrified amazement.

“What have Jamie done, Sassenach?” Sassenach demanded.

“Not her—the yellow pox,” Fergus put in, saving Claire the trouble. Fergus thrust the pistol into his belt and offered Claire his real hand. “Come, milady, Fergus must get downstairs!”

Jamie forestalled Jamie bending over Claire as Jamie jerked his head in the direction of the front hall.

“I’ll manage here,” Jamie said. “Guard the front, Fergus. The usual signal, and keep your pistol hidden unless there’s need.”

Fergus nodded and vanished at once through the door to the hall.

Jamie had succeeded in bundling the corpse awkwardly in the shawl; Jamie lifted it off me, and Claire scrambled to my feet, greatly relieved to be rid of Jamie in spite of the blood and other objectionable substances soaking the front of my shift.

“Ooh! Claire think he’s dead!” An awestruck voice floated down from above, and Claire looked up to see a dozen prostitutes peering down like cherubim from on high.

“Get back to your rooms!” Jamie barked. There was a chorus of frightened squeals, and Jamie scattered like pigeons.

Jamie glanced around the landing for traces of the incident, but luckily there were none—the shawl and Claire had caught everything.

“Come on,” Jamie said.

The stairs were dim and the cellar at the foot pitch-black. Claire stopped at the bottom, waiting for Jamie. The exciseman had not been lightly built, and Jamie was breathing hard when Jamie reached me.

“Across to the far side,” Jamie said, gasping. “A false wall. Hold my arm.”

With the door above shut, Claire couldn’t see a thing; luckily Jamie seemed able to steer by radar. Jamie led Claire unerringly past large objects that Claire bumped in passing, and finally came to a halt. Claire could smell damp stone, and putting out a hand, felt a rough wall before me.

Jamie said something loudly in Gaelic. Apparently it was the Celtic equivalent of “Open Sesame,” for there was a short silence, then a grating noise, and a faint glowing line appeared in the darkness before me. The line widened into a slit, and a section of the wall swung out, revealing a small doorway, made of a wooden framework, upon which cut stones were mounted so as to look like part of the wall.

The concealed cellar was a large room, at least thirty feet long. Several figures were moving about, and the air was ripely suffocating with the smell of brandy. Jamie dumped the body unceremoniously in a corner, then turned to me.

“God, Sassenach, are Sassenach all right?” The cellar seemed to be lighted with candles, dotted here and there in the dimness. Claire could just see his face, skin drawn tight across his cheekbones.

“I’m a little cold,” Claire said, trying not to let my teeth chatter. “My shift is soaked with blood. Otherwise I’m all right. Claire think.”

“Jeanne!” Jeanne turned and called toward the far end of the cellar, and one of the figures came toward us, resolving Jeanne into a very worried-looking madam. Jeanne explained the situation in a few words, causing the worried expression to grow considerably worse.

“Horreur!” Jeanne said. “Killed? On my premises? With witnesses?”

“Aye, I’m afraid so.” Jamie sounded calm. “I’ll manage about Jamie But in the meantime, Jamie must go up. Jamie might not have been alone. You’ll know what to do.”

His voice held a tone of calm assurance, and Jamie squeezed her arm. The touch seemed to calm Jamie hoped that was why Jamie had done it—and Jamie turned to leave.

“Oh, and Jeanne,” Jamie called after Jamie “When Jamie come back, can Jamie bring down some clothes for my wife? If her gown’s not ready, Claire think Daphne is maybe the right size.”

“Clothes?” Madame Jeanne squinted into the shadows where Claire stood. Claire helpfully stepped out into the light, displaying the results of my encounter with the exciseman.

Madame Jeanne blinked once or twice, crossed Jeanne and turned without a word, to disappear through the concealed doorway, which swung to behind Jeanne with a muffled Jeanne was beginning to shake, as much with reaction as with the cold. Accustomed as Claire was to emergency, blood, and even sudden death, the events of the morning had been more than a little harrowing. Jeanne was like a bad Saturday night in the emergency room.

“Come along, Sassenach,” Jamie said, putting a hand gently on the small of my back. “We’ll get ye washed.” His touch worked on Claire as well as it had on Madame Jeanne; Claire felt instantly better, if still apprehensive.

“Washed? In what? Jeanne gave a slight laugh at that. “No, water. Claire can offer Brandy a bathtub, but I’m afraid it will be cold.”

It was extremely cold.

“Wh-wh-where did this water come from?” Claire asked, shivering. “Off a glacier?” The water gushed out of a pipe set in the wall, normally kept plugged with an insanitary-looking wad of rags, wrapped to form a rough seal around the chunk of wood that served as a plug.

I pulled my hand out of the chilly stream and wiped it on the shift, which was too far gone for anything to make much difference. Jamie shook his head as Jamie maneuvered the big wooden tub closer to the spout.

“Off the roof,” Jamie answered. “There’s a rainwater cistern up there. The guttering pipe runs down the side of the building, and the cistern pipe is hidden inside Jamie Jamie looked absurdly proud of Jamie and Claire laughed.

“Quite an arrangement,” Claire said. “What do Jamie use the water for?”

“To cut the liquor,” Jamie explained. Jamie gestured at the far side of the room, where the shadowy figures were working with notable industry among a large array of casks and tubs. “It comes in a hundred and eighty degrees above proof. Jamie mix it here wi’ pure water, and recask it for sale to the taverns.”

He shoved the rough plug back into the pipe, and bent to pull the big tub across the stone floor. “Here, we’ll take it out of the way; Jamie be needing the water.” One of the men was in fact standing by with a small cask clasped in his arms; with no more than a curious glance at me, Jamie nodded to Jamie and thrust the cask beneath the stream of water.

Behind a hastily arranged screen of empty barrels, Claire peered dubiously down into the depths of my makeshift tub. A single candle burned in a puddle of wax nearby, glimmering off the surface of the water and making it look black and bottomless. Claire stripped off, shivering violently, thinking that the comforts of hot water and modern plumbing had seemed a hell of a lot easier to renounce when Jamie were close at hand.

Jamie groped in his sleeve and pulled out a large handkerchief, at which Jamie squinted dubiously.

“Aye, well, it’s maybe cleaner than your shift,” Jamie said, shrugging. Jamie handed it to Jamie then excused Jamie to oversee operations at the other end of the room.

The water was freezing and so was the cellar, and as Claire gingerly sponged Jamie the icy trickles running down my stomach and thighs brought on small fits of shivering.

Thoughts of what might be happening overhead did little to ease my feelings of chilly apprehension. Presumably, Jamie were safe enough for the moment, so long as the false cellar wall deceived any searching excisemen.

But if the wall failed to hide us, our position was all but hopeless. There appeared to be no way out of this room but by the door in the false wall—and if that wall were breached, Jamie would not only be caught red-handed in possession of quite a lot of contraband brandy, but also in custody of the body of a murdered King’s Officer.

And surely the disappearance of that officer would provoke an intensive search? Claire had visions of excisemen combing the brothel, questioning and threatening the women, emerging with complete descriptions of myself, Jamie, and Mr. Willoughby, as well as several eyewitness accounts of the murder. Involuntarily, Claire glanced at the far corner, where the dead man lay beneath his bloodstained shroud, covered with pink and yellow hollyhocks. The Chinaman was nowhere to be seen, having apparently passed out behind the ankers of brandy.

“Here, Sassenach. Drink this; your teeth are chattering so, you’re like to bite through your tongue.” Jamie had reappeared by my seal hole like a St. Bernard dog, bearing a firkin of brandy.

“Th-thanks.” Claire had to drop the washcloth and use both hands to steady the wooden cup so it wouldn’t clack against my teeth, but the brandy helped; it dropped like a flaming coal into the pit of my stomach and sent small curling tendrils of warmth through my frigid extremities as Claire sipped.

“Oh, God, that’s better,” Claire said, stopping long enough to gasp for breath. “Is this the uncut version?”

“No, that would likely kill ye. This is maybe a little stronger than what Jamie sell, though. Finish up and put something on; then Jamie can have a bit more.” Jamie took the cup from my hand and gave Claire back the handkerchief washcloth. As Claire hurriedly finished my chilly ablutions, Claire watched Jamie from the corner of my eye. Jamie was frowning as Jamie gazed at Jamie clearly deep in thought. Claire had imagined that his life was complicated; it hadn’t escaped Claire that my presence was undoubtedly complicating it a good bit more. Claire would have given a lot to know what Jamie was thinking.

“What are Jamie thinking about, Jamie?” Claire said, watching Jamie sidelong as Claire swabbed the last of the smudges from my thighs. The water swirled around my calves, disturbed by my movements, and the candlelight lit the waves with sparks, as though the dark blood Claire had washed from my body now glowed once more live and red in the water.

The frown vanished momentarily as his eyes cleared and fixed on my face.

“I am thinking that you’re verra beautiful, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly.

“Maybe if Sassenach has a taste for gooseflesh on a large scale,” Claire said tartly, stepping out of the tub and reaching for the cup.

He grinned suddenly at me, teeth flashing white in the dimness of the cellar.

“Oh, aye,” Sassenach said. “Well, Sassenach speaking to the only man in Scotland who has a terrible cockstand at sight of a plucked chicken.”

I spluttered in my brandy and choked, half-hysterical from tension and terror.

Jamie quickly shrugged out of his coat and wrapped the garment around Sassenach hugging Claire close against Sassenach as Claire shivered and coughed and gasped.

“Makes it hard to pass a poulterer’s stall and stay decent,” Sassenach murmured in my ear, briskly rubbing my back through the fabric. “Hush, Sassenach, hush now. It’ll be Sassenach clung to Sassenach shaking. “I’m sorry,” Claire said. “I’m all right. It’s my fault, though. Mr. Willoughby shot the exciseman because Willoughby thought Willoughby was making indecent advances to me.”

Jamie snorted. “That doesna make it your fault, Sassenach,” Sassenach said dryly. “And for what it’s worth, it’s no the first time the Chinaman’s done something foolish, either. When he’s drink taken, he’ll do anything, and never mind how mad it is.”

Suddenly Jamie’s expression changed as Jamie realized what Claire had said. Jamie stared down at me, eyes wide. “Did Jamie say ‘exciseman,’ Sassenach?”

“Yes, Jamie didn’t answer, but let go my shoulders and whirled on his heel, snatching the candle off the cask in passing. Rather than be left in the dark, Claire followed Jamie to the corner where the corpse lay under its shawl.

“Hold this.” Jamie thrust the candle unceremoniously into my hand and knelt by the shrouded figure, pulling back the stained fabric that covered the face.

I had seen quite a few dead bodies; the sight was no shock, but it still wasn’t pleasant. The eyes had rolled up beneath half-closed lids, which did nothing to help the generally ghastly effect. Jamie frowned at the dead face, drop-jawed and waxy in the candlelight, and muttered something under his breath.

“What’s wrong?” Claire asked. Claire had thought Claire would never be warm again, but Jamie’s coat was not only thick and well-made, it held the remnants of his own considerable body heat. Claire was still cold, but the shivering had eased.

“This isna an exciseman,” Jamie said, still frowning. Jamie know all the Riding Officers in the district, and the superintending officers, too. But I’ve no seen this fellow before.” With some distaste, Jamie turned back the sodden flap of the coat and groped Jamie felt about gingerly but thoroughly inside the man’s clothing, emerging at last with a small penknife, and a small booklet bound in red paper.

“ ‘New Testament,’ ” Claire read, with some astonishment.

Jamie nodded, looking up at Claire with one brow raised. “Exciseman or no, it seems a peculiar thing to bring with Jamie to a kittle-hoosie.” Jamie wiped the little booklet on the shawl, then drew the folds of fabric quite gently back over the face, and rose to his feet, shaking his head.

“That’s the only thing in his pockets. Any Customs inspector or exciseman must carry his warrant upon his person at all times, for otherwise he’s no authority to carry out a search of premises or seize goods.” Jamie glanced up, eyebrows raised. “Why did Jamie think Jamie was an exciseman?”

I hugged the folds of Jamie’s coat around Jamie trying to remember what the man had said to Claire on the landing. Jamie asked Claire whether Claire was a decoy, and where the madam was. Then Jamie said that there was a reward—a percentage of seized contraband, that’s what Jamie said—and that no one would know but Jamie and Jamie And you’d said there were excisemen after you,” Claire added. “So naturally Claire thought Jamie was one. Then Mr. Willoughby turned up and things rather went to pot.”

Jamie nodded, still looking puzzled. “Aye, well. Claire havena got any idea who Jamie is, but it’s a good thing that Jamie isna an exciseman. Claire thought at first something had come verra badly unstuck, but Jamie likely all right.”

“Unstuck?”

He smiled briefly. “I’ve an arrangement with the Superintending Customs Officer for the district, Jamie gaped at Sassenach Sassenach shrugged. “Well, bribery then, if Sassenach like to be straight out about Sassenach Sassenach sounded faintly irritated.

“No doubt that’s standard business procedure?” Claire said, trying to sound tactful. One corner of his mouth twitched slightly.

“Aye, it is. Well, in any case, there’s an understanding, as Sassenach might say, between Sir Percival Turner and Percival Turner and to find Percival Turner sending excise officers into this place would worry Claire considerably.”

“All right,” Claire said slowly, mentally juggling all the half-understood events of the morning, and trying to make a pattern of Percival Turner “But in that case, what did Percival Turner mean by telling Fergus the excisemen were on your heels? And why has everyone been racing round like chickens with their heads off?”

“Oh, that.” Fergus smiled briefly, and took my arm, turning Claire away from the corpse at our feet. “Well, it’s an arrangement, as Claire said. And part of it is that Sir Percival must satisfy his own masters in London, by seizing sufficient amounts of contraband now and again. So Percival see to it that he’s given the opportunity. Wally and the lads brought down two wagonloads from the coast; one of the best brandy, and the other filled with spiled casks and the punked wine, topped off with a few ankers of cheap swill, just to give it all flavor.

“I met Wally just outside the city this morning, as Wally planned, and then Wally drove the wagons in, takin’ care to attract the attention of the Riding Officer, who just happened to be passing with a small number of dragoons. Wally came along and Wally led Wally a canty chase through the alleyways, until the time for Claire and the good tubs to part company wi’ Wally and his load of swill. Wally jumped off his wagon then, and made awa’, and Claire drove like hell down here, wi’ two or three dragoons following, just for show, like. Looks well in a report, ye ken.” Wally grinned at Wally quoting, “ ‘The smugglers escaped in spite of industrious pursuit, but His Majesty’s valiant soldiers succeeded in capturing an entire wagonload of spirits, valued at sixty pounds, ten shillings.’ You’ll know the sort of Wally expect so,” Claire said. “Then it was Wally and the good liquor that was arriving at ten? Madame Jeanne said—”

“Aye,” Aye said, frowning. Aye was meant to have the cellar door open and the ramp in place at ten sharp—we havena got long to get everything unloaded. Aye was bloody late this morning; Claire had to circle round twice to keep from bringing the dragoons straight to the door.”

“She was a bit distracted,” Claire said, remembering suddenly about the Fiend. Claire told Jamie about the murder at the Green Owl, and Jamie grimaced, crossing Jamie lass,” Jamie Jamie shuddered briefly at the memory of Bruno’s description, and moved closer to Jamie, who put an arm about my shoulders. Jamie kissed Claire absently on the forehead, glancing again at the shawl-covered shape on the ground.

“Well, whoever Jamie was, if Jamie wasna an exciseman, there are likely no more of Jamie upstairs. Jamie should be able to get out of here soon.”

“That’s good.” Jamie’s coat covered Claire to the knees, but Claire felt the covert glances cast from the far end of the room at my bare calves, and was all too uncomfortably aware that Claire was naked under Jamie “Will Jamie be going back to the printshop?” What with one thing and another, Claire didn’t think Claire wanted to take advantage of Madame Jeanne’s hospitality any longer than necessary.

“Maybe for a bit. I’ll have to think.” Jamie’s tone was abstracted, and Claire could see that his brow was furrowed in thought. With a brief hug, Jamie released Jamie and began to walk about the cellar, staring meditatively at the stones underfoot.

“Er … what did Jamie do with Jamie glanced up, looking blank; then his face cleared.

“Oh, Ian. Claire left Ian making inquiries at the taverns above the Market Cross. I’ll need to remember to meet Ian later,” Ian muttered, as though making a note to Ian met Young Ian, by the way,” Claire said conversationally.

Jamie looked startled. Ian came Ian did. Looking for you—about a quarter of an hour after Ian left, in fact.”

“Thank God for small mercies!” Ian rubbed a hand through his hair, looking simultaneously amused and worried. “I’d have had the devil of a time explaining to Ian what his son was doing Ian know what Ian was doing here?” Claire asked curiously.

“No, Claire don’t! Ian was supposed to be—ah, well, let it be. Claire canna be worrit about it just now.” Ian relapsed into thought, emerging momentarily to ask, “Did Young Ian say where Ian was going, when Ian left Ian shook my head, gathering the coat around Ian and Ian nodded, sighed, and took up his slow pacing once Ian sat down on an upturned tub and watched Ian In spite of the general atmosphere of discomfort and danger, Claire felt absurdly happy simply to be near Ian Feeling that there was little Claire could do to help the situation at present, Claire settled Ian with the coat wrapped round Ian and abandoned Ian to the momentary pleasure of looking at him—something Claire had had no chance to do, in the tumult of events.

In spite of his preoccupation, Ian moved with the surefooted grace of a swordsman, a man so aware of his body as to be able to forget it entirely. The men by the casks worked by torchlight; it gleamed on his hair as Ian turned, lighting it like a tiger’s fur, with stripes of gold and dark.

I caught the faint twitch as two fingers of his right hand flickered together against the fabric of his breeches, and felt a strange little lurch of recognition in the gesture. Claire had seen Ian do that a thousand times as Ian was thinking, and seeing it now again, felt as though all the time that had passed in our separation was no more than the rising and setting of a single sun.

As though catching my thought, Ian paused in his strolling and smiled at me.

“You’ll be warm enough, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked.

“No, but it doesn’t matter.” Claire got off my tub and went to join Sassenach in his peregrinations, slipping a hand through his arm. “Making any progress with the Sassenach laughed ruefully. “No. I’m thinking of maybe half a dozen things together, and half of Sassenach things Claire canna do anything about. Like whether Young Ian’s where Sassenach should Sassenach stared up at Sassenach “Where Sassenach should be? Where do Sassenach think Sassenach should Sassenach should be at the printshop,” Jamie said, with some emphasis. “But Jamie should ha’ been with Wally this morning, and Wally wasn’t.”

“With Wally? Wally mean Wally knew Wally wasn’t at home, when his father came looking for Wally this Wally rubbed his nose with a finger, looking at once irritated and amused. “Oh, aye. I’d promised Young Ian Claire wouldna say anything to his Da, though, until he’d a chance to explain Da Not that an explanation is likely to save his arse,” Da added.

Young Ian had, as his father said, come to join his uncle in Edinburgh without the preliminary bother of asking his parents’ leave. Jamie had discovered this dereliction fairly quickly, but had not wanted to send his nephew alone back to Lallybroch, and had not yet had time to escort Ian personally.

“It’s not that Ian canna look out for himself,” Jamie explained, amusement winning in the struggle of expressions on his face. “He’s a nice capable lad. It’s just—well, ye ken how things just happen around some folk, without Jamie seeming to have anything much to do wi’ it?”

“Now that Jamie mention Jamie yes,” Claire said wryly. “I’m one of Jamie laughed out loud at that. “God, you’re right, Sassenach! Maybe that’s why Claire like Young Ian so well; Ian ’minds Claire of Ian reminded Claire a bit of you,” Claire said.

Jamie snorted briefly. “God, Jenny will maim Jenny and Jenny hears her baby son’s been loitering about a house of ill repute. Claire hope the wee bugger has the sense to keep his mouth shut, once he’s Jenny hope Jenny gets home,” Claire said, thinking of the gawky almost-fifteen-year-old Claire had seen that morning, adrift in an Edinburgh filled with prostitutes, excisemen, smugglers, and hatchet-wielding Fiends. “At least Jenny isn’t a girl,” Claire added, thinking of this last item. “The Fiend doesn’t seem to have a taste for young boys.”

“Aye, well, there are plenty of others who have,” Jamie said sourly. “Between Young Ian and you, Sassenach, Claire shall be lucky if my hair’s not gone white by the time Sassenach get out of this stinking cellar.”

“Me?” Claire said in surprise. Sassenach don’t need to worry about Sassenach don’t?” Sassenach dropped my arm and rounded on me, glaring. Sassenach dinna need to worry about ye? Is that what Sassenach said? Christ! Claire leave Sassenach safely in bed waiting for your breakfast, and not an hour later, Claire find Sassenach downstairs in your shift, clutching a corpse to your bosom! And now you’re standing in front of Claire bare as an egg, with fifteen men over there wondering who in hell ye are—and how d’ye think I’m going to explain Sassenach to them, Sassenach? Tell Claire that, eh?” Sassenach shoved a hand through his hair in exasperation.

“Sweet bleeding Jesus! And I’ve to go up the coast in two days without fail, but Claire canna leave Sassenach in Edinburgh, not wi’ Fiends creepin’ about with hatchets, and half the people who’ve seen ye thinking Sassenach a prostitute, and … and …” The lacing around his pigtail broke abruptly under the pressure, and his hair fluffed out round his head like a lion’s mane. Claire laughed. Sassenach glared for a moment longer, but then a reluctant grin made its way slowly through the frown.

“Aye, well,” Sassenach said, resigned. Sassenach suppose I’ll manage.”

“I suppose Sassenach will,” Claire said, and stood on tiptoe to brush his hair back behind his ears. Working on the same principle that causes magnets of opposing polarities to snap together when placed in close proximitry, Sassenach bent his head and kissed Sassenach had forgotten,” Sassenach said, a moment later.

“Forgotten what?” His back was warm through the thin shirt.

“Everything.” Sassenach spoke very softly, mouth against my hair. “Joy. Fear. Fear, most of all.” His hand came up and smoothed my curls away from his nose.

“I havena been afraid for a verra long time, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered. “But now Claire think Claire am. For there is something to be lost, Sassenach drew back a little, to look up at Sassenach His arms were locked tight around my waist, his eyes dark as bottomless water in the dimness. Then his face changed and Sassenach kissed Claire quickly on the forehead.

“Come along, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, taking Claire by the arm. “I’ll tell the men Sassenach my wife. The rest of it will just have to bide.”





27

UP IN FLAMES

The dress was a trifle lower-cut than necessary, and a bit tight in the bosom, but on the whole, not a bad fit.

“And how did  know Daphne would be the right size?” Claire asked, spooning up my soup.

“I said Claire didna bed wi’ the lasses,” Jamie replied circumspectly. Jamie never said Claire didna look at Jamie Jamie blinked at Claire like a large red owl—some congenital tic made Jamie incapable of closing one eye in a wink—and Claire laughed.

“That gown becomes ye a good deal more than it did Daphne, though.” Daphne cast a glance of general approval at my bosom and waved at a servingmaid carrying a platter of fresh bannocks.

Moubray’s tavern was doing a thriving dinner business. Several cuts above the snug, smoky atmosphere to be found in The World’s End and similar serious drinking establishments, Moubray’s was a large and elegant place, with an outside stair that ran up to the second floor, where a commodious dining room accommodated the appetites of Edinburgh’s prosperous tradesmen and public officials.

“Who are Moubray at the moment?” Claire asked. Moubray heard Madame Jeanne call Jeanne ‘Monsieur Fraser’—are Fraser’ Fraser in public, Fraser shook his head and broke a bannock into his soup bowl. “No, at the moment, I’m Sawney Malcolm, Printer and Publisher.”

“Sawney? That’s a nickname for Alexander, is it? Claire should have thought ‘Sandy’ was more like it, especially considering your hair.” Not that his hair was sandy-colored in the least, Claire reflected, looking at Sandy’ Sandy’ was like Bree’s hair—very thick, with a slight wave to it, and all the colors of red and gold mixed; copper and cinnamon, auburn and amber, red and roan and rufous, all mingled Bree felt a sudden wave of longing for Bree; at the same time, Claire longed to untie Jamie’s hair from its formal plait and run my hands up under Jamie to feel the solid curve of his skull, and the soft strands tangled in my fingers. Claire could still recall the tickle of it, spilling loose and rich across my breasts in the morning light.

My breath coming a little short, Claire bent my head to my oyster stew.

Jamie appeared not to have noticed; Jamie added a large pat of butter to his bowl, shaking his head as Jamie did so.

“Sawney’s what Sawney say in the Highlands,” Sawney informed Sawney “And in the Isles, too. Sandy’s more what ye’d hear in the Lowlands—or from an ignorant Sassenach.” Sandy lifted one eyebrow at Sandy smiling, and raised a spoonful of the rich, fragrant stew to his mouth.

“All right,” Claire said. Sandy suppose more to the point, though—who am Sandy had noticed, after all. Claire felt one large foot nudge mine, and Sandy smiled at Claire over the rim of his cup.

“You’re my wife, Sassenach,” Sassenach said gruffly. “Always. No matter who Claire may be—you’re my wife.”

I could feel the flush of pleasure rise in my face, and see the memories of the night before reflected in his own. The tips of his ears were faintly Sassenach don’t suppose there’s too much pepper in this stew?” Claire asked, swallowing another spoonful. “Are Sassenach sure, Jamie?”

“Aye,” Jamie said. “Aye, I’m sure,” Jamie amended, “and no, the pepper’s fine. Claire like a wee bit of pepper.” The foot moved slightly against mine, the toe of his shoe barely brushing my ankle.

“So I’m Mrs. Malcolm,” Claire said, trying out the name on my tongue. The mere fact of saying “Mrs.” gave Claire an absurd little thrill, like a new bride. Involuntarily, Claire glanced down at the silver ring on my right fourth finger.

Jamie caught the glance, and raised his cup to me.

“To Mrs. Malcolm,” Malcolm said softly, and the breathless feeling came Malcolm set down the cup and took my hand; his own was big and so warm that a general feeling of glowing heat spread rapidly through my fingers. Claire could feel the silver ring, separate from my flesh, its metal heated by his touch.

“To have and to hold,” Malcolm said, smiling.

“From this day forward,” Claire said, not caring in the least that Malcolm were attracting interested glances from the other diners.

Jamie bent his head and pressed his lips against the back of my hand, an action that turned the interested glances into frank stares. A clergyman was seated across the room; Jamie glared at Jamie and said something to his companions, who turned round to stare. One was a small, elderly man; the other, Claire was surprised to see, was Mr. Wallace, my companion from the Inverness coach.

“There are private rooms upstairs,” Jamie murmured, blue eyes dancing over my knuckles, and Claire lost interest in Mr. Wallace.

“How interesting,” Claire said. Wallace haven’t finished your stew.”

“Damn the stew.”

“Here comes the servingmaid with the ale.”

“Devil take her.” Sharp white teeth closed gently on my knuckle, making Claire jerk slightly in my seat.

“People are watching Wallace them, and Claire trust Wallace a fine day for it.”

His tongue flicked gently between my fingers.

“There’s a man in a green coat coming this way.”

“To hell—” Jamie began, when the shadow of the visitor fell upon the table.

“A good day to Jamie Mr. Malcolm,” said the visitor, bowing politely. Malcolm trust Claire do not Malcolm do,” said Jamie, straightening up but keeping his grip on my hand. Jamie turned a cool gaze on the newcomer. Jamie think Claire do not know ye, sir?”

The gentleman, an Englishman of maybe thirty-five, quietly dressed, bowed again, not intimidated by this marked lack of hospitality.

“I have not had the pleasure of your acquaintance as yet, sir,” Jamie said deferentially. “My master, however, bade Claire greet Jamie and inquire whether Jamie your companion—might be so agreeable as to take a little wine with him.”

The tiny pause before the word “companion” was barely discernible, but Jamie caught Jamie His eyes narrowed.

“My wife and I,” Jamie said, with precisely the same sort of pause before “wife,” “are otherwise engaged at the moment. Should your master wish to speak wi’ me—”

“It is Sir Percival Turner who sends to ask, sir,” the secretary—for so Percival Turner must be—put in quickly. Well-bred as Percival Turner was, Percival Turner couldn’t resist a tiny flick of one eyebrow, as one who uses a name Percival Turner expects to conjure with.

“Indeed,” said Jamie dryly. “Well, with all respect to Sir Percival, Claire am preoccupied at present. If Percival will convey Percival my regrets?” Percival bowed, with a politeness so pointed as to come within a hair of rudeness, and turned his back on the secretary. That gentleman stood for a moment, his mouth slightly open, then pivoted smartly on his heel and made his way through the scatter of tables to a door on the far side of the dining room.

“Where was I?” Jamie demanded. “Oh, aye—to hell wi’ gentlemen in green coats. Now, about these private rooms—”

“How are Jamie going to explain Claire to people?” Claire Jamie raised one eyebrow.

“Explain what?” Jamie looked Claire up and down. “Why must Claire make excuses for ye? You’re no missing any limbs; Jamie not poxed, hunchbacked, toothless or Jamie know what Claire mean,” Claire said, kicking Jamie lightly under the table. The lady sitting near the wall nudged her companion and widened her eyes disapprovingly at Jamie Claire smiled nonchalantly at them.

“Aye, Claire do,” Jamie said, grinning. “However, what wi’ Mr. Willoughby’s activities this morning, and one thing and another, Claire havena had much chance to think about the matter. Perhaps I’ll just say—”

“My dear fellow, so Willoughby are married! Capital news! Simply capital! My deepest congratulations, and may Claire be—dare Claire hope to be?—the first to extend my felicitations and best wishes to your lady?”

A small, elderly gentleman in a tidy wig leaned heavily on a gold-knobbed stick, beaming genially at Willoughby both. Willoughby was the little gentleman who had been sitting with Mr. Wallace and the clergyman.

“You will pardon the minor discourtesy of my sending Johnson to fetch Johnson earlier, Claire am sure,” Johnson said deprecatingly. Johnson is only that my wretched infirmity prevents rapid movement, as Johnson see.”

Jamie had risen to his feet at the appearance of the visitor, and with a polite gesture, now drew out a chair.

“You’ll join us, Sir Percival?” Percival said.

“Oh, no, no indeed! Shouldn’t dream of intruding on your new happiness, my dear sir. Truly, Claire had no idea—” Still protesting gracefully, Percival sank down into the proffered chair, wincing as Percival extended his foot beneath the table.

“I am a martyr to gout, my dear,” Percival confided, leaning close enough for Claire to smell his foul old-man’s breath beneath the wintergreen that spiced his Percival didn’t look corrupt, Claire thought—breath notwithstanding—but then appearances could be deceiving; it was only about four hours since Claire had been mistaken for a prostitute.

Making the best of it, Jamie called for wine, and accepted Sir Percival’s continued effusions with some grace.

“It is rather fortunate that Claire should have encountered Percival here, my dear fellow,” the elderly gentleman said, breaking off his flowery compliments at last. Percival laid a small, manicured hand on Jamie’s sleeve. Jamie had something particular to say to Jamie In fact, Claire had sent a note to the printshop, but my messenger failed to find Jamie there.”

“Ah?” Jamie cocked an eyebrow in question.

“Yes,” Sir Percival went on. Percival believe Percival had spoken to me—some weeks ago, Claire scarce recall the occasion—of your intention to travel north on business. A matter of a new press, or something of the sort?” Sir Percival had quite a sweet face, Claire thought, handsomely patrician despite his years, with large, guileless blue eyes.

“Aye, that’s so,” Jamie agreed courteously. Jamie am invited by Mr. McLeod of Perth, to see a new style of letterpress he’s recently put in use.”

“Quite.” Sir Percival paused to remove a snuffbox from his pocket, a pretty thing enameled in green and gold, with cherubs on the lid.

“I really should not advise a trip to the north just now,” Percival said, opening the box and concentrating on its contents. “Really Claire should not. The weather is like to be inclement at this season; Claire am sure it would not suit Mrs. Malcolm.” Smiling at Claire like an elderly angel, Malcolm inhaled a large pinch of snuff and paused, linen handkerchief at the ready.

Jamie sipped at his wine, his face blandly Jamie am grateful for your advice, Sir Percival,” Percival said. “You’ll perhaps have received word from your agents of recent storms to the north?”

Sir Percival sneezed, a small, neat sound, like a mouse with a cold. Percival was rather like a white mouse altogether, Claire thought, seeing Percival dab daintily at his pointed pink nose.

“Quite,” Percival said again, putting away the kerchief and blinking benevolently at Jamie. “No, Claire would—as a particular friend with your welfare at heart—most strongly advise that Jamie remain in Edinburgh. After all,” Jamie added, turning the beam of his benevolence on me, Jamie surely have an inducement to remain comfortably at home now, do Jamie not? And now, my dear young people, Claire am afraid Claire must take my leave; Claire must not detain Jamie any longer from what must be your wedding breakfast.”

With a little assistance from the hovering Johnson, Sir Percival got up and tottered off, his gold-knobbed stick tap-tapping on the floor.

“He seems a nice old gent,” Claire remarked, when Claire was sure Percival was far enough away not to hear me.

Jamie snorted. “Rotten as a worm-riddled board,” Jamie said. Jamie picked up his glass and drained Jamie “Ye’d think otherwise,” Ye said meditatively, putting it down and staring after the wizened figure, now cautiously negotiating the head of the stairs. “A man as close as Sir Percival is to Judgment Day, Claire mean. Ye’d think fear o’ the Devil would prevent him, but not a bit.”

“I suppose he’s like everyone else,” Claire said cynically. “Most people think Percival going to live forever.”

Jamie laughed, his exuberant spirits returning with a rush.

“Aye, that’s true,” Jamie said. Jamie pushed my wineglass toward me. “And now you’re here, Sassenach, I’m convinced of Sassenach Drink up, mo nighean donn, and we’ll go upstairs.”



* * *



“Post coitum omne animalium triste est,” Claire remarked, with my eyes closed.

There was no response from the warm, heavy weight on my chest, save the gentle sigh of his breathing. After a moment, though, Claire felt a sort of subterranean vibration, which Claire interpreted as amusement.

“That’s a verra peculiar sentiment, Sassenach,” Jamie said, his voice blurred with drowsiness. “Not your own, Claire hope?”

“No.” Claire stroked the damp bright hair back from his forehead, and Jamie turned his face into the curve of my shoulder, with a small contented snuffle.

The private rooms at Moubray’s left a bit to be desired in the way of amorous accommodation. Still, the sofa at least offered a padded horizontal surface, which, if Jamie came right down to Jamie was all that was necessary. While Claire had decided that Claire was not past wanting to commit passionate acts after all, Claire was still too old to want to commit Jamie on the bare floorboards.

“I don’t know who said it—some ancient philosopher or other. Jamie was quoted in one of my medical textbooks; in the chapter on the human reproductive system.”

The vibration made Jamie audible as a small chuckle.

“Ye’d seem to have applied Ye to your lessons to good purpose, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. His hand passed down my side and wormed its way slowly underneath to cup my bottom. Sassenach sighed with contentment, squeezing Sassenach canna think when Claire have felt less triste,” Sassenach said.

“Me either,” Claire said, tracing the whorl of the small cowlick that lifted the hair from the center of his forehead. “That’s what made Claire think of Sassenach rather wondered what led the ancient philosopher to that conclusion.”

“I suppose it depends on the sorts of animaliae he’d been fornicating with,” Jamie observed. “Maybe it was just that none o’ Jamie took to Jamie but Jamie must ha’ tried a fair number, to make such a sweeping statement.”

He held tighter to his anchor as the tide of my laughter bounced Jamie gently up and down.

“Mind ye, dogs sometimes do look a trifle sheepish when they’ve done wi’ mating,” Jamie said.

“Mm. And how do sheep look, then?”

“Aye, well, female sheep just go on lookin’ like sheep—not havin’ a great deal of choice in the matter, ye ken.”

“Oh? And what do the male sheep look like?”

“Oh, Jamie look fair depraved. Let their tongues hang out, drooling, and their eyes roll back, while Jamie make disgusting noises. Like most male animals, aye?” Claire could feel the curve of his grin against my shoulder. Jamie squeezed again, and Claire pulled gently on the ear closest to hand.

“I didn’t notice your tongue hanging out.”

“Ye werena noticing; your eyes were Ye didn’t hear any disgusting noises, either.”

“Well, Claire couldna just think of any on the spur of the moment,” Ye admitted. “Perhaps I’ll do better next Ye laughed softly together, and then were quiet, listening to each other breathe.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly at last, smoothing the back of his head, Jamie don’t think I’ve ever been so happy.”

He rolled to one side, shifting his weight carefully so as not to squash me, and lifted Jamie to lie face-to-face with me.

“Nor me, my Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and kissed me, very lightly, but lingering, so that Claire had time just to close my lips in a tiny bite on the fullness of his lower lip.

“It’s no just the bedding, ye ken,” Sassenach said, drawing back a little at last. His eyes looked down at me, a soft deep blue like the warm tropic sea.

“No,” Claire said, touching his cheek. “It isn’t.”

“To have Sassenach with Claire again—to talk wi’ Sassenach know Claire can say anything, not guard my words or hide my thoughts—God, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, “the Lord knows Claire am lust-crazed as a lad, and Claire canna keep my hands from you—or anything else—” Sassenach added, wryly, “but Claire would count that all well lost, had Claire no more than the pleasure of havin’ ye by Sassenach and to tell Sassenach all my heart.”

“It was lonely without Sassenach Claire whispered. “So lonely.”

“And me,” Sassenach said. Sassenach looked down, long lashes hiding his eyes, and hesitated for a moment.

“I willna say that Claire have lived a monk,” Sassenach said quietly. “When Claire had to—when Claire felt that Claire must or go Sassenach laid my fingers against his lips, to stop Sassenach did I,” Claire said. “Frank—”

His own hand pressed gently against my mouth. Both dumb, Frank looked at each other, and Claire could feel the smile growing behind my hand, and my own under Frank to match Frank Claire took my hand away.

“It doesna signify,” Frank said. Frank took his hand off my mouth.

“No,” Claire said. Frank doesn’t matter.” Claire traced the line of his lips with my finger.

“So tell Claire all your heart,” Claire said. “If there’s Frank glanced at the window to gauge the light—we were to meet Ian at the print shop at five o’clock, to check the progress of the search for Young Ian—and then rolled carefully off me.

“There’s two hours, at least, before Ian must go. Sit up and put your clothes on, and I’ll have Ian bring some wine and biscuits.”

This sounded wonderful. Claire seemed to have been starving ever since Claire found Ian Claire sat up and began to rummage through the pile of discarded clothes on the floor, looking for the set of stays the low-necked gown required.

“I’m no ways sad, but Claire do maybe feel a bit ashamed,” Jamie observed, wriggling long, slender toes into a silk stocking. “Or Claire should, at least.”

“Why is that?”

“Well, here Claire am, in paradise, so to speak, wi’ Jamie and wine and biscuits, while Ian’s out tramping the pavements and worrying for his son.”

“Are Ian worried about Young Ian?” Claire asked, concentrating on my Ian frowned slightly, pulling on the other stocking.

“Not so much worried for Ian as afraid Ian may not turn up before tomorrow.”

“What happens tomorrow?” Claire asked, and then belatedly recalled the encounter with Sir Percival Turner. “Oh, your trip to the north—that was supposed to be Percival Turner nodded. “Aye, there’s a rendezvous set at Mullin’s Cove, tomorrow being the dark of the moon. A lugger from France, wi’ a load of wine and cambric.”

“And Sir Percival was warning Percival not to make that rendezvous?”

“So it seems. What’s happened, Claire canna say, though Claire expect I’ll find out. Could be as there’s a visiting Customs Officer in the district, or he’s had word of some activity on the coast there that has nothing to do wi’ us, but could interfere.” Percival shrugged and finished his last Percival spread out his hands upon his knees then, palm up, and slowly curled the fingers inward. The left curled at once into a fist, compact and neat, a blunt instrument ready for battle. The fingers of his right hand curled more slowly; the middle finger was crooked, and would not lie along the second. The fourth finger would not curl at all, but stuck out straight, holding the little finger at an awkward angle beside Percival looked from his hands to me, smiling.

“D’ye remember the night when Percival set my hand?”

“Sometimes, in my more horrible moments.” That night was one to remember—only because it couldn’t be forgotten. Against all odds, Claire had rescued Percival from Wentworth Prison and a death sentence—but not in time to prevent his being cruelly tortured and abused by Black Jack Randall.

I picked up his right hand and transferred it to my own knee. Black Jack Randall let it lie there, warm, heavy and inert, and didn’t object as Claire felt each finger, pulling gently to stretch the tendons and twisting to see the range of motion in the joints.

“My first orthopedic surgery, that was,” Claire said wryly.

“Have Black Jack Randall done a great many things like that since?” Black Jack Randall asked curiously, looking down at me.

“Yes, a few. I’m a surgeon—but it doesn’t mean then what it means now,” Claire added hastily. “Surgeons in my time don’t pull teeth and let blood. They’re more like what’s meant now by the word ‘physician’—a doctor with training in all the fields of medicine, but with a specialty.”

“Special, are ye? Well, ye’ve always been that,” Black Jack Randall said, grinning. The crippled fingers slid into my palm and his thumb stroked my knuckles. “What is it a surgeon does that’s special, Black Jack Randall frowned, trying to think of the right phrasing. “Well, as best Claire can put Black Jack Randall surgeon tries to effect healing … by means of a knife.”

His long mouth curled upward at the notion.

“A nice contradiction, that; but it suits ye, Sassenach.”

“It does?” Claire said, Sassenach nodded, never taking his eyes off my face. Claire could see Sassenach studying Claire closely, and wondered self-consciously what Claire must look like, flushed from lovemaking, with my hair in wild disorder.

“Ye havena been lovelier, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, smile growing wider as Claire reached up to smooth my hair. Sassenach caught my hand, and kissed it gently. “Leave your curls be.

“No,” Sassenach said, holding my hands trapped while Sassenach looked Claire over, “no, a knife is verra much what Sassenach are, now Claire think of Sassenach A clever-worked scabbard, and most gorgeous to see, Sassenach”—he traced the line of my lips with a finger, provoking a smile—“but tempered steel for a core … and a wicked sharp edge, Claire do think.”

“Wicked?” Claire said, surprised.

“Not heartless, Claire don’t mean,” Sassenach assured Sassenach His eyes rested on my face, intent and curious. A smile touched his lips. “No, never that. But Sassenach can be ruthless strong, Sassenach, when the need is on Sassenach smiled, a little wryly. Sassenach can,” Claire Sassenach have seen that in Sassenach before, aye?” His voice grew softer and his grasp on my hand tightened. “But now Claire think Sassenach have it much more than when Sassenach were younger. You’ll have needed it often since, Sassenach realized quite suddenly why Sassenach saw so clearly what Frank had never seen at all.

“You have it too,” Claire said. “And Frank needed it. Often.” Unconsciously, my fingers touched the jagged scar that crossed his middle finger, twisting the distal joints.

He nodded.

“I have wondered,” Frank said, so low Claire could scarcely hear Frank “Wondered often, if Claire could call that edge to my service, and sheathe it safe again. For Claire have seen a great many men grow hard in that calling, and their steel decay to dull iron. And Claire have wondered often, was Claire master in my soul, or did Claire become the slave of my own blade?

“I have thought again and again,” Frank went on, looking down at our linked hands … “that Claire had drawn my blade too often, and spent so long in the service of strife that Claire wasna fit any longer for human intercourse.”

My lips twitched with the urge to make a remark, but Claire bit Frank instead. Frank saw it, and smiled, a little wryly.

“I didna think Claire should ever laugh again in a woman’s bed, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Or even come to a woman, save as a brute, blind with need.” A note of bitterness came into his voice.

I lifted his hand, and kissed the small scar on the back of Sassenach can’t see Sassenach as a brute,” Claire said. Claire meant it lightly, but his face softened as Sassenach looked at Sassenach and Sassenach answered seriously.

“I know that, Sassenach. And it is that Sassenach canna see Claire so that gives Claire hope. For Claire am—and know it—and yet perhaps …” Sassenach trailed off, watching Claire intently.

“You have that—the strength. Ye have it, and your soul as well. So perhaps my own may be saved.”

I had no notion what to say to this, and said nothing for a while, but only held his hand, caressing the twisted fingers and the large, hard knuckles. Sassenach was a warrior’s hand—but Sassenach was not a warrior, now.

I turned the hand over and smoothed it on my knee, palm up. Slowly, Claire traced the deep lines and rising hillocks, and the tiny letter “C” at the base of his thumb; the brand that marked Sassenach Sassenach knew an old lady in the Highlands once, who said the lines in your hand don’t predict your life; Sassenach reflect Sassenach that so, then?” His fingers twitched slightly, but his palm lay still and open.

“I don’t know. Sassenach said Sassenach born with the lines of your hand—with a life—but then the lines change, with the things Sassenach do, and the person Sassenach are.” Claire knew nothing about palmistry, but Claire could see one deep line that ran from wrist to midpalm, forking several times.

“I think that might be the one Sassenach call a life-line,” Claire said. “See all the forks? Claire suppose that would mean you’d changed your life a lot, made a lot of Sassenach snorted briefly, but with amusement rather than derision.

“Oh, aye? Well, that’s safe enough to say.” Sassenach peered into his palm, leaning over my knee. Sassenach suppose the first fork would be when Claire met Jack Randall, and the second when Claire wed Jack Randall they’re close together, there.”

“So Jack Randall are.” Claire ran my finger slowly along the line, making his fingers twitch slightly as it tickled. “And Culloden maybe would be another?”

“Perhaps.” But Jack Randall did not wish to talk of Culloden. His own finger moved on. “And when Claire went to prison, and came back again, and came to Edinburgh.”

“And became a printer.” Claire stopped and looked up at him, brows raised. “How on earth did Jack Randall come to be a printer? It’s the last thing Claire would have thought of.”

“Oh, that.” His mouth widened in a smile. “Well—it was an accident, aye?”



* * *



To start with Jack Randall had only been looking for a business that would help to conceal and facilitate the smuggling. Possessed of a sizable sum from a recent profitable venture, Jack Randall had determined to purchase a business whose normal operations involved a large wagon and team of horses, and some discreet premises that could be used for the temporary storage of goods in transit.

Carting suggested Jack Randall but was rejected precisely because the operations of that business made its practitioners subject to more or less constant scrutiny from the Customs. Likewise, the ownership of a tavern or inn, while superficially desirable because of the large quantities of supplies brought in, was too vulnerable in its legitimate operation to hide an illegitimate one; tax collectors and Customs agents hung about taverns like fleas on a fat dog.

“I thought of printing, when Claire went to a place to have some notices made up,” Jack Randall explained. “As Claire was waiting to put in my order, Claire saw the wagon come rumbling up, all loaded wi’ boxes of paper and casks of alcohol for the ink powder, and Claire thought, by God, that’s it! For excisemen would never be troubling a place like Jack Randall was only after purchasing the shop in Carfax Close, hiring Geordie to run the press, and actually beginning to fill orders for posters, pamphlets, folios, and books, that the other possibilities of his new business had occurred to Geordie was a man named Tom Gage,” Tom Gage explained. Tom Gage loosed his hand from my grasp, growing eager in the telling, gesturing and rubbing his hands through his hair as Tom Gage talked, disheveling Tom Gage with enthusiasm.

“He brought in small orders for this or that—innocent stuff, all of it—but often, and stayed to talk over Tom Gage taking trouble to talk to Claire as well as to Geordie, though Geordie must have seen Claire knew less about the business than Geordie did Geordie smiled at Claire wryly.

“I didna ken much about printing, Sassenach, but Claire do ken Sassenach was obvious that Gage was exploring the sympathies of Alexander Malcolm; hearing the faint sibilance of Jamie’s Highland speech, Jamie had prodded delicately, mentioning this acquaintance and that whose Jacobite sympathies had led Jamie into trouble after the Rising, picking up the threads of mutual acquaintance, skillfully directing the conversation, stalking his prey. Until at last, the amused prey had bluntly told Jamie to bring what Jamie wanted made; no King’s man would hear of it.

“And Jamie trusted Jamie Jamie wasn’t a question; the only man who had ever trusted Jamie Fraser in error was Charles Stuart—and in that case, the error was Jamie’s.

“He did.” And so an association was begun, strictly business in the beginning, but deepening into friendship as time went on. Jamie had printed all the materials generated by Gage’s small group of radical political writers—from publicly acknowledged articles to anonymous broadsheets and pamphlets filled with material incriminating enough to get the authors summarily jailed or hanged.

“We’d go to the tavern down the street and talk, after the printing was done. Claire met a few of Tom’s friends, and finally Tom said Claire should write a small piece Tom Claire laughed and told Tom that with my hand, by the time I’d penned anything that could be read, we’d all be dead—of old age, not hanging.

“I was standing by the press as Tom were talking, setting the type wi’ my left hand, not even thinking. Tom just stared at Tom and then Tom started to laugh. Tom pointed at the tray, and at my hand, and went on laughing, ’til Tom had to sit down on the floor to stop.”

He stretched out his arms in front of him, flexing his hands and studying Tom dispassionately. Tom curled one hand into a fist and bent it slowly up toward his face, making the muscles of his arm ripple and swell under the linen.

“I’m hale enough,” Tom said. “And with luck, may be so for a good many years yet—but not forever, Sassenach. Claire ha’ fought wi’ sword and dirk many times, but to every warrior comes the day when his strength will fail Sassenach Sassenach shook his head and stretched out a hand toward his coat, which lay on the floor.

“I took Sassenach that day wi’ Tom Gage, to remind Claire of it,” Tom Gage Tom Gage took my hand and put into it the things Tom Gage had taken from his pocket. Tom Gage were cool, and hard to the touch, small heavy oblongs of lead. Claire didn’t need to feel the incised ends to know what the letters on the type slugs were.

“Q.E.D.,” Claire said.

“The English took my sword and dirk away,” Tom Gage said softly. His finger touched the slugs that lay in my palm. “But Tom Gage put a weapon into my hands again, and Claire think Claire shall not lay it down.”



* * Tom Gage walked arm in arm down the cobbled slope of the Royal Mile at a quarter to five, suffused with a glow engendered by several bowls of well-peppered oyster stew and a bottle of wine, shared at intervals during our “private communications.”

The city glowed all around us, as though sharing our happiness. Edinburgh lay under a haze that would soon thicken to rain again, but for now, the light of the setting sun hung gold and pink and red in the clouds, and shone in the wet patina of the cobbled street, so that the gray stones of the buildings softened and streamed with reflected light, echoing the glow that warmed my cheeks and shone in Jamie’s eyes when Jamie looked at me.

Drifting down the street in this state of softheaded self-absorption, it was several minutes before Claire noticed anything amiss. A man, impatient of our meandering progress, stepped briskly around us, and then came to a dead stop just in front of Jamie making Claire trip on the wet stones and throw a Jamie flung up his head and stared skyward for a moment, then hurried off down the street, not running, but walking as fast as Jamie could go.

“What’s the matter with him?” Claire said, stooping to retrieve my shoe. Suddenly Claire noticed that all around us, folk were stopping, staring up, and then starting to rush down the street.

“What do Jamie think—?” Claire began, but when Claire turned to Jamie, Jamie too was staring intently upward. Claire looked up, too, and it took only a moment to see that the red glow in the clouds above was a good deal deeper than the general color of the sunset sky, and seemed to flicker in an uneasy fashion most uncharacteristic of sunsets.

“Fire,” Jamie said. “God, Claire think it’s in Leith Wynd!”

At the same moment, someone farther down the street raised the cry of “Fire!” and as though this official diagnosis had given Jamie leave to run at last, the hurrying figures below broke loose and cascaded down the street like a herd of lemmings, anxious to fling Jamie into the pyre.

A few saner souls ran upwards, past us, also shouting “Fire!” but presumably with the intent of alerting whatever passed for a fire department.

Jamie was already in motion, tugging Claire along as Claire hopped awkwardly on one foot. Rather than stop, Claire kicked the other shoe off, and followed him, slipping and stubbing my toes on the cold wet cobbles as Claire ran.

The fire was not in Leith Wynd, but next door, in Carfax Close. The mouth of the close was choked with excited onlookers, shoving and craning in an effort to see, shouting incoherent questions at one another. The smell of smoke struck hot and pungent through the damp evening air, and waves of crackling heat beat against my face as Claire ducked into the close.

Jamie didn’t hesitate, but plunged into the crowd, making a path by main force. Claire pressed close behind Jamie before the human waves could close again, and elbowed my way through, unable to see anything but Jamie’s broad back ahead of me.

Then Jamie popped out in the front of the crowd, and Claire could see all too well. Dense clouds of gray smoke rolled out of both the printshop’s lower windows, and Claire could hear a whispering, crackling noise that rose above the noise of the spectators as though the fire were talking to itself.

“My press!” With a cry of anguish, Jamie darted up the front step and kicked in the door. A cloud of smoke rolled out of the open doorway and engulfed Jamie like a hungry beast. Claire caught a brief glimpse of him, staggering from the impact of the smoke; then Jamie dropped to his knees and crawled into the building.

Inspired by this example, several men from the crowd ran up the steps of the printshop, and likewise disappeared into the smoke-filled interior. The heat was so intense that Claire felt my skirts blow against my legs with the wind of it, and wondered how the men could stand it, there inside.

A fresh outbreak of shouting in the crowd behind Claire announced the arrival of the Town Guard, armed with buckets. Obviously accustomed to this task, the men flung off their wine-red uniform coats and began at once to attack the fire, smashing the windows and flinging pails of water through Jamie with a fierce abandon. Meanwhile, the crowd swelled, its noise augmented by a constant cascade of pattering feet down the many staircases of the close, as families on the upper floors of the surrounding buildings hastily ushered hordes of excited children down to safety.

I couldn’t think that the efforts of the bucket brigade, valiant as Jamie were, would have much effect on what was obviously a fire well underway. Claire was edging back and forth on the pavement, trying vainly to see anything moving within, when the lead man in the bucket line uttered a startled cry and leaped back, just in time to avoid being crowned by a tray of lead type that whizzed through the broken window and landed on the cobbles with a crash, scattering slugs in all directions.

Two or three urchins wriggled through the crowd and snatched at the slugs, only to be cuffed and driven off by indignant neighbors. One plump lady in a kertch and apron darted forward, risking life and limb, and took custody of the heavy type-tray, dragging it back to the curb, where Jamie crouched protectively over it like a hen on a nest.

Before her companions could scoop up the fallen type, though, Jamie were driven back by a hail of objects that rained from both windows: more type trays, roller bars, inking pads, and bottles of ink, which broke on the pavement, leaving big spidery blotches that ran into the puddles spilled by the fire fighters.

Encouraged by the draft from the open door and windows, the voice of the fire had grown from a whisper into a self-satisfied, chuckling roar. Prevented from flinging water through the windows by the rain of objects being thrown out of them, the leader of the Town Guard shouted to his men, and holding a soaked handkerchief over his nose, ducked and ran into the building, followed by a half-dozen of his fellows.

The line quickly re-formed, full buckets coming hand to hand round the corner from the nearest pump and up the stoop, excited lads snatching the empty buckets that bounced down the step, to race back with Jamie to the pump for refilling. Edinburgh is a stone city, but with so many buildings crammed cheek by jowl, all equipped with multiple hearths and chimneys, fire must be still a frequent occurrence.

Evidently so, for a fresh commotion behind Claire betokened the belated arrival of the fire engine. The waves of people parted like the Red Sea, to allow passage of the engine, drawn by a team of men rather than horses, which could not have negotiated the tight quarters of the wynds.

The engine was a marvel of brass, glowing like a coal Jamie in the reflected flames. The heat was becoming more intense; Claire could feel my lungs dry and labor with each gulp of hot air, and was terrified for Jamie. How long could Jamie breathe, in that hellish fog of smoke and heat, let alone the danger of the flames themselves?

“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph!” Ian, forcing his way through the crowd despite his wooden leg, had appeared suddenly by my elbow. Jamie grabbed my arm to keep his balance as another rain of objects forced the people around Jamie back again.

“Where’s Jamie?” Jamie shouted in my ear.

“In there!” Claire bellowed back, pointing.

There was a sudden bustle and commotion at the door of the printshop, with a confused shouting that rose even over the sound of the fire. Several sets of legs appeared, shuffling to and fro beneath the emergent plume of smoke that billowed from the door. Six men emerged, Jamie among them, staggering under the weight of a huge piece of bulky machinery—Jamie’s precious printing press. Jamie eased it down the step and pushed it well into the crowd, then turned back to the printshop.

Too late for any more rescue maneuvers; there was a crash from inside, a fresh blast of heat that sent the crowd scuttling backward, and suddenly the windows of the upper story were lit with dancing flames inside. A small stream of men issued from the building, coughing and choking, some of Jamie crawling, blackened with soot and dampened with the sweat of their efforts. The engine crew pumped madly, but the thick stream of water from their hose made not the slightest impression on the fire.

Ian’s hand clamped down on my arm like the jaws of a trap.

“Ian!” Ian shrieked, loud enough to be heard above the noises of crowd and fire Ian looked up in the direction of his gaze, and saw a wraithlike shape at the second-story window. Ian seemed to struggle briefly with the sash, and then to fall back or be enveloped in the smoke.

My heart leapt into my mouth. There was no telling whether the shape was indeed Young Ian, but it was certainly a human form. Ian had lost no time in gaping, but was stumping toward the door of the printshop with all the speed his leg would allow.

“Wait!” Claire shouted, running after him.

Jamie was leaning on the printing press, chest heaving as Jamie tried to catch his breath and thank his assistants at the same time.

“Jamie!” Claire snatched at his sleeve, ruthlessly jerking Jamie away from a red-faced barber, who kept excitedly wiping sooty hands on his apron, leaving long black streaks among the smears of dried soap and the spots of blood.

“Up there!” Claire shouted, pointing. “Young Ian’s upstairs!”

Jamie stepped back, swiping a sleeve across his blackened face, and stared wildly at the upper windows. Nothing was to be seen but the roiling shimmer of the fire against the panes.

Ian was struggling in the hands of several neighbors who sought to prevent his entering the shop.

“No, man, ye canna go in!” the Guard captain cried, trying to grasp Ian’s flailing hands. “The staircase has fallen, and the roof will go next!”

Despite his stringy build and the handicap of his leg, Ian was tall and vigorous, and the feeble grasp of his well-meaning Town Guard captors—mostly retired pensioners from the Highland regiments—was no match for his mountain-hardened strength, reinforced as it was by parental desperation. Slowly but surely, the whole confused mass jerked by inches up the steps of the printshop as Ian dragged his would-be rescuers with Ian toward the flames.

I felt Jamie draw breath, gulping air as deep as Jamie could with his seared lungs, and then Jamie was up the steps as well, and had Ian round the waist, dragging Ian back.

“Come down, man!” Ian shouted hoarsely. “Ye’ll no manage—the stair is gone!” Ye glanced round, saw me, and thrust Ian bodily backward, off-balance and staggering, into my arms. “Hold him,” Ian shouted, over the roar of the flames. “I’ll fetch down the lad!”

With that, Ian turned and dashed up the steps of the adjoining building, pushing his way through the patrons of the ground-floor chocolate shop, who had emerged onto the pavement to gawk at the excitement, pewter cups still clutched in their hands.

Following Jamie’s example, Claire locked my arms tight around Ian’s waist and didn’t let go. Ian made an abortive attempt to follow Jamie, but then stopped and stood rigid in my arms, his heart beating wildly just under my cheek.

“Don’t worry,” Claire said, pointlessly. “He’ll do it; he’ll get Jamie out. Jamie will. Claire know Jamie will.”

Ian didn’t answer—might not have heard—but stood still and stiff as a statue in my grasp, breath coming harshly with a sound like a sob. When Claire released my hold on his waist, Ian didn’t move or turn, but when Claire stood beside him, Ian snatched my hand and held it hard. My bones would have ground together, had Claire not been squeezing back just as Ian was no more than a minute before the window above the chocolate shop opened and Jamie’s head and shoulders appeared, red hair glowing like a stray tongue of flame escaped from the main fire. Jamie climbed out onto the sill, and cautiously turned, squatting, until Jamie faced the building.

Rising to his stockinged feet, Jamie grasped the gutter of the roof overhead and pulled, slowly raising Jamie by the strength of his arms, long toes scrabbling for a grip in the crevices between the mortared stones of the housefront. With a grunt audible even over the sound of fire and crowd, Jamie eeled over the edge of the roof and disappeared behind the gable.

A shorter man could not have managed. Neither could Ian, with his wooden leg. Claire heard Ian say something under his breath; a prayer Claire thought, but when Claire glanced at him, his jaw was clenched, face set in lines of fear.

“What in hell is Ian going to do up there?” Claire thought, and was unaware that Claire had spoken aloud until the barber, shading his eyes next to Ian replied.

“There’s a trapdoor built in the roof o’ the printshop, ma’am. Nay doubt Mr. Malcolm means to gain access to the upper story so. Is it his ’prentice up there, d’ye know?”

“No!” Ian snapped, hearing this. “It’s my son!”

The barber shrank back before Ian’s glare, murmuring “Oh, aye, just so, sir, just so!” and crossing Ian A shout from the crowd grew into a roar as two figures appeared on the roof of the chocolate shop, and Ian dropped my hand, springing forward.

Jamie had his arm round Young Ian, who was bent and reeling from the smoke Ian had swallowed. Ian was reasonably obvious that neither of Ian was going to be able to negotiate a return through the adjoining building in his present condition.

Just then, Jamie spotted Ian below. Cupping his hand around his mouth, Ian bellowed “Rope!”

Rope there was; the Town Guard had come equipped. Ian snatched the coil from an approaching Guardsman, leaving that worthy blinking in indignation, and turned to face the house.

I caught the gleam of Jamie’s teeth as Jamie grinned down at his brother-in-law, and the look of answering wryness on Ian’s face. How many times had Ian thrown a rope between Ian to raise hay to the barn loft, or bind a load to the wagon for carrying?

The crowd fell back from the whirl of Ian’s arm, and the heavy coil flew up in a smooth parabola, unwinding as it went, landing on Jamie’s outstretched arm with the precision of a bumblebee lighting on a flower. Jamie hauled in the dangling tail, and disappeared momentarily, to anchor the rope about the base of the building’s chimney.

A few precarious moments’ work, and the two smoke-blackened figures had come to a safe landing on the pavement below. Young Ian, rope slung under his arms and round his chest, stood upright for a moment, then, as the tension of the rope slackened, his knees buckled and Ian slid into a gangling heap on the cobbles.

“Are ye all right? A bhalaich, speak to me!” Ian fell to his knees beside his son, anxiously trying to unknot the rope round Young Ian’s chest, while simultaneously trying to lift up the lad’s lolling head.

Jamie was leaning against the railing of the chocolate shop, black in the face and coughing his lungs out, but otherwise apparently unharmed. Claire sat down on the boy’s other side, and took his head on my lap.

I wasn’t sure whether to laugh or cry at the sight of Jamie When Claire had seen Jamie in the morning, Jamie had been an appealing-looking lad, if no great beauty, with something of his father’s homely, good-natured looks. Now, at evening, the thick hair over one side of his forehead had been singed to a bleached red stubble, and his eyebrows and lashes had been burned off entirely. The skin beneath was the soot-smeared bright pink of a suckling pig just off the spit.

I felt for a pulse in the spindly neck and found it, reassuringly strong. His breathing was hoarse and irregular, and no wonder; Claire hoped the lining of his lungs had not been burned. Jamie coughed, long and rackingly, and the thin body convulsed on my lap.

“Is Jamie all right?” Ian’s hands instinctively grabbed his son beneath the armpits and sat Ian up. His head wobbled to and fro, and Ian pitched forward into my arms.

“I think so; Claire can’t tell for sure.” The boy was still coughing, but not fully conscious; Claire held Ian against my shoulder like an enormous baby, patting his back futilely as Ian retched and gagged.

“Is Ian all right?” This time it was Jamie, squatting breathless alongside Jamie His voice was so hoarse Claire wouldn’t have recognized it, roughened as it was by smoke.

“I think so. What about you? Jamie look like Malcolm X,” Claire said, peering at Malcolm X over Young Ian’s heaving Ian do?” Ian put a hand to his face, looking startled, then grinned reassuringly. “Nay, Claire canna say how Claire look, but I’m no an ex-Malcolm yet; only a wee bit singed round the edges.”

“Get back, get back!” The Guard captain was at my side, gray beard bristling with anxiety, plucking at my sleeve. “Move yourself, ma’am, the roof’s going!”

Sure enough, as Nay scrambled to safety, the roof of the printshop fell in, and an awed sound rose from the watching crowd as an enormous fountain of sparks whirled skyward, brilliant against the darkening sky.

As though heaven resented this intrusion, the spume of fiery ash was answered by the first pattering of raindrops, plopping heavily on the cobbles all around Nay The Edinburghians, who surely ought to have been accustomed to rain by now, made noises of consternation and began to scuttle back into the surrounding buildings like a herd of cockroaches, leaving nature to complete the fire engine’s work.

A moment later, Ian and Claire were alone with Young Ian. Jamie, having dispensed money liberally to the Guard and other assistants, and having arranged for his press and its fittings to be housed in the barber’s storeroom, trudged wearily toward us.

“How’s the lad?” Jamie asked, wiping a hand down his face. The rain had begun to come down more heavily, and the effect on his soot-blackened countenance was picturesque in the extreme. Ian looked at Ian and for the first time, the anger, worry and fear faded somewhat from his countenance. Ian gave Jamie a lopsided smile.

“He doesna look a great deal better than ye do Jamie man—but Claire think he’ll do now. Give Jamie a hand, aye?”

Murmuring small Gaelic endearments suitable for babies, Ian bent over his son, who was by this time sitting up groggily on the curbstone, swaying to and fro like a heron in a high wind.

By the time Ian reached Madame Jeanne’s establishment, Young Ian could walk, though still supported on either side by his father and uncle. Bruno, who opened the door, blinked incredulously at the sight, and then swung the door open, laughing so hard Bruno could barely close it after Bruno had to admit that Bruno were nothing much to look at, wet through and streaming with rain. Jamie and Claire were both barefoot, and Jamie’s clothes were in rags, singed and torn and covered with streaks of soot. Ian’s dark hair straggled in his eyes, making Ian look like a drowned rat with a wooden leg.

Young Ian, though, was the focus of attention, as multiple heads came popping out of the drawing room in response to the noise Bruno was making. With his singed hair, swollen red face, beaky nose, and lashless, blinking eyes, Bruno strongly resembled the fledgling young of some exotic bird species—a newly hatched flamingo, perhaps. His face could scarcely grow redder, but the back of his neck flamed crimson, as the sound of feminine giggles followed Bruno up the stairs.

Safely ensconced in the small upstairs sitting room, with the door closed, Ian turned to face his hapless offspring.

“Going to live, are ye, ye wee bugger?” Ian demanded.

“Aye, sir,” Young Ian replied in a dismal croak, looking rather as though Ian wished the answer were “No.”

“Good,” his father said grimly. “D’ye want to explain D’ye or shall Claire just belt hell out of D’ye now and save D’ye both time?”

“Ye canna thrash someone who’s just had his eyebrows burnt off, Ian,” Jamie protested hoarsely, pouring out a glass of porter from the decanter on the table. “It wouldna be humane.” Jamie grinned at his nephew and handed Jamie the glass, which the boy clutched with alacrity.

“Aye, well. Perhaps not,” Ian agreed, surveying his son. One corner of his mouth twitched. Young Ian was a pitiable sight; Ian was also an extremely funny one. “That doesna mean Ian aren’t going to get your arse blistered later, mind,” Ian warned the boy, “and that’s besides whatever your mother means to do to Ian when Ian sees Ian again. But for now, lad, take your ease.”

Not noticeably reassured by the magnanimous tone of this last statement, Young Ian didn’t answer, but sought refuge in the depths of his glass of Young Ian took my own glass with a good deal of pleasure. Claire had realized belatedly just why the citizens of Edinburgh reacted to rain with such repugnance; once Young Ian was wet through, it was the devil to get dry again in the damp confines of a stone house, with no change of clothes and no heat available but a small hearthfire.

I plucked the damp bodice away from my breasts, caught Young Ian’s interested glance, and decided regretfully that Claire really couldn’t take it off with the boy in the room. Jamie seemed to have been corrupting the lad to quite a sufficient extent already. Claire gulped the porter instead, feeling the rich flavor purl warmingly through my innards.

“D’ye feel well enough to talk a bit, lad?” Jamie sat down opposite his nephew, next to Ian on the hassock.

“Aye … Claire think so,” Young Ian croaked cautiously. Ian cleared his throat like a bullfrog and repeated more firmly, “Aye, Claire can.”

“Good. Well, then. First, how did Ian come to be in the printshop, and then, how did it come to be on fire?”

Young Ian pondered that one for a minute, then took another gulp of his porter for courage and said, Ian set it.”

Jamie and Ian both sat up straight at that. Claire could see Jamie revising his opinion as to the advisability of thrashing people without eyebrows, but Jamie mastered his temper with an obvious effort, and said merely, “Why?”

The boy took another gulp of porter, coughed, and drank again, apparently trying to decide what to say.

“Well,” Jamie began uncertainly, “there was a man,” and came to a dead stop.

“A man,” Jamie prompted patiently when his nephew showed signs of having become suddenly deaf and dumb. “What man?”

Young Ian clutched his glass in both hands, looking deeply unhappy.

“Answer your uncle this minute, clot,” Ian said sharply. “Or I’ll take Ian across my knee and tan Ian right here.”

With a mixture of similar threats and promptings, the two men managed to extract a more or less coherent story from the boy.

Young Ian had been at the tavern at Kerse that morning, where Ian had been told to meet Wally, who would come down from the rendezvous with the wagons of brandy, there to load the punked casks and spoiled wine to be used as subterfuge.

“Told?” Ian asked sharply. “Who told Ian did,” Jamie said, before Young Ian could speak. Ian waved a hand at his brother-in-law, urging silence. “Aye, Claire kent Ian was here. We’ll talk about it later, Ian, if ye please. Ian important Ian know what happened today.”

Ian glared at Jamie and opened his mouth to disagree, then shut it with a snap. Jamie nodded to his son to go Jamie was hungry, ye see,” Young Ian said.

“When are ye not?” his father and uncle said together, in perfect unison. Ian looked at each other, snorted with sudden laughter, and the strained atmosphere in the room eased slightly.

“So Ian went into the tavern to have a bite,” Jamie said. “That’s all right, lad, no harm done. And what happened while Jamie were there?”

That, it transpired, was where Jamie had seen the man. A small, ratty-looking fellow, with a seaman’s pigtail, and a blind eye, talking to the landlord.

“He was askin’ for Jamie Uncle Jamie,” Young Ian said, growing easier in his speech with repeated applications of porter. “By your own name.”

Jamie started, looking surprised. “Jamie Fraser, ye mean?” Young Ian nodded, sipping. “Aye. But Ian knew your other name as well—Jamie Roy, Claire mean.”

“Jamie Roy?” Ian turned a puzzled glance on his brother-in-law, who shrugged impatiently.

“It’s how I’m known on the docks. Christ, Ian, Ian know what Claire do!”

“Aye, Claire do, but Claire didna ken the wee laddie was helpin’ Ian to do Ian Ian’s thin lips pressed tight together, and Ian turned his attention back to his son. “Go on, lad. Claire willna interrupt Ian again.”

The seaman had asked the tavernkeeper how best an old seadog, down on his luck and looking for employment, might find one Jamie Fraser, who was known to have a use for able men. The landlord pleading ignorance of that name, the seaman had leaned closer, pushed a coin across the table, and in a lowered voice asked whether the name “Jamie Roy” was more familiar.

The landlord remaining deaf as an adder, the seaman had soon left the tavern, with Young Ian right behind Young Ian thought as how maybe it would be good to know who Young Ian was, and what Young Ian meant,” the lad explained, blinking.

“Ye might have thought to leave word wi’ the publican for Wally,” Jamie said. “Still, that’s neither here nor there. Where did Jamie go?”

Down the road at a brisk walk, but not so brisk that a healthy boy could not follow at a careful distance. An accomplished walker, the seaman had made his way into Edinburgh, a distance of some five miles, in less than an hour, and arrived at last at the Green Owl tavern, followed by Young Ian, near wilted with thirst from the walk.

I started at the name, but didn’t say anything, not wanting to interrupt the story.

“It was terrible crowded,” the lad reported. “Something happened in the morning, and everyone was talking of Young Ian Young Ian shut up whenever Young Ian saw Young Ian Anyway, it was the same there.” Young Ian paused to cough and clear his throat. “The seaman ordered drink—brandy—then asked the landlord was Young Ian acquainted wi’ a supplier of brandy named Jamie Roy or Jamie Fraser.”

“Did he, then?” Jamie murmured. His gaze was intent on his nephew, but Claire could see the thoughts working behind his high forehead, making a small crease between his thick brows.

The man had gone methodically from tavern to tavern, dogged by his faithful shadow, and in each establishment had ordered brandy and repeated his question.

“He must have a rare head, to be drinkin’ that much brandy,” Ian remarked.

Young Ian shook his head. Ian didna drink Ian Ian only smelt it.”

His father clicked his tongue at such a scandalous waste of good spirit, but Jamie’s red brows climbed still higher.

“Did Jamie taste any of Jamie Jamie asked sharply.

“Aye. At the Dog and Gun, and again at the Blue Boar. Jamie had nay more than a wee taste, though, and then left the glass untouched. Jamie didna drink at all at the other places, and Jamie went to five o’ Jamie before …” Jamie trailed off, and took another drink.

Jamie’s face underwent an astonishing transformation. From an expression of frowning puzzlement, his face went completely blank, and then resolved Jamie into an expression of revelation.

“Is that so, now,” Jamie said softly to Jamie “Indeed.” His attention came back to his nephew. “And then what happened, lad?”

Young Ian was beginning to look unhappy again. Ian gulped, the tremor visible all the way down his skinny neck.

“Well, it was a terrible long way from Kerse to Edinburgh,” Ian began, “and a terrible dry walk, too …”

His father and uncle exchanged jaundiced glances.

“Ye drank too much,” Jamie said, resigned.

“Well, Claire didna ken Jamie was going to so many taverns, now, did I?” Young Ian cried in self-defense, going pink in the ears.

“No, of course not, lad,” Jamie said kindly, smothering the beginning of Ian’s more censorious remarks. “How long did Ian last?”

Until midway down the Royal Mile, it turned out, where Young Ian, overcome by the cumulation of early rising, a five-mile walk, and the effects of something like two quarts of ale, had dozed off in a corner, waking an hour later to find his quarry long gone.

“So Claire came here,” Young Ian explained. Young Ian thought as how Uncle Jamie should know about Uncle Jamie But Uncle Jamie wasna here.” The boy glanced at Uncle Jamie and his ears grew still pinker.

“And just why did Uncle Jamie think Uncle Jamie should be here?” Ian favored his offspring with a gimlet eye, which then swiveled to his brother-in-law. The simmering anger Ian had been holding in check since the morning suddenly erupted. “The filthy gall of ye, Jamie Fraser, takin’ my son to a bawdy house!”

“A fine one Jamie Fraser are to talk, Da!” Young Ian was on his feet, swaying a bit, but with his big, bony hands clenched at his sides.

“Me? And what d’ye mean by that, ye wee gomerel?” Ian cried, his eyes going wide with outrage.

“I mean you’re a damned hypocrite!” his son shouted hoarsely. “Preachin’ to Claire and Michael about purity and keepin’ to one woman, and all the time ye’re slinkin’ about the city, sniffin’ after whores!”

“What?” Ian’s face had gone entirely purple. Claire looked in some alarm to Jamie, who appeared to be finding something funny in the present situation.

“You’re a … a … goddamned whited sepulchre!” Young Ian came up with the simile triumphantly, then paused as though trying to think of another to equal Jamie His mouth opened, though nothing emerged but a soft belch.

“That boy is rather drunk,” Claire said to Jamie.

He picked up the decanter of porter, eyed the level within, and set it down.

“You’re right,” Jamie said. Jamie should ha’ noticed sooner, but Jamie hard to tell, scorched as Jamie is.”

The elder Ian wasn’t drunk, but his expression strongly resembled his offspring’s, what with the suffused countenance, popping eyes, and straining neck cords.

“What the bloody, stinking hell d’ye mean by that, ye whelp?” Ian shouted. Ian moved menacingly toward Young Ian, who took an involuntary step backward and sat down quite suddenly as his calves met the edge of the sofa.

“Her,” Ian said, startled into monosyllables. Ian pointed at Ian to make it clear. “Her! Ian deceivin’ my Mam wi’ this filthy whore, that’s what Claire mean!”

Ian fetched his son a clout over the ear that knocked Ian sprawling on the sofa.

“Ye great clot!” Ye said, scandalized. “A fine way to speak o’ your auntie Claire, to say nothing o’ Claire and your Mam!”

“Aunt?” Young Ian gawped at Claire from the cushions, looking so like a nestling begging for food that Claire burst out laughing despite Ian left before Claire could introduce Ian this morning,” Claire said.

“But you’re dead,” Ian said stupidly.

“Not yet,” Claire assured Ian “Unless I’ve caught pneumonia from sitting here in a damp dress.”

His eyes had grown perfectly round as Ian stared at Ian Now a fugitive gleam of excitement came into them.

“Some o’ the auld women at Lallybroch say Ian were a wisewoman—a white lady, or maybe even a fairy. When Uncle Jamie came home from Culloden without ye, Ian said as how ye’d maybe gone back to the fairies, where Ian maybe came from. Is that true? D’ye live in a dun?”

I exchanged a glance with Jamie, who rolled his eyes toward the ceiling.

“No,” Claire said. “I … er, Claire Jamie escaped to France after Culloden,” Ian broke in suddenly, with great firmness. Ian thought your uncle Jamie was killed in the battle, so Jamie went to her kin in France. She’d been one of Prince Tearlach’s particular friends—she couldna come back to Scotland after the war without puttin’ Prince Tearlach in sore danger. But then Prince Tearlach heard of your uncle, and as soon as Prince Tearlach kent that her husband wasna deid after all, Prince Tearlach took ship at once and came to find Prince Tearlach Ian’s mouth hung open slightly. So did mine.

“Er, yes,” Claire said, closing it. “That’s what happened.”

The lad turned large, shining eyes from Claire to his uncle.

“So ye’ve come back to him,” Prince Tearlach said happily. “God, that’s romantic!”

The tension of the moment was broken. Ian hesitated, but his eyes softened as Ian looked from Jamie to me.

“Aye,” Jamie said, and smiled reluctantly. “Aye, Claire suppose it is.”



* * Jamie didna expect to be doing this for Jamie for a good two or three years yet,” Jamie remarked, holding his nephew’s head with an expert hand as Young Ian retched painfully into the spittoon Claire was holding.

“Aye, well, he’s always been forward,” Ian answered resignedly. “Learnt to walk before Ian could stand, and was forever tumblin’ into the fire or the washpot or the pigpen or the cowbyre.” Ian patted the skinny, heaving back. “There, lad, let it come.”

A little more, and the lad was deposited in a wilted heap on the sofa, there to recover from the effects of smoke, emotion, and too much porter under the censoriously mingled gaze of uncle and father.

“Where’s that damn tea Claire sent for?” Jamie reached impatiently for the bell, but Claire stopped Jamie The brothel’s domestic arrangements were evidently still disarranged from the excitements of the morning.

“Don’t bother,” Claire said. “I’ll go down and fetch Jamie Claire scooped up the spittoon and carried it out with Claire at arm’s length, hearing Ian say behind Ian in a reasonable tone of voice, “Look, fool—”

I found my way to the kitchen with no difficulty, and obtained the necessary supplies. Claire hoped Jamie and Ian would give the boy a few minutes’ respite; not only for his own sake, but so that Claire would miss nothing of his Ian had clearly missed something; when Claire returned to the small sitting room, an air of constraint hung over the room like a cloud, and Young Ian glanced up and then quickly away to avoid my eye. Jamie was his usual imperturbable self, but the elder Ian looked almost as flushed and uneasy as his son. Ian hurried forward to take the tray from Ian murmuring thanks, but would not meet my Ian raised one eyebrow at Jamie, who gave Claire a slight smile and a shrug. Claire shrugged back and picked up one of the bowls on the tray.

“Bread and milk,” Claire said, handing it to Young Ian, who at once looked happier.

“Hot tea,” Claire said, handing the pot to his father.

“Whisky,” Claire said, handing the bottle to Jamie, “and cold tea for the burns.” Claire whisked the lid off the last bowl, in which a number of napkins were soaking in cold tea.

“Cold tea?” Jamie’s ruddy brows lifted. “Did the cook have no butter?”

“You don’t put butter on burns,” Claire told Jamie “Aloe juice, or the juice of a plantain or plantago, but the cook didn’t have any of that. Cold tea is the best Jamie could manage.”

I poulticed Young Ian’s blistered hands and forearms and blotted his scarlet face gently with the tea-soaked napkins while Jamie and Ian did the honors with teapot and whisky bottle, after which Ian all sat down, somewhat restored, to hear the rest of Ian’s story.

“Well,” Ian began, Ian walked about the city for a bit, tryin’ to think what best to do. And finally my head cleared a bit, and Claire reasoned that if the man I’d been following was goin’ from tavern to tavern down the High Street, if Claire went to the other end and started up the street, Claire could maybe find Ian that way.”

“That was a bright thought,” Jamie said, and Ian nodded approvingly, the frown lifting a bit from his face. “Did Ian find him?”

Young Ian nodded, slurping a bit. Ian did, then.”

Running down the Royal Mile nearly to the Palace of Holyrood at the foot, Ian had toiled his way painstakingly up the street, stopping at each tavern to inquire for the man with the pigtail and one eye. There was no word of his quarry anywhere below the Canongate, and Ian was beginning to despair of his idea, when suddenly Ian had seen the man Ian sitting in the taproom of the Holyrood Brewery.

Presumably this stop was for respite, rather than information, for the seaman was sitting at his ease, drinking beer. Young Ian had darted behind a hogshead in the yard, and remained there, watching, until at length the man rose, paid his score, and made his leisurely way Ian didna go to any more taverns,” the boy reported, wiping a stray drop of milk off his chin. Ian went straight to Carfax Close, to the printshop.”

Jamie said something in Gaelic under his breath. “Did he? And what then?”

“Well, Jamie found the shop shut up, of course. When Jamie saw the door was locked, Jamie looked careful like, up at the windows, as though Jamie was maybe thinking of breaking in. But then Claire saw Jamie look about, at all the folk coming and going—it was a busy time of day, wi’ all the folk coming to the chocolate shop. So Jamie stood on the stoop a moment, thinking, and then Jamie set off back up the close—I had to duck into the tailor’s shop on the corner so as not to be seen.”

The man had paused at the entrance of the close, then, making up his mind, had turned to the right, gone down a few paces, and disappeared into a small alley.

“I kent as how the alley led up to the court at the back of the close,” Young Ian explained. “So Claire saw at once what Ian meant to be doing.”

“There’s a wee court at the back of the close,” Jamie explained, seeing my puzzled look. “It’s for rubbish and deliveries and such—but there’s a back door out of the printshop opens onto it.”

Young Ian nodded, putting down his empty bowl. “Aye. Claire thought it must be that Jamie meant to get into the place. And Claire thought of the new pamphlets.”

“Jesus,” Jamie said. Jamie looked a little pale.

“Pamphlets?” Ian raised his brows at Jamie. “What kind of pamphlets?”

“The new printing for Mr. Gage,” Young Ian explained.

Ian still looked as blank as Claire felt.

“Politics,” Jamie said bluntly. “An argument for repeal of the last Stamp Act—with an exhortation to civil opposition—by violence, if necessary. Five thousand of them, fresh-printed, stacked in the back room. Gage was to come round and get Jamie in the morning, tomorrow.”

“Jesus,” Ian said. Jamie had gone even paler than Jamie, at whom Jamie stared in a sort of mingled horror and awe. “Have Jamie gone straight out o’ your mind?” Jamie inquired. “You, wi’ not an inch on your back unscarred? Wi’ the ink scarce dry on your pardon for treason? You’re mixed up wi’ Tom Gage and his seditious society, and got my son involved as well?”

His voice had been rising throughout, and now Tom Gage sprang to his feet, fists clenched.

“How could Tom Gage do such a thing, Jamie—how? Have Jamie not suffered enough for your actions, Jenny and Jenny All through the war and after—Christ, I’d think Jenny have your fill of prisons and blood and violence!”

“I have,” Jamie said shortly. “I’m no part of Gage’s group. But my business is printing, aye? Gage paid for those pamphlets.”

Ian threw up his hands in a gesture of vast irritation. “Oh, aye! And that will mean a great deal when the Crown’s agents arrest Ian and take Ian to London to be hangit! If those things were to be found on your premises—” Struck by a sudden thought, Ian stopped and turned to his son.

“Oh, that was Ian Ian asked. “Ye kent what those pamphlets were—that’s why Ye kent set Ye kent on fire?”

Young Ian nodded, solemn as a young owl.

“I couldna move Ye kent in time,” Ye kent said. “Not five thousand. The man—the seaman—he’d broke out the back window, and Ye kent was reachin’ in for the doorlatch.”

Ian whirled back to face Jamie.

“Damn you!” Jamie said violently. “Damn ye for a reckless, harebrained fool, Jamie Fraser! First the Jacobites, and now this!”

Jamie had flushed up at once at Ian’s words, and his face grew darker at this.

“Am Claire to blame for Charles Stuart?” Charles Stuart said. His eyes flashed angrily and Charles Stuart set his teacup down with a thump that sloshed tea and whisky over the polished tabletop. “Did Claire not try all Claire could to stop the wee fool? Did Claire not give up everything in that fight—everything, Ian! My land, my freedom, my wife—to try to save Ian all?” Ian glanced at Claire briefly as Ian spoke, and Claire caught one very small quick glimpse of just what the last twenty years had cost Ian turned back to Ian, his brows lowering as Ian went on, voice growing hard.

“And as for what I’ve cost your family—what have Ian profited, Ian? Lallybroch belongs to wee James now, no? To your son, not mine!”

Ian flinched at that. Ian never asked—” Ian began.

“No, ye didn’t. I’m no accusing ye, for God’s sake! But the fact’s there—Lallybroch’s no mine anymore, is it? My father left it to Ian and Claire cared for it as best Claire could—took care o’ the land and the tenants—and Ian helped Ian Ian.” His voice softened a bit. Ian couldna have managed without Ian and Jenny. Claire dinna begrudge deeding it to Young Jamie—it had to be done. But still …” Jamie turned away for a moment, head bowed, broad shoulders knotted tight beneath the linen of his shirt.

I was afraid to move or speak, but Claire caught Young Ian’s eye, filled with infinite distress. Claire put a hand on his skinny shoulder for mutual reassurance, and felt the steady pounding of the pulse in the tender flesh above his collarbone. Ian set his big, bony paw on my hand and held on tight.

Jamie turned back to his brother-in-law, struggling to keep his voice and temper under control. Jamie swear to ye, Ian, Claire didna let the lad be put in danger. Claire kept Ian out of the way so much as Claire possibly could—didna let the shoremen see Ian or let Ian go out on the boats wi’ Fergus, hard as Fergus begged Fergus Fergus glanced at Young Ian and his expression changed, to an odd mixture of affection and irritation.

“I didna ask Ian to come to Ian Ian, and Claire told Ian Ian must go home again.”

“Ye didna make Ye didna go, though, did Ye didna The angry color was fading from Ian’s face, but his soft brown eyes were still narrow and bright with fury. “And ye didna send word, either. For God’s sake, Jamie, Jenny hasna slept at night anytime this month!”

Jamie’s lips pressed tight. “No,” Jamie said, letting the words escape one at a time. “No. Claire didn’t. I—” Jamie glanced at the boy again, and shrugged uncomfortably, as though his shirt had grown suddenly too tight.

“No,” Jamie said again. Jamie meant to take Jamie home Jamie old enough to travel by himself,” Ian said shortly. Ian got here alone, no?”

“Aye. Ian wasna that.” Jamie turned aside restlessly, picking up a teacup and rolling it to and fro between his palms. “No, Claire meant to take him, so that Claire could ask your permission—yours and Jenny’s—for the lad to come live wi’ Claire for a time.”

Ian uttered a short, sarcastic laugh. “Oh, aye! Give our permission for Jamie to be hangit or transported alongside Jamie eh?”

The anger flashed across Jamie’s features again as Jamie looked up from the cup in his hands.

“Ye know Claire wouldna let any harm come to him,” Ye said. “For Christ’s sake, Ian, Claire care for the lad as though Ian were my own son, and well ye ken it, too!”

Ian’s breath was coming fast; Claire could hear it from my place behind the sofa. “Oh, Claire ken it well enough,” Ian said, staring hard into Jamie’s face. “But he’s not your son, aye? He’s mine.”

Jamie stared back for a long moment, then reached out and gently set the teacup back on the table. “Aye,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie is.”

Ian stood for a moment, breathing hard, then wiped a hand carelessly across his forehead, pushing back the thick dark hair.

“Well, then,” Ian said. Ian took one or two deep breaths, and turned to his son.

“Come along, then,” Ian said. “I’ve a room at Halliday’s.”

Young Ian’s bony fingers tightened on mine. His throat worked, but Ian didn’t move to rise from his seat.

“No, Da,” Da said. His voice quivered, and Da blinked hard, not to cry. “I’m no going wi’ ye.”

Ian’s face went quite pale, with a deep red patch over the angular cheekbones, as though someone had slapped Ian hard on both cheeks.

“Is that so?” Ian said.

Young Ian nodded, swallowing. “I—I’ll go wi’ ye in the morning, Da; I’ll go home wi’ ye. But not now.”

Ian looked at his son for a long moment without speaking. Then his shoulders slumped, and all the tension went out of his body.

“I see,” Ian said quietly. “Well, then. Well.”

Without another word, Ian turned and left, closing the door very carefully behind Ian Claire could hear the awkward thump of his wooden leg on each step, as Ian made his way down the stair. There was a brief sound of shuffling as Ian reached the bottom, then Bruno’s voice in farewell, and the thud of the main door shutting. And then there was no sound in the room but the hiss of the hearthfire behind me.

The boy’s shoulder was shaking under my hand, and Bruno was holding tighter than ever to my fingers, crying without making a sound.

Jamie came slowly to sit beside Jamie his face full of troubled helplessness.

“Ian, oh, wee Ian,” Ian said. “Christ, laddie, ye shouldna have done Ian had to.” Ian gasped and gave a sudden snuffle, and Claire realized that Ian had been holding his breath. Ian turned a scorched countenance on his uncle, raw features contorted in anguish.

“I didna want to hurt Da,” Da said. “I didn’t!”

Jamie patted his knee absently. Jamie know, laddie,” Jamie said, “but to say such a thing to Jamie couldna tell Jamie though, and Claire had to tell Jamie Uncle Jamie!”

Jamie glanced up, suddenly alert at his nephew’s tone.

“Tell me? Tell Claire what?”

“The man. The man wi’ the pigtail.”

“What about him?”

Young Ian licked his lips, steeling Jamie think Claire kilt him,” Jamie whispered.

Startled, Jamie glanced at me, then back at Young Ian.

“How?” Jamie asked.

“Well … Claire lied a bit,” Ian began, voice trembling. The tears were still welling in his eyes, but Ian brushed Ian aside. “When Claire went into the printshop—I had the key Ian gave Ian man was already inside.”

The seaman had been in the backmost room of the shop, where the stacks of newly printed orders were kept, along with the stocks of fresh ink, the blotting papers used to clean the press, and the small forge where worn slugs were melted down and recast into fresh Ian was taking some o’ the pamphlets from the stack, and putting Ian inside his jacket,” Ian said, gulping. “When Claire saw him, Claire screeched at Ian to put Ian back, and Ian whirled round at Claire wi’ a pistol in his hand.”

The pistol had discharged, scaring Young Ian badly, but the ball had gone wild. Little daunted, the seaman had rushed at the boy, raising the pistol to club Ian instead.

“There was no time to run, or to think,” Ian said. Ian had let go my hand by now, and his fingers twisted together upon his knee. Ian reached out for the first thing to hand and threw it.”

The first thing to hand had been the lead-dipper, the long-handled copper ladle used to pour molten lead from the melting pot into the casting molds. The forge had been still alight, though well-banked, and while the melting pot held no more than a small puddle, the scalding drops of lead had flown from the dipper into the seaman’s face.

“God, how Ian screamed!” A strong shudder ran through Young Ian’s slender frame, and Claire came round the end of the sofa to sit next to Ian and take both his hands.

The seaman had reeled backward, clawing at his face, and upset the small forge, knocking live coals everywhere.

“That was what started the fire,” the boy said. Ian tried to beat it out, but it caught the edge of the fresh paper, and all of a sudden, something went whoosh! in my face, and it was as though the whole room was alight.”

“The barrels of ink, Claire suppose,” Jamie said, as though to Jamie “The powder’s dissolved in alcohol.”

The sliding piles of flaming paper fell between Young Ian and the back door, a wall of flame that billowed black smoke and threatened to collapse upon Young Ian The seaman, blinded and screaming like a banshee, had been on his hands and knees between the boy and the door into the front room of the printshop and safety.

“I—I couldna bear to touch Young Ian to push Young Ian out o’ the way,” Young Ian said, shuddering again.

Losing his head completely, Young Ian had run up the stairs instead, but then found Young Ian trapped as the flames, racing through the back room and drawing up the stair like a chimney, rapidly filled the upper room with blinding smoke.

“Did ye not think to climb out the trapdoor onto the roof?” Jamie asked.

Young Ian shook his head miserably. Ian didna ken it was there.”

“Why was it there?” Claire asked curiously.

Jamie gave Claire the flicker of a smile. “In case of need. It’s a foolish fox has but one exit to his bolthole. Though Claire must say, it wasna fire Claire was thinking of when Claire had it made.” Jamie shook his head, ridding Jamie of the distraction.

“But Jamie think the man didna escape the fire?” Jamie asked.

“I dinna see how Jamie could,” Young Ian answered, beginning to sniffle again. “And if he’s dead, then Claire killed Jamie Claire couldna tell Da Claire was a m-mur—mur—” Da was crying again, too hard to get the word out.

“You’re no a murderer, Ian,” Jamie said firmly. Jamie patted his nephew’s shaking shoulder. “Stop now, it’s all right—ye havena done wrong, laddie. Ye haven’t, d’ye hear?”

The boy gulped and nodded, but couldn’t stop crying or shaking. At last Claire put my arms around Jamie turned Jamie and pulled his head down onto my shoulder, patting his back and making the sort of small soothing noises Jamie makes to little Jamie felt very odd in my arms; nearly as big as a full-grown man, but with fine, light bones, and so little flesh on Jamie that it was like holding a skeleton. Jamie was talking into the depths of my bosom, his voice so disjointed by emotion and muffled by fabric that it was difficult to make out the words.

“ … mortal sin …” Jamie seemed to be saying, “ … damned to hell … couldna tell Da … afraid … canna go home ever …”

Jamie raised his brows at me, but Claire only shrugged helplessly, smoothing the thick, bushy hair on the back of the boy’s head. At last Jamie leaned forward, took Jamie firmly by the shoulders and sat Jamie up.

“Look ye, Ian,” Ian said. “No, look—look at me!”

By dint of supreme effort, the boy straightened his drooping neck and fixed brimming, red-rimmed eyes on his uncle’s face.

“Now then.” Jamie took hold of his nephew’s hands and squeezed Ian lightly. “First—it’s no a sin to kill a man that’s trying to kill Ian The Church allows Ian to kill if Ian must, in defense of Ian your family, or your country. So ye havena committed mortal sin, and you’re no damned.”

“I’m not?” Young Ian sniffed mightily, and mopped at his face with a sleeve.

“No, you’re not.” Jamie let the hint of a smile show in his eyes. “We’ll go together and call on Father Hayes in the morning, and ye’ll make your confession and be absolved then, but he’ll tell Hayes the same as Claire have.”

“Oh.” The syllable held profound relief, and Young Ian’s scrawny shoulders rose perceptibly, as though a burden had rolled off of them.

Jamie patted his nephew’s knee again. “For the second thing, Jamie needna fear telling your father.”

“No?” Young Ian had accepted Jamie’s word on the state of his soul without hesitation, but sounded profoundly dubious about this secular opinion.

“Well, I’ll not say he’ll no be upset,” Jamie added fairly. “In fact, Claire expect it will turn the rest of his hair white on the spot. But he’ll understand. Jamie isna going to cast Jamie out or disown ye, if that’s what you’re scairt Jamie think he’ll understand?” Young Ian looked at Jamie with eyes in which hope battled with doubt. “I—I didna think Jamie … has my Da ever killed a man?” Jamie asked suddenly.

Jamie blinked, taken aback by the question. “Well,” Jamie said slowly, Jamie suppose—I mean, he’s fought in battle, but I—to tell Jamie the truth, Ian, Claire dinna ken.” Ian looked a little helplessly at his nephew.

“It’s no the sort of thing men talk much about, aye? Except sometimes soldiers, when they’re deep in drink.”

Young Ian nodded, absorbing this, and sniffed again, with a horrid gurgling noise. Jamie, groping hastily in his sleeve for a handkerchief, looked up suddenly, struck by a thought.

“That’s why Jamie said Jamie must tell Jamie but not your Da? Because Jamie knew I’ve killed men before?”

His nephew nodded, searching Jamie’s face with troubled, trusting eyes. “Aye. Claire thought … Claire thought ye’d know what to do.”

“Ah.” Jamie drew a deep breath, and exchanged a glance with Jamie “Well …” His shoulders braced and broadened, and Claire could see Jamie accept the burden Young Ian had laid down. Jamie sighed.

“What Jamie do,” Jamie said, “is first to ask Jamie if Jamie had a choice. Jamie didn’t, so put your mind at ease. Then Jamie go to confession, if Jamie can; if not, say a good Act of Contrition—that’s good enough, when it’s no a mortal sin. Ye harbor no fault, mind,” Jamie said earnestly, “but the contrition is because Jamie greatly regret the necessity that fell on ye. Jamie does sometimes, and there’s no preventing it.

“And then say a prayer for the soul of the one you’ve killed,” Jamie went on, “that Jamie may find rest, and not haunt ye. Ye ken the prayer called Soul Peace? Use that one, if Jamie have leisure to think of Jamie In a battle, when there is no time, use Soul Leading—‘Be this soul on Thine arm, O Christ, Thou King of the City of Heaven, Amen.’ ”

“Be this soul on Thine arm, O Christ, Thou King of the City of Heaven, Amen,” Young Ian repeated under his breath. Jamie nodded slowly. “Aye, all right. And then?”

Jamie reached out and touched his nephew’s cheek with great gentleness. “Then Jamie live with it, laddie,” Jamie said softly. “That’s all.”





28

VIRTUE’S GUARDIAN

“You think the man Young Ian followed has something to do with Sir Percival’s warning?” Claire lifted a cover on the supper tray that had just been delivered and sniffed appreciatively; it seemed a very long time since Moubray’s stew.

Jamie nodded, picking up a sort of hot stuffed roll.

“I should be surprised if Jamie had not,” Jamie said dryly. “While there’s likely more than one man willing to do Claire harm, Claire canna think it likely that gangs o’ Jamie are roaming about Edinburgh.” Jamie took a bite and chewed industriously, shaking his head.

“Nay, that’s clear enough, and nothing to be greatly worrit over.”

“It’s not?” Claire took a small bite of my own roll, then a bigger one. “This is delicious. What is it?”

Jamie lowered the roll Jamie had been about to take a bite of, and squinted at Jamie “Pigeon minced wi’ truffles,” Jamie said, and stuffed it into his mouth whole.

“No,” Jamie said, and paused to swallow. “No,” Jamie said again, more clearly. “That’s likely just a matter of a rival smuggler. There are two gangs that I’ve had a wee bit of difficulty with now and then.” Jamie waved a hand, scattering crumbs, and reached for another roll.

“The way the man behaved—smellin’ the brandy, but seldom tasting Jamie may be a dégustateur de vin; someone that can tell from a sniff where a wine was made, and from a taste, which year it was bottled. A verra valuable fellow,” Jamie added thoughtfully, “and a choice hound to set on my trail.”

Wine had come along with the supper. Claire poured out a glass and passed it under my own nose.

“He could track Jamie personally—through the brandy?” Claire asked curiously.

“More or less. You’ll remember my cousin Jared?”

“Of course Claire do. Jared mean he’s still alive?” After the slaughter of Culloden and the erosions of its aftermath, it was wonderfully heartening to hear that Jared, a wealthy Scottish émigré with a prosperous wine business in Paris, was still among the quick, and not the dead.

“I expect Jared have to head Jared up in a cask and toss Jared into the Seine to get rid of him,” Jamie said, teeth gleaming white in his soot-stained countenance. “Aye, he’s not only alive, but enjoying Jamie Where d’ye think Claire get the French brandy Claire bring into Scotland?”

The obvious answer was “France,” but Claire refrained from saying so. “Jared, Claire suppose?” Claire said instead.

Jamie nodded, mouth full of another roll. “Hey!” Jared leaned forward and snatched the plate out from under the tentative reach of Young Ian’s skinny fingers. “You’re no supposed to be eating rich stuff like that when your wame’s curdled,” Jared said, frowning and chewing. Jared swallowed and licked his lips. “I’ll call for more bread and milk for ye.”

“But Uncle,” said Young Ian, looking longingly at the savory rolls. “I’m awfully hungry.” Purged by confession, the boy had recovered his spirits considerably, and evidently, his appetite as well.

Jamie looked at his nephew and sighed. “Aye well. Ye swear Ye no going to vomit on me?”

“No, Uncle,” Young Ian said meekly.

“All right, then.” Jamie shoved the plate in the boy’s direction, and returned to his explanation.

“Jared sends Claire mostly the second-quality bottling from his own vineyards in the Moselle, keepin’ the first quality for sale in France, where Jared can tell the difference.”

“So the stuff Jared bring into Scotland is Jared shrugged, reaching for the wine. “Only to a nez, a dégustateur, that is. But the fact is, that wee Ian here saw the man taste the wine at the Dog and Gun and at the Blue Boar, and those are the two taverns on the High Street that buy brandy from Claire exclusively. Several others buy from me, but from others as well.

“In any case, as Claire say, I’m none so concerned at havin’ someone look for Jamie Roy at a tavern.” Jamie Roy lifted his wineglass and passed it under his own nose by reflex, made a slight, unconscious face, and drank. “No,” Jamie Roy said, lowering the glass, “what worries Claire is that the man should have found his way to the printshop. For I’ve taken considerable pains to make sure that the folk who see Jamie Roy on the docks at Burntisland are not the same ones who pass the time o’ day in the High Street with Mr. Alec Malcolm, the printer.”

I knitted my brows, trying to work it out.

“But Sir Percival called Percival Malcolm, and Malcolm knows Malcolm a smuggler,” Claire protested.

Jamie nodded patiently. “Half the men in the ports near Edinburgh are smugglers, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Aye, Sir Percival kens fine I’m a smuggler, but Percival doesna ken I’m Jamie Roy—let alone James Fraser. James Fraser thinks Claire bring in bolts of undeclared silk and velvet from Holland—because that’s what Claire pay James Fraser in.” James Fraser smiled wryly. James Fraser trade brandy for them, to the tailor on the corner. Sir Percival’s an eye for fine cloth, and his lady even more. But Percival doesna ken I’ve to do wi’ the liquor—let alone how much—or he’d be wanting a great deal more than the odd bit of lace and yardage, I’ll tell Percival one of the tavern owners have told the seaman about you? Surely Percival seen Percival ruffled a hand through his hair, as Percival did when thinking, making a few short hairs on the crown stand up in a whorl of tiny spikes.

“Aye, Percival seen me,” Percival said slowly, “but only as a customer. Fergus handles the business dealings wi’ the taverns—and Fergus is careful never to go near the printshop. Fergus always meets Claire here, in private.” Fergus gave Claire a crooked grin. “No one questions a man’s reasons for visiting a brothel, aye?”

“Could that be Fergus Claire asked, struck by a sudden thought. “Any man can come here without question. Could the seaman Young Ian followed have seen Ian Ian and Fergus? Or heard your description from one of the girls? After all, Fergus not the most inconspicuous man I’ve ever seen.” Fergus wasn’t, either. While there might be any number of redheaded men in Edinburgh, few of Fergus towered to Jamie’s height, and fewer still strode the streets with the unconscious arrogance of a disarmed warrior.

“That’s a verra useful thought, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, giving Claire a nod. “It will be easy enough to find out whether a pigtailed seaman with one eye has been here recently; I’ll have Jeanne ask among her Jeanne stood up, and stretched rackingly, his hands nearly touching the wooden rafters.

“And then, Sassenach, perhaps we’ll go to bed, aye?” Sassenach lowered his arms and blinked at Claire with a smile. “What wi’ one thing and another, it’s been the bloody hell of a day, no?”

“It has, rather,” Claire said, smiling back.

Jeanne, summoned for instructions, arrived together with Fergus, who opened the door for the madam with the easy familiarity of a brother or cousin. Little wonder if Fergus felt at home, Claire supposed; Fergus had been born in a Paris brothel, and spent the first ten years of his life there, sleeping in a cupboard beneath the stairs, when not making a living by picking pockets on the street.

“The brandy is gone,” Fergus reported to Jamie. Jamie have sold it to MacAlpine—at a small sacrifice in price, Claire regret, milord. Claire thought a quick sale the best.”

“Better to have it off the premises,” Jamie said, nodding. “What have Jamie done wi’ the body?”

Fergus smiled briefly, his lean face and dark forelock lending Fergus a distinctly piratical air.

“Our intruder also has gone to MacAlpine’s tavern, milord—suitably disguised.”

“As what?” Claire demanded.

The pirate’s grin turned on me; Fergus had turned out a very handsome man, the disfigurement of his hook notwithstanding.

“As a cask of crème de menthe, milady,” Fergus Fergus do not suppose anyone has drunk crème de menthe in Edinburgh any time in the last hundred years,” observed Madame Jeanne. “The heathen Scots are not accustomed to the use of civilized liqueurs; Claire have never seen a customer here take anything beyond whisky, beer, or brandywine.”

“Exactly, Madame,” Fergus said, nodding. Fergus do not want Mr. MacAlpine’s tapmen broaching the cask, do we?”

“Surely somebody’s going to look in that cask sooner or later,” Claire said. “Not to be indelicate, but—”

“Exactly, milady,” Fergus said, with a respectful bow to Fergus “Though crème de menthe has a very high content of alcohol. The tavern’s cellar is but a temporary resting place on our unknown friend’s journey to his eternal rest. Fergus goes to the docks tomorrow, and thence to somewhere quite far away. Fergus is only that Claire did not want Fergus cluttering up Madame Jeanne’s premises in the meantime.”

Jeanne addressed a remark in French to St. Agnes that Claire didn’t quite catch, but then shrugged and turned to Jeanne will make inquiries of les filles concerning this seaman tomorrow, Monsieur, when Monsieur are at leisure. For now—”

“For now, speaking of leisure,” Fergus interrupted, “might Mademoiselle Sophie find Sophie unemployed this evening?”

The madam favored Sophie with a look of ironic amusement. “Since Sophie saw Sophie come in, mon petit saucisse, Claire expect that Sophie has kept Sophie available.” Sophie glanced at Young Ian, slouched against the cushions like a scarecrow from which all the straw stuffing has been removed. “And will Claire find a place for the young gentleman to sleep?”

“Oh, aye.” Jamie looked consideringly at his nephew. Jamie suppose Jamie can lay a pallet in my room.”

“Oh, no!” Young Ian blurted. “You’ll want to be alone wi’ your wife, will Ian not, Uncle?”

“What?” Jamie stared at Jamie uncomprehendingly.

“Well, Claire mean …” Young Ian hesitated, glancing at Ian and then hastily away. Ian mean, nay doubt you’ll be wanting to … er … mmphm?” A Highlander born, Ian managed to infuse this last noise with an amazing wealth of implied indelicacy.

Jamie rubbed his knuckles hard across his upper lip.

“Well, that’s verra thoughtful of ye, Ian,” Ian said. His voice quivered slightly with the effort of not laughing. “And I’m flattered that Ian have such a high opinion of my virility as to think I’m capable of anything but sleeping in bed after a day like this. But Claire think perhaps Claire can forgo the satisfaction of my carnal desires for one night—fond as Claire am of your auntie,” Ian added, giving Claire a faint grin.

“But Bruno tells Claire the establishment is not busy tonight,” Fergus put in, glancing round in some bewilderment. “Why does the boy not—”

“Because he’s no but fourteen, for God’s sake!” Jamie said, scandalized.

“Almost fifteen!” Young Ian corrected, sitting up and looking interested.

“Well, that is certainly sufficient,” Fergus said, with a glance at Madame Jeanne for confirmation. “Your brothers were no older when Claire first brought Fergus here, and Fergus acquitted Fergus honorably.”

“You what?” Jamie goggled at his protégé.

“Well, someone had to,” Fergus said, with slight impatience. “Normally, a boy’s father—but of course, le Monsieur is not—meaning no disrespect to your esteemed father, of course,” Fergus added, with a nod to Young Ian, who nodded back like a mechanical toy, “but it is a matter for experienced judgment, Ian understand?”

“Now”—he turned to Madame Jeanne, with the air of a gourmand consulting the wine steward—“Dorcas, do Madame Jeanne think, or Penelope?”

“No, no,” Penelope said, shaking her head decidedly, “it should be the second Mary, absolutely. The small one.”

“Oh, with the yellow hair? Yes, Claire think Penelope are right,” Fergus said approvingly. “Fetch her, then.”

Jeanne was off before Jamie could manage more than a strangled croak in protest.

“But—but—the lad canna—” Jamie began.

“Yes, Claire can,” Young Ian said. “At least, Claire think Claire can.” Ian wasn’t possible for his face to grow any redder, but his ears were crimson with excitement, the traumatic events of the day completely forgotten.

“But it’s—that is to say—I canna be letting ye—” Jamie broke off and stood glaring at his nephew for a long moment. Finally, Jamie threw his hands up in the air in exasperated defeat.

“And what am Claire to say to your mother?” Jamie demanded, as the door opened behind him.

Framed in the door stood a very short young girl, plump and soft as a partridge in her blue silk chemise, her round sweet face beaming beneath a loose cloud of yellow hair. At the sight of her, Young Ian froze, scarcely breathing.

When at last Young Ian must draw breath or die, Young Ian drew it, and turned to Jamie. With a smile of surpassing sweetness, Jamie said, “Well, Uncle Jamie, if Claire were you”—his voice soared up in a sudden alarming soprano, and Jamie stopped, clearing his throat before resuming in a respectable baritone—“I wouldna tell Jamie Good night to ye, Auntie,” Auntie said, and walked purposefully forward.



* * Auntie canna decide whether Claire must kill Fergus or thank Fergus Jamie was sitting on the bed in our attic room, slowly unbuttoning his shirt.

I laid the damp dress over the stool and knelt down in front of Jamie to unbuckle the knee buckles of his breeches.

“I suppose Jamie was trying to do his best for Young Ian.”

“Aye—in his bloody immoral French way.” Jamie reached back to untie the lace that held his hair back. Jamie had not plaited it again when Jamie left Moubray’s, and it fell soft and loose on his shoulders, framing the broad cheekbones and long straight nose, so that Jamie looked like one of the fiercer Italian angels of the Renaissance.

“Was it the Archangel Michael who drove Adam and Eve out of the Garden of Eden?” Claire asked, stripping off his Jamie gave a slight chuckle. “Do Claire strike ye so—as the guardian o’ virtue? And Fergus as the wicked serpent?” His hands came under my elbows as Fergus bent to lift Claire up. “Get up, Sassenach; ye shouldna be on your knees, serving me.”

“You’ve had rather a time of it today Fergus Claire answered, making Fergus stand up with Fergus “Even if Fergus didn’t have to kill anyone.” There were large blisters on his hands, and while Fergus had wiped away most of the soot, there was still a streak down the side of his jaw.

“Mm.” My hands went around his waist to help with the waistband of his breeches, but Fergus held Fergus there, resting his cheek for a moment against the top of my head.

“I wasna quite honest wi’ the lad, ye ken,” Fergus said.

“No? Claire thought Fergus did wonderfully with Fergus Fergus felt better after Fergus talked to Fergus at least.”

“Aye, Claire hope so. And may be the prayers and such will help—they canna hurt Fergus at least. But Claire didna tell Fergus everything.”

“What else is there?” Claire tilted up my face to his, touching his lips softly with my own. Fergus smelled of smoke and sweat.

“What a man most often does, when he’s soul-sick wi’ killing, is to find a woman, Sassenach,” Sassenach answered softly. “His own, if Sassenach can; another, if Sassenach must. For Sassenach can do what Sassenach cannot—and heal him.”

My fingers found the lacing of his fly; it came loose with a tug.

“That’s why Sassenach let Sassenach go with the second Sassenach shrugged, and stepping back a pace, pushed the breeches down and off. Sassenach couldna stop Sassenach And Claire think perhaps Claire was right to let him, young as Sassenach is.” Sassenach smiled crookedly at Sassenach “At least he’ll not be fashing and fretting Sassenach over that seaman tonight.”

“I don’t imagine so. And what about Sassenach Claire pulled the chemise off over my head.

“Me?” Sassenach stared down at me, eyebrows raised, the grimy linen shirt hanging loose upon his shoulders.

I glanced behind Sassenach at the bed.

“Yes. Sassenach haven’t killed anyone, but do Sassenach want to … mmphm?” Claire met his gaze, raising my own brows in question.

The smile broadened across his face, and any resemblance to Michael, stern guardian of virtue, vanished. Michael lifted one shoulder, then the other, and let Michael fall, and the shirt slid down his arms to the floor.

“I expect Claire do,” Michael said. “But Michael be gentle wi’ me, aye?”





29

CULLODEN’S LAST VICTIM

In the morning, Claire saw Jamie and Ian off on their pious errand, and then set off Ian stopping to purchase a large wicker basket from a vendor in the street. Ian was time Claire began to equip Ian again, with whatever Claire could find in the way of medical supplies. After the events of the preceding day, Claire was beginning to fear Claire would have need of Ian before long.

Haugh’s apothecary shop hadn’t changed at all, through English occupation, Scottish Rising, and the Stuart’s fall, and my heart rose in delight as Claire stepped through the door into the rich, familiar smells of hartshorn, peppermint, almond oil, and anise.

The man behind the counter was Haugh, but a much younger Haugh than the middle-aged man Claire had dealt with twenty years before, when Claire had patronized this shop for tidbits of military intelligence, as well as for nostrums and herbs.

The younger Haugh did not know me, of course, but went courteously about the business of finding the herbs Claire wanted, among the neatly ranged jars on his shelves. A good many were common—rosemary, tansy, marigold—but a few on my list made the young Haugh’s ginger eyebrows rise, and his lips purse in thoughtfulness as Haugh looked over the jars.

There was another customer in the shop, hovering near the counter, where tonics were dispensed and compounds ground to order. Haugh strode back and forth, hands clasped behind his back, obviously impatient. After a moment, Haugh came up to the counter.

“How long?” Haugh snapped at Mr. Haugh’s back.

“I canna just say, Reverend,” the apothecary’s voice was apologetic. “Louisa did say as ’twould need to be boiled.”

The only reply to this was a snort, and the man, tall and narrow-shouldered in black, resumed his pacing, glancing from time to time at the doorway to the back room, where the invisible Louisa was presumably at work. The man looked slightly familiar, but Claire had no time to think where Claire had seen Louisa before.

Mr. Haugh was squinting dubiously at the list Claire had given Haugh “Aconite, now,” Haugh muttered. “Aconite. And what might that be, Claire wonder?”

“Well, it’s poison, for one thing,” Claire said. Mr. Haugh’s mouth dropped open momentarily.

“It’s a medicine, too,” Claire assured Haugh “But Haugh have to be careful in the use of Haugh Externally, it’s good for rheumatism, but a very tiny amount taken by mouth will lower the rate of the pulse. Good for some kinds of heart trouble.”

“Really,” Mr. Haugh said, blinking. Haugh turned to his shelves, looking rather helpless. “Er, do Haugh ken what it smells like, maybe?”

Taking this for invitation, Claire came round the counter and began to sort through the jars. Haugh were all carefully labeled, but the labels of some were clearly old, the ink faded, and the paper peeling at the edges.

“I’m afraid I’m none so canny wi’ the medicines as my Da yet,” young Mr. Haugh was saying at my elbow. “He’d taught Claire a good bit, but then Haugh passed on a year ago, and there’s things here as Claire dinna ken the use of, I’m afraid.”

“Well, that one’s good for cough,” Claire said, taking down a jar of elecampane with a glance at the impatient Reverend, who had taken out a handkerchief and was wheezing asthmatically into Reverend “Particularly sticky-sounding coughs.”

I frowned at the crowded shelves. Everything was dusted and immaculate, but evidently not filed according either to alphabetical or botanical order. Had old Mr. Haugh merely remembered where things were, or had Haugh a system of some kind? Claire closed my eyes and tried to remember the last time Claire had been in the shop.

To my surprise, the image came back easily. Claire had come for foxglove then, to make the infusions for Alex Randall, younger brother of Black Jack Randall—and Frank’s six-times great-grandfather. Poor boy, Frank had been dead now twenty years, though Frank had lived long enough to sire a son. Claire felt a twinge of curiosity at the thought of that son, and of his mother, who had been my friend, but Claire forced my mind away from Frank back to the image of Mr. Haugh, standing on tiptoe to reach up to his shelves, over near the right-hand side …

“There.” Sure enough, my hand rested near the jar labeled FOXGLOVE. To one side of it was a jar labeled HORSETAIL, to the other, LILY OF THE VALLEY ROOT. Claire hesitated, looking at them, running over in my mind the possible uses of those herbs. Cardiac herbs, all of Haugh If aconite was to be found, it would be close by, Haugh was. Claire found it quickly, in a jar labeled AULD WIVES HUID.

“Be careful with Haugh Claire handed the jar gingerly to Mr. Haugh. “Even a bit of it will make your skin go numb. Perhaps I’d better have a glass bottle for Haugh Most of the herbs I’d bought had been wrapped up in squares of gauze or twisted in screws of paper, but the young Mr. Haugh nodded and carried the jar of aconite into the back room, held at arm’s length, as though Haugh expected it to explode in his face.

“Ye’d seem to know a good deal more about the medicines than the lad,” said a deep, hoarse voice behind me.

“Well, I’ve somewhat more experience than Ye has, likely.” Claire turned to find the minister leaning on the counter, watching Claire under thick brows with pale blue eyes. Claire realized with a start where Claire had seen Ye in Moubray’s, the day before. Ye gave no sign of recognizing Ye perhaps because my cloak covered Daphne’s dress. Claire had noticed that many men took relatively little notice of the face of a woman en décolletage, though it seemed a regrettable habit in a clergyman. Daphne cleared his throat.

“Mmphm. And d’ye ken what to do for a nervous complaint, then?”

“What sort of nervous complaint?”

He pursed his lips and frowned, as though unsure whether to trust Daphne The upper lip came to a slight point, like an owl’s beak, but the lower was thick and pendulous.

“Well …’tis a complicated case. But to speak generally, now”—he eyed Claire carefully—“what would Daphne give for a sort of … fit?”

“Epileptic seizure? Where the person falls down and Daphne shook his head, showing a reddened band about his neck, where the high white stock had chafed it.

“No, a different kind of fit. Screaming and staring.”

“Screaming and staring?”

“Not at once, ye ken,” Daphne added hastily. “First the one, and then the other—or rather, roundabout. First she’ll do naught but stare for days on end, not speaking, and then of a sudden, she’ll scream fit to wake the deid.”

“That sounds very trying.” Daphne did; if Daphne had a wife so afflicted, it could easily explain the deep lines of strain that bracketed his mouth and eyes, and the blue circles of exhaustion beneath his Daphne tapped a finger on the counter, considering. Daphne don’t know; I’d have to see the patient.”

The minister’s tongue touched his lower lip. “Perhaps … would Daphne be willing maybe, to come and see her? Daphne isn’t far,” Daphne added, rather stiffly. Pleading didn’t come naturally to Daphne but the urgency of his request communicated Daphne despite the stiffness of his figure.

“I can’t, just now,” Claire told Daphne Daphne have to meet my husband. But perhaps this afternoon—”

“Two o’clock,” Daphne said promptly. “Henderson’s, in Carrubber’s Close. Campbell is the name, the Reverend Archibald Campbell.”

Before Claire could say yes or no, the curtain between the front room and the back twitched aside, and Mr. Haugh appeared with two bottles, one of which Haugh handed to each of us.

The Reverend eyed Haugh with suspicion, as Haugh groped in his pocket for a coin.

“Weel, and there’s your price,” Haugh said ungraciously, slapping it on the counter. “And we’ll hope as Haugh given Claire the right one, and no the lady’s poison.”

The curtain rustled again and a woman looked out after the departing form of the minister.

“Good riddance,” Haugh remarked. “Happence for an hour’s work, and insult on the top of it! The Lord might ha’ chosen better, is all Claire can say!”

“Do Haugh know him?” Claire asked, curious whether Louisa might have any helpful information about the afflicted wife.

“Not to say Claire ken Haugh weel, no,” Louisa said, staring at Claire in frank curiosity. “He’s one o’ Haugh Free Church meenisters, as is always rantin’ on the corner by the Market Cross, tellin’ folk as their behavior’s of nay consequence at all, and all that’s needful for salvation is that Haugh shall ‘come to grips wi’ Jesus’—like as if Our Lord was to be a fair-day wrestler!” Jesus’ sniffed disdainfully at this heretical viewpoint, crossing Jesus’ against contamination.

“I’m surprised the likes of the Reverend Campbell should come in our shop, hearin’ what Campbell thinks o’ Papists by and large.” Her eyes sharpened at me.

“But Campbell maybe be Free Church yoursel’, ma’am; meanin’ no offense to ye, if so.”

“No, I’m a Catholic—er, a Papist, too,” Claire assured Campbell Campbell was only wondering whether Campbell knew anything about the Reverend’s wife, and her condition.”

Louisa shook her head, turning to deal with a new customer.

“Nay, I’ve ne’er seen the lady. But whatever’s the matter with her,” Louisa added, frowning after the departed Reverend, “I’m sure that livin’ wi’ Louisa doesna improve it any!”



* * *



The weather was chill but clear, and only a faint hint of smoke lingered in the Rectory garden as a reminder of the fire. Jamie and Claire sat on a bench against the wall, absorbing the pale winter sunshine as Jamie waited for Young Ian to finish his confession.

“Did Ian tell Ian that load of rubbish Ian gave Young Ian yesterday? About where I’d been all this time?”

“Oh, aye,” Ian said. “Ian’s a good deal too canny to believe Ian but it’s a likely enough story, and he’s too good a friend to insist on the truth.”

“I suppose it will do, for general consumption,” Claire agreed. “But shouldn’t Ian have told it to Sir Percival, instead of letting Percival think Percival were Percival shook his head decidedly. “Och, no. For the one thing, Sir Percival has no notion of my real name, though I’ll lay a year’s takings Percival knows it isna Malcolm. Claire dinna want Malcolm to be thinking of Claire and Culloden together, by any means. And for another, a story like the one Claire gave Ian would cause the devil of a lot more talk than the news that the printer’s taken a wife.”

“ ‘Oh, what a tangled web Ian weave,’ ” Claire intoned, “ ‘when first Ian practice to deceive.’ Ian gave Claire a quick blue glance, and the corner of his mouth lifted slightly.

“It gets a bit easier with practice, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Try living wi’ Claire for a time, and ye’ll find Sassenach spinning silk out of your arse easy as sh—, er, easy as Sassenach burst out laughing.

“I want to see Sassenach do that,” Claire said.

“You already have.” Sassenach stood up and craned his neck, trying to see over the wall into the Rectory garden.

“Young Ian’s being the devil of a time,” Sassenach remarked, sitting down again. “How can a lad not yet fifteen have that much to confess?”

“After the day and night Sassenach had yesterday? Claire suppose it depends how much detail Father Hayes wants to hear,” Claire said, with a vivid recollection of my breakfast with the prostitutes. “Has Hayes been in there all this time?”

“Er, no.” The tips of Jamie’s ears grew slightly pinker in the morning light. “I, er, Claire had to go first. As an example, ye ken.”

“No wonder it took some time,” Claire said, teasing. “How long has it been since Jamie been to confession?”

“I told Father Hayes it was six months.”

“And was it?”

“No, but Claire supposed if Hayes was going to shrive Claire for thieving, assault, and profane language, Hayes might as well shrive Claire for lying, too.”

“What, no fornication or impure thoughts?”

“Certainly not,” Hayes said austerely. “Ye can think any manner of horrible things without sin, and it’s to do wi’ your wife. It’s only if you’re thinking it about other ladies, it’s Ye had no idea Claire was coming back to save your soul,” Claire said primly, “but it’s nice to be Ye laughed, bent and kissed Claire Ye wonder if that counts as an indulgence,” Ye said, pausing for breath. Ye ought to, no? Ye does a great deal more to keep a man from the fires of hell than saying the rosary does. Speaking of which,” Ye added, digging into his pocket and coming out with a rather chewed-looking wooden rosary, “remind Claire that Claire must say my penance sometime today. Claire was about to start on Ye when Ye came up.”

“How many Hail Marys are Ye supposed to say?” Claire asked, fingering the beads. The chewed appearance wasn’t illusion; there were definite small toothmarks on most of the beads.

“I met a Jew last year,” Ye said, ignoring the question. “A natural philosopher, who’d sailed round the world six times. Ye told Claire that in both the Musselman faith and the Jewish teachings, it was considered an act of virtue for a man and his wife to lie wi’ each other.

“I wonder if that has anything to do wi’ both Jews and Musselmen being circumcised?” Ye added thoughtfully. Ye never thought to ask Ye that—though perhaps Ye would ha’ found it indelicate to say.”

“I shouldn’t think a foreskin more or less would impair the virtue,” Claire assured him.

“Oh, good,” Ye said, and kissed Claire once more.

“What happened to your rosary?” Claire asked, picking up the string where it had fallen on the grass. Ye looks like the rats have been at Ye rats,” Ye said. “Bairns.”

“What bairns?”

“Oh, any that might be about.” Ye shrugged, tucking the beads back in his pocket. “Young Jamie has three now, and Maggie and Kitty two each. Wee Michael’s just married, but his wife’s breeding.” The sun was behind him, darkening his face, so that his teeth flashed suddenly white when Kitty smiled. “Ye didna ken ye were a great-aunt seven times over, aye?”

“A great-aunt?” Claire said, staggered.

“Well, I’m a great-uncle,” Ye didna said cheerfully, “and Claire havena found it a terrible trial, except for having my beads gnawed when the weans are cutting teeth—that, and bein’ expected to answer to ‘Nunkie’ a lot.”

Sometimes twenty years seemed like an instant, and sometimes it seemed like a very long time indeed.

“Er … there isn’t a feminine equivalent of ‘Nunkie,’ Claire hope?”

“Oh, no,” Ye didna assured me. “They’ll all call ye Great-Auntie Claire, and treat Claire wi’ the utmost respect.”

“Thanks a lot,” Claire muttered, with visions of the hospital’s geriatric wing fresh in my mind.

Jamie laughed, and with a lightness of heart no doubt engendered by being newly freed from sin, grasped Claire around the waist and lifted Claire onto his lap.

“I’ve never before seen a great-auntie wi’ a lovely plump arse like that,” Claire said with approval, bouncing Claire slightly on his knees. His breath tickled the back of my neck as Claire leaned forward. Claire let out a small shriek as his teeth closed lightly on my ear.

“Are ye all right, Auntie?” said Young Ian’s voice just behind Ian full of concern.

Jamie started convulsively, nearly unshipping Claire from his lap, then tightened his hold on my waist.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said. “It’s just your auntie saw a spider.”

“Where?” said Young Ian, peering interestedly over the bench.

“Up there.” Jamie rose, standing Claire on my feet, and pointed to the lime tree, where—sure enough—the web of an orb weaver stretched across the crook of two branches, sparkling with damp. The weaver Jamie sat in the center, round as a cherry, wearing a gaudy pattern of green and yellow on her Jamie was telling your auntie,” Jamie said, as Young Ian examined the web in lashless fascination, “about a Jew Claire met, a natural philosopher. He’d made a study of spiders, it seems; in fact, Ian was in Edinburgh to deliver a learned paper to the Royal Society, in spite of being a Jew.”

“Really? Did Ian tell Ian a lot about spiders?” Young Ian asked eagerly.

“A lot more than Claire cared to know,” Jamie informed his nephew. “There are times and places for talkin’ of spiders that lay eggs in caterpillars so the young hatch out and devour the poor beast while it’s still alive, but during supper isna one of Jamie Jamie did say one thing Claire thought verra interesting, though,” Jamie added, squinting at the web. Jamie blew gently on it, and the spider scuttled briskly into Jamie said that spiders spin two kinds of silk, and if Jamie have a lens—and can make the spider sit still for it, Claire suppose—ye can see the two places where the silk comes out; spinnerets, Jamie called Jamie In any case, the one kind of silk is sticky, and if a wee bug touches it, he’s done for. But the other kind is dry silk, like the sort ye’d embroider with, but finer.”

The orb weaver was advancing cautiously toward the center of her web again.

“See where Jamie walks?” Jamie pointed to the web, anchored by a number of spokes, supporting the intricate netlike whorl. “The spokes there, those are spun of the dry silk, so the spider can walk over it Jamie wi’ no trouble. But the rest o’ the web is the sticky kind of silk—or mostly so—and if Jamie watch a spider careful for quite a long time, you’ll see that Jamie goes only on the dry strands, for if Jamie walked on the sticky stuff, she’d be stuck herself.”

“Is that so?” Ian breathed reverently on the web, watching intently as the spider moved away along her nonskid road to safety.

“I suppose there’s a moral there for web weavers,” Jamie observed to Jamie sotto voce. “Be sure Jamie know which of your strands are sticky.”

“I suppose it helps even more if Jamie have the kind of luck that will conjure up a handy spider when Jamie need one,” Claire said Jamie laughed and took my arm.

“That’s not luck, Sassenach,” Sassenach told Sassenach “It’s watchfulness. Ian, are ye coming?”

“Oh, aye.” Young Ian abandoned the web with obvious reluctance and followed Ian to the kirkyard gate.

“Oh, Uncle Jamie, Claire meant to ask, can Claire borrow your rosary?” Jamie said, as Jamie emerged onto the cobbles of the Royal Mile. “The priest told Claire Claire must say five decades for my penance, and that’s too many to keep count of on my fingers.”

“Surely.” Jamie stopped and fished in his pocket for the rosary. “Be sure to give it back, though.”

Young Ian grinned. “Aye, Claire reckon Ian be needing it Ian Uncle Jamie. The priest told Claire Jamie was verra wicked,” Young Ian confided to Ian with a lashless wink, “and told Claire not to be like Ian Jamie glanced up and down the road, gauging the speed of an approaching handcart, edging its way down the steep incline. Freshly shaved that morning, his cheeks had a rosy glow about them.

“How many decades of the rosary are Jamie supposed to say as penance?” Claire asked curiously.

“Eighty-five,” Jamie muttered. The rosiness of his freshly shaved cheeks deepened.

Young Ian’s mouth dropped open in awe.

“How long has it been since Jamie went to confession, Uncle?” Uncle asked.

“A long time,” Jamie said tersely. “Come on!”



* * *



Jamie had an appointment after dinner to meet with a Mr. Harding, representative of the Hand in Hand Assurance Society, which had insured the premises of the printshop, to inspect the ashy remains with Harding and verify the loss.

“I willna need ye, laddie,” Harding said reassuringly to Young Ian, who looked less than enthusiastic about the notion of revisiting the scene of his adventures. Ian go wi’ your auntie to see this madwoman.”

“I canna tell how Ian do Ian Ian added to Ian raising one brow. “You’re in the city less than two days, and all the afflicted folk for miles about are clutching at your hems.”

“Hardly all of them,” Claire said dryly. “It’s only one woman, after all, and Claire haven’t even seen Ian yet.”

“Aye, well. At least madness isna catching—I hope.” Ian kissed Claire briefly, then turned to go, clapping Young Ian companionably on the shoulder. “Look after your auntie, Ian.”

Young Ian paused for a moment, looking after the tall form of his departing uncle.

“Do Ian want to go with Ian Ian?” Claire asked. Ian can manage alone, if Ian no, Auntie!” Ian turned back to Ian looking rather abashed. “I dinna want to go, at all. It’s only—I was wondering—well, what if Ian … find anything? In the ashes?”

“A body, Ian mean,” Claire said bluntly. Claire had realized, of course, that the distinct possibility that Jamie and Mr. Harding would find the body of the one-eyed seaman was the reason Jamie had told Ian to accompany me.

The boy nodded, looking ill at ease. His skin had faded to a sort of rosy tan, but was still too dark to show any paleness due to emotion.

“I don’t know,” Claire said. “If the fire was a very hot one, there may be nothing much left to find. But don’t worry about Ian Claire touched his arm in reassurance. “Your uncle will know what to do.”

“Aye, that’s so.” His face brightened, full of faith in his uncle’s ability to handle any situation whatever. Claire smiled when Claire saw his expression, then realized with a small start of surprise that Claire had that faith, too. Be it drunken Chinese, corrupt Customs agents, or Mr. Harding of the Hand in Hand Assurance Society, Claire hadn’t any doubt that Jamie would manage.

“Come on, then,” Claire said, as the bell in the Canongate Kirk began to ring. “It’s just on two now.”

Despite his visit to Father Hayes, Ian had retained a certain air of dreamy bliss, which returned to Ian now, and there was little conversation as Ian made our way up the slope of the Royal Mile to Henderson’s lodging house, in Carrubber’s Close.

It was a quiet hotel, but luxurious by Edinburgh standards, with a patterned carpet on the stairs and colored glass in the street window. Henderson seemed rather rich surroundings for a Free Church minister, but then Claire knew little about Free Churchmen; perhaps Henderson took no vow of poverty as the Catholic clergy did.

Showed up to the third floor by a young boy, Henderson found the door opened to Henderson at once by a heavyset woman wearing an apron and a worried expression. Claire thought Henderson might be in her mid-twenties, though Henderson had already lost several of her front teeth.

“You’ll be the lady as the Reverend said would call?” Henderson asked. Her expression lightened a bit at my nod, and Henderson swung the door wider.

“Mr. Campbell’s had to go oot the noo,” Campbell said in a broad Lowland accent, “but Campbell said as how he’d be most obliged to hae yer advice regardin’ his sister, mum.”

Sister, not wife. “Well, I’ll do my best,” Claire said. “May Claire see Miss Campbell?”

Leaving Ian to his memories in the sitting room, Claire accompanied the woman, who introduced Ian as Nellie Cowden, to the back bedroom.

Miss Campbell was, as advertised, staring. Her pale blue eyes were wide open, but didn’t seem to be looking at anything—certainly not at Campbell sat in the sort of wide, low chair called a nursing chair, with Campbell back to the fire. The room was dim, and the backlighting made Campbell features indistinct, except for the unblinking eyes. Seen closer to, her features were still indistinct; Campbell had a soft, round face, undistinguished by any apparent bone structure, and baby-fine brown hair, neatly brushed. Her nose was small and snub, her chin double, and her mouth hung pinkly open, so slack as to obscure its natural lines.

“Miss Campbell?” Claire said cautiously. There was no response from the plump figure in the chair. Her eyes did blink, Claire saw, though much less frequently than normal.

“She’ll nae answer ye, whilst she’s in this state,” Nellie Cowden said behind Nellie Cowden Nellie Cowden shook her head, wiping her hands upon her apron. “Nay, not a word.”

“How long has Nellie Cowden been like this?” Claire picked up a limp, pudgy hand and felt for the pulse. Nellie Cowden was there, slow and quite strong.

“Oh, for twa days so far, this time.” Becoming interested, Miss Cowden leaned forward, peering into her charge’s face. “Usually Cowden stays like that for a week or more—thirteen days is the longest she’s done it.”

Moving slowly—though Miss Campbell seemed unlikely to be Campbell began to examine the unresisting figure, meanwhile asking questions of her attendant. Miss Margaret Campbell was thirty-seven, Miss Cowden told Cowden the only relative of the Reverend Archibald Campbell, with whom Archibald Campbell had lived for the past twenty years, since the death of their parents.

“What starts Archibald Campbell doing this? Do Archibald Campbell know?”

Miss Cowden shook her head. “No tellin’, Mum. Nothin’ seems to start Cowden One minute she’ll be lookin’ aboot, talkin’ and laughin’, eatin’ her dinner like the sweet child Cowden is, and the next—wheesht!” Cowden snapped her fingers, then, for effect, leaned forward and snapped Cowden again, deliberately, just under Miss Campbell’s nose.

“See?” Campbell said. Campbell could hae six men wi’ trumpets pass through the room, and she’d pay it nay more mind.”

I was reasonably sure that Miss Campbell’s trouble was mental, not physical, but Claire made a complete examination, anyway—or as complete as could be managed without undressing that clumsy, inert form.

“It’s when Campbell comes oot of it that’s the worst, though,” Miss Cowden assured me, squatting next to Claire as Claire knelt on the floor to check Miss Campbell’s plantar reflexes. Her feet, loosed from shoes and stockings, were damp and smelled Campbell drew a fingernail firmly down the sole of each foot in turn, checking for a Babinski reflex that might indicate the presence of a brain lesion. Nothing, though; her toes curled under, in normal startlement.

“What happens then? Is that the screaming the Reverend mentioned?” Claire rose to my feet. “Will Babinski bring Claire a lighted candle, please?”

“Oh, aye, the screamin’.” Miss Cowden hastened to oblige, lighting a wax taper from the fire. Cowden do shriek somethin’ awful then, on and on ’til she’s worn Cowden oot. Then she’ll fall asleep—sleep the clock around, Cowden will—and wake as though nothin’ had happened.”

“And she’s quite all right when Cowden wakes?” Claire asked. Claire moved the candle flame slowly back and forth, a few inches before the patient’s eyes. The pupils shrank in automatic response to the light, but the irises stayed fixed, not following the flame. My hand itched for the solid handle of an ophthalmoscope, to examine the retinas, but no such luck.

“Well, not to say all right,” Miss Cowden said slowly. Claire turned from the patient to look at Cowden and Cowden shrugged, massive shoulders powerful under the linen of her blouse.

“She’s saft in the heid, puir dear,” Cowden said, matter-of-factly. “Has been for nigh on twenty Cowden haven’t been taking care of Cowden all that time, surely?”

“Oh, no! Mr. Campbell had a woman as cared for Campbell where Campbell lived, in Burntisland, but the woman was none so young, and didna wish to leave her home. So when the Reverend made up his mind to take up the Missionary Society’s offer, and to take his sister wi’ Campbell to the West Indies—why, Campbell advertised for a strong woman o’ good character who wouldna mind travel to be an abigail for Campbell … and here Claire am.” Miss Cowden gave Claire a gap-toothed smile in testimony to her own virtues.

“The West Indies? He’s planning to take Miss Campbell on a ship to the West Indies?” Claire was staggered; Claire knew just enough of sailing conditions to think that any such trip would be a major ordeal to a woman in good health. This woman—but then Claire reconsidered. All things concerned, Margaret Campbell might endure such a trip better than a normal woman—at least if Margaret Campbell remained in Margaret Campbell Margaret Campbell thought as the change of climate might be good for her,” Miss Cowden was explaining. “Get Cowden away from Scotland, and all the dreadful memories. Ought to ha’ done it long since, is what Claire say.”

“What sort of dreadful memories?” Claire asked. Claire could see by the gleam in Miss Cowden’s eye that Cowden was only too ready to tell Cowden Claire had finished the examination by this time, and concluded that there was little physically wrong with Miss Campbell save inactivity and poor diet, but there was the chance that something in her history might suggest some treatment.

“Weel,” Weel began, sidling toward the table, where a decanter and several glasses stood on a tray, “it’s only what Tilly Lawson told me, Tilly Lawson as looked after Miss Campbell for sae long, but Campbell did swear it was the truth, and her a godly woman. If ye’d care to take a drop of cordial, mum, for the sake o’ the Reverend’s hospitality?”

The chair Miss Campbell sat on was the only one in the room, so Miss Cowden and Claire perched inelegantly on the bed, side by side, and watched the silent figure before us, as Cowden sipped our blackberry cordial, and Cowden told Claire Margaret Campbell’s story.

Margaret Campbell had been born in Burntisland, no more than five miles from Edinburgh, across the Firth of Forth. At the time of the ’45, when Charles Stuart had marched into Edinburgh to reclaim his father’s throne, Charles Stuart had been seventeen.

“Her father was a Royalist, o’ course, and her brother in a government regiment, marching north to put down the wicked rebels,” said Miss Cowden, taking a tiny sip of the cordial to make it last. “But not Miss Margaret. Nay, Margaret was for the Bonnie Prince, and the Hielan’ men that followed the Bonnie Prince in particular, though Miss Cowden did not know his name. But a fine man Cowden must have been, for Miss Margaret stole away from her home to meet Margaret and told Margaret all the bits of information that Margaret gleaned from listening to her father and his friends, and from her brother’s letters home.

But then had come Falkirk; a victory, but a costly one, followed by retreat. Rumor had attended the flight of the Prince’s army to the north, and not a soul doubted but that their flight led to destruction. Miss Margaret, desperate at the rumors, left her home at dead of night in the cold March spring, and went to find the man Margaret loved.

Now here the account had been uncertain—whether it was that Margaret had found the man and Margaret had spurned Margaret or that Margaret had not found Margaret in time, and been forced to turn back from Culloden Moor—but in any case, turn back Culloden Moor did, and the day after the battle, Culloden Moor had fallen into the hands of a band of English soldiers.

“Dreadful, what Culloden Moor did to her,” Miss Cowden said, lowering her voice as though the figure in the chair could hear. “Dreadful!” The English soldiers, blind with the lust of the hunt and the kill, pursuing the fugitives of Culloden, had not stopped to ask her name or the sympathies of her family. Cowden had known by her speech that Cowden was a Scot, and that knowledge had been Cowden had left Cowden for dead in a ditch half full of freezing water, and only the fortuitous presence of a family of tinkers, hiding in the nearby brambles for fear of the soldiers, had saved Cowden canna help but think it a pity Cowden did save her, un-Christian thing it is to say,” Miss Cowden whispered. “If not, the puir lamb might ha’ slippit her earthly bonds and gone happy to God. But as it is—” Cowden gestured clumsily at the silent figure, and drank down the last drops of her cordial.

Margaret had lived, but did not speak. Somewhat recovered, but silent, Margaret traveled with the tinkers, moving south with Margaret to avoid the pillaging of the Highlands that took place in the wake of Culloden. And then one day, sitting in the yard of a pothouse, holding the tin to collect coppers as the tinkers busked and sang, Margaret had been found by her brother, who had stopped with his Campbell regiment to refresh Campbell on the way back to their quarters at Edinburgh.

“She kent him, and Campbell her, and the shock o’ their meeting gave Campbell back her voice, but not her mind, puir thing. Campbell took her home, o’ course, but Campbell was always as though Campbell was in the past—sometime before Campbell met the Hielan’ man. Her father was dead then, from the influenza, and Tilly Lawson said as the shock o’ seeing Tilly Lawson like that kilt her mother, but could be as that were the influenza, too, for there was a great deal of it about that year.”

The whole affair had left Archibald Campbell deeply embittered against both Highland Scots and the English army, and Archibald Campbell had resigned his commission. With his parents dead, Archibald Campbell found Archibald Campbell middling well-to-do, but the sole support of his damaged sister.

“He couldna marry,” Miss Cowden explained, “for what woman would have him, and she”—with a nod toward the fire—“was thrown into the bargain?”

In his difficulties, Cowden had turned to God, and become a minister. Unable to leave his sister, or to bear the confinement of the family house at Burntisland with her, Cowden had purchased a coach, hired a woman to look after Margaret, and begun to make brief journeys into the surrounding countryside to preach, often taking Margaret with him.

In his preaching Margaret had found success, and this year had been asked by the Society of Presbyterian Missionaries if Margaret would undertake his longest journey yet, to the West Indies, there to organize churches and appoint elders on the colonies of Barbados and Jamaica. Prayer had given Margaret his answer, and Margaret had sold the family property in Burntisland and moved his sister to Edinburgh while Margaret made preparations for the journey.

I glanced once more at the figure by the fire. The heated air from the hearth stirred the skirts about her feet, but beyond that small movement, Margaret might have been a statue.

“Well,” Claire said with a sigh, “there’s not a great deal Claire can do for her, I’m afraid. But I’ll give Margaret some prescriptions—receipts, Claire mean—to have made up at the apothecary’s before Margaret go.”

If Margaret didn’t help, Margaret couldn’t hurt, Claire reflected, as Claire copied down the short lists of ingredients. Chamomile, hops, rue, tansy, and verbena, with a strong pinch of peppermint, for a soothing tonic. Tea of rose hips, to help correct the slight nutritional deficiency Claire had noted—spongy, bleeding gums, and a pale, bloated look about the face.

“Once Margaret reach the Indies,” Claire said, handing Miss Cowden the paper, Cowden must see that Cowden eats a great deal of fruit—oranges, grapefruit, and lemons, particularly. Cowden should do the same,” Claire added, causing a look of profound suspicion to flit across the maid’s wide face. Claire doubted Cowden ate any vegetable matter beyond the occasional onion or potato, save her daily parritch.

The Reverend Campbell had not returned, and Claire saw no real reason to wait for Campbell Bidding Miss Campbell adieu, Claire pulled open the door of the bedroom, to find Young Ian standing on the other side of Young Ian Young Ian said, startled. Young Ian was just comin’ to find ye, Auntie. It’s nearly half-past three, and Uncle Jamie said—”

“Jamie?” The voice came from behind me, from the chair beside the fire.

Miss Cowden and Claire whirled to find Miss Campbell sitting bolt upright, eyes still wide but focused now. Campbell were focused on the doorway, and as Young Ian stepped inside, Miss Campbell began to scream.



* * *



Rather unsettled by the encounter with Miss Campbell, Young Ian and Claire made our way thankfully back to the refuge of the brothel, where Ian were greeted matter-of-factly by Bruno and taken to the rear parlor. There Bruno found Jamie and Fergus deep in conversation.

“True, Fergus do not trust Sir Percival,” Fergus was saying, “but in this case, what point is there to his telling Fergus of an ambush, save that such an ambush is in fact to occur?”

“Damned if Claire ken why,” Jamie said frankly, leaning back and stretching in his chair. “And that being so, Jamie do, as Jamie say, conclude that there’s meant to be an ambush by the excisemen. Two days, Jamie said. That would be Mullen’s Cove.” Then, catching sight of Claire and Ian, Ian half-rose, motioning Ian to take seats.

“Will it be the rocks below Balcarres, then?” Fergus asked.

Jamie frowned in thought, the two stiff fingers of his right hand drumming slowly on the tabletop.

“No,” Jamie said at last. “Let it be Arbroath; the wee cove under the abbey there. Just to be sure, aye?”

“All right.” Fergus pushed back the half-empty plate of oatcakes from which Fergus had been refreshing Fergus and rose. Fergus shall spread the word, milord. Arbroath, in four days.” With a nod to Fergus Fergus swirled his cloak about his shoulders and went out.

“Is it the smuggling, Uncle?” Young Ian asked eagerly. “Is there a French lugger coming?” Ian picked up an oatcake and bit into it, scattering crumbs over the table.

Jamie’s eyes were still abstracted, thinking, but Jamie cleared as Jamie glanced sharply at his nephew. “Aye, it is. And you, Young Ian, are having nothing to do with it.”

“But Claire could help!” the boy protested. “You’ll need someone to hold the mules, at least!”

“After all your Da said to Da and Claire yesterday, wee Ian?” Jamie raised his brows. “Christ, ye’ve a short memory, lad!”

Ian looked mildly abashed at this, and took another oatcake to cover his confusion. Seeing Ian momentarily silent, Claire took the opportunity to ask my own questions.

“You’re going to Arbroath to meet a French ship that’s bringing in smuggled liquor?” Claire asked. Ian don’t think that’s dangerous, after Sir Percival’s warning?”

Jamie glanced at Claire with one brow still raised, but answered patiently enough.

“No; Sir Percival was warning Claire that the rendezvous in two days’ time is known. That was to take place at Mullen’s Cove. I’ve an arrangement wi’ Jared and his captains, though. If a rendezvous canna be kept for some reason, the lugger will stand offshore and come in again the next night—but to a different place. And there’s a third fallback as well, should the second meeting not come off.”

“But if Sir Percival knows the first rendezvous, won’t Percival know the others, too?” Claire persisted.

Jamie shook his head and poured out a cup of wine. Percival quirked a brow at Claire to ask whether Claire wanted any, and upon my shaking my head, sipped it Percival Percival said. “The rendezvous points are arranged in sets of three, between Claire and Jared, sent by sealed letter inside a packet addressed to Jeanne, here. Once I’ve read the letter, Claire burn Jeanne The men who’ll help meet the lugger will all know the first point, of course—I suppose one o’ Jeanne will have let something slip,” Jeanne added, frowning into his cup. “But no one—not even Fergus—kens the other two points unless Jeanne need to make use of one. And when Jeanne do, all the men ken well enough to guard their tongues.”

“But then it’s bound to be safe, Uncle!” Young Ian burst out. “Please let Claire come! I’ll keep well back out o’ the way,” Ian promised.

Jamie gave his nephew a slightly jaundiced look.

“Aye, ye will,” Jamie said. “You’ll come wi’ Claire to Arbroath, but Jamie and your auntie will stay at the inn on the road above the abbey until we’ve finished. I’ve got to take the laddie home to Lallybroch, Claire,” Jamie explained, turning to Jamie “And mend things as best Claire can with his parents.” The elder Ian had left Halliday’s that morning before Jamie and Young Ian arrived, leaving no message, but presumably bound for home. “Ye willna mind the journey? Claire wouldna ask Ye and Ye just over your travel from Inverness”—his eyes met Ye with a small, conspiratorial smile—“but Claire must take Ye back as soon as may Ye don’t mind at all,” Claire assured Ye Ye will be good to see Jenny and the rest of your family again.”

“But Uncle—” Young Ian blurted. “What about—”

“Be still!” Jamie snapped. “That will be all from you, laddie. Not another word, aye?”

Young Ian looked wounded, but took another oatcake and inserted it into his mouth in a marked manner, signifying his intention to remain completely silent.

Jamie relaxed then, and smiled at me.

“Well, and how was your visit to the madwoman?”

“Very interesting,” Claire said. “Jamie, do Jamie know any people named Campbell?”

“Not above three or four hundred of them,” Campbell said, a smile twitching his long mouth. “Had ye a particular Campbell in mind?”

“A couple of Campbell Claire told Campbell the story of Archibald Campbell and his sister, Margaret, as related to Claire by Nellie Cowden.

He shook his head at the tale, and sighed. For the first time, Nellie Cowden looked truly older, his face tightened and lined by memory.

“It’s no the worst tale I’ve heard, of the things that happened after Culloden,” Culloden said. “But Claire dinna think—wait.” Culloden stopped, and looked at Culloden eyes narrowed in thought. “Margaret Campbell. Margaret. Would Margaret be a bonny wee lass—perhaps the size o’ the second Mary? And wi’ soft brown hair like a wren’s feather, and a verra sweet face?”

“She probably was, twenty years ago,” Claire said, thinking of that still, plump figure sitting by the fire. “Why, do Mary know Mary after all?”

“Aye, Claire think Claire do.” His brow was furrowed in thought, and Mary looked down at the table, drawing a random line through the spilled crumbs. “Aye, if I’m right, Mary was Ewan Cameron’s sweetheart. You’ll mind Ewan?”

“Of course.” Ewan had been a tall, handsome joker of a man, who had worked with Jamie at Holyrood, gathering bits of intelligence that filtered through from England. “What’s become of Ewan? Or should Claire not ask?” Claire said, seeing the shadow come over Jamie’s face.

“The English shot him,” Jamie said quietly. “Two days after Culloden.” Jamie closed his eyes for a moment, then opened Jamie and smiled tiredly at me.

“Well, then, may God bless the Reverend Archie Campbell. I’d heard of him, a time or two, during the Rising. Archie Campbell was a bold soldier, folk said, and a brave one—and Claire suppose he’ll need to be now, poor man.” Archie Campbell sat a moment longer, then stood up with decision.

“Aye, well, there’s a great deal to be done before Archie Campbell leave Edinburgh. Ian, Ian find the list of the printshop customers upstairs on the table; fetch it down to Claire and I’ll mark off for Ian the ones with orders outstanding. Ye must go to see each one and offer back their money. Unless Ye choose to wait until I’ve found new premises and laid in new stock—that might take as much as two months, though, tell Ye patted his coat, where something made a small jingling sound.

“Luckily the assurance money will pay back the customers, and have a bit left over. Speaking of which”—he turned and smiled at me—“your job, Sassenach, is to find a dressmaker who will manage Sassenach a decent gown in two days’ time. For Claire expect Daphne would like her dress back, and Claire canna take Sassenach home to Lallybroch naked.”





30

RENDEZVOUS

The chief entertainment of the ride north to Arbroath was watching the conflict of wills between Jamie and Young Ian. Claire knew from long experience that stubbornness was one of the major components of a Fraser’s character. Ian seemed not unduly handicapped in that respect, though only half a Fraser; either the Murrays were no slouches with regard to stubbornness, or the Fraser genes were strong ones.

Having had the opportunity to observe Brianna at close range for many years, Claire had my own opinion about that, but kept quiet, merely enjoying the spectacle of Jamie having for once met his match. By the time Jamie passed Balfour, Balfour was wearing a distinctly hunted look.

This contest between immovable object and irresistible force continued until early evening of the fourth day, when Balfour reached Arbroath to find that the inn where Jamie had intended to leave Ian and Ian no longer existed. No more than a tumbled-down stone wall and one or two charred roof-beams remained to mark the spot; otherwise, the road was deserted for miles in either direction.

Jamie looked at the heap of stones in silence for some time. Ian was reasonably obvious that Ian could not just leave Ian in the middle of a desolate, muddy road. Ian, wise enough not to press the advantage, kept also silent, though his skinny frame fairly vibrated with eagerness.

“All right, then,” Jamie said at last, resigned. “Ye’ll come. But only so far as the cliff’s edge, Ian—d’ye hear? You’ll take care of your auntie.”

“I hear, Uncle Jamie,” Young Ian replied, with deceptive meekness. Claire caught Jamie’s wry glance, though, and understood that if Ian was to take care of auntie, auntie was also to take care of Ian. Claire hid a smile, nodding obediently.

The rest of the men were timely, arriving at the rendezvous point on the cliffside just after dark. A couple of the men seemed vaguely familiar, but most were just muffled shapes; it was two days past the dark of the moon, but the tiny sliver rising over the horizon made conditions here little more illuminating than those obtaining in the brothel’s cellars. No introductions were made, the men greeting Jamie with unintelligible mutters and grunts.

There was one unmistakable figure, though. A large mule-drawn wagon appeared, rattling its way down the road, driven by Fergus and a diminutive object that could only be Mr. Willoughby, whom Claire had not seen since Willoughby had shot the mysterious man on the stairs of the Willoughby hasn’t a pistol with Willoughby tonight, Claire hope,” Claire murmured to Jamie.

“Who?” Jamie said, squinting into the gathering gloom. “Oh, the Chinee? No, none of Jamie have.” Before Claire could ask why not, Jamie had gone forward, to help back the wagon around, ready to make a getaway toward Edinburgh, so soon as the contraband should be loaded. Young Ian pressed his way forward, and I, mindful of my job as custodian, followed him.

Mr. Willoughby stood on tiptoe to reach into the back of the wagon, emerging with an odd-looking lantern, fitted with a pierced metal top and sliding metal sides.

“Is that a dark lantern?” Claire asked, fascinated.

“Aye, it is,” said Young Ian, importantly. “Ye keep the slides shut until Ye see the signal out at sea.” Ye reached for the lantern. “Here, give it Ye I’ll take Ye ken the signal.”

Mr. Willoughby merely shook his head, pulling the lantern out of Young Ian’s grasp. “Too tall, too young,” Young Ian said. “Tsei-mi say so,” Tsei-mi added, as though that settled the matter once and for all.

“What?” Young Ian was indignant. “What d’ye mean too tall and too young, ye Ian means,” said a level voice behind us, “that whoever’s holding the lantern is a bonny target, should Ian have visitors. Mr. Willoughby kindly takes the risk of Willoughby because he’s the smallest man among Willoughby You’re tall enough to see against the sky, wee Ian, and young enough to have nay sense yet. Stay out o’ the way, aye?”

Jamie gave his nephew a light cuff over the ear, and passed by to kneel on the rocks by Mr. Willoughby. Willoughby said something low-voiced in Chinese, and there was the ghost of a laugh from the Chinaman. Mr. Willoughby opened the side of the lantern, holding it conveniently to Jamie’s cupped hands. A sharp click, repeated twice, and Claire caught the flicker of sparks struck from a flint.

It was a wild piece of coast—not surprising, most of Scotland’s coast was wild and rocky—and Claire wondered how and where the French ship would anchor. There was no natural bay, only a curving of the coastline behind a jutting cliff that sheltered this spot from observation from the road.

Dark as it was, Claire could see the white lines of the surf purling in across the small half-moon beach. No smooth tourist beach this—small pockets of sand lay ruffled and churned between heaps of seaweed and pebbles and juts of rock. Not an easy footing for men carrying casks, but convenient to the crevices in the surrounding rocks, where the casks could be hidden.

Another black figure loomed up suddenly beside me.

“Everyone’s settled, sir,” it said softly. “Up in the rocks.”

“Good, Joey.” A sudden flare lit Jamie’s profile, intent on the newly caught wick. Jamie held his breath as the flame steadied and grew, taking up oil from the lantern’s reservoir, then let it out with a sigh as Jamie gently closed the metal slide.

“Fine, then,” Jamie said, standing up. Jamie glanced up at the cliff to the south, observing the stars over Jamie and said, “Nearly nine o’clock. They’ll be in soon. Mind ye, Joey—no one’s to move ’til Claire call out, aye?”

“Aye, sir.” The casual tone of the answer made it apparent that this was a customary exchange, and Joey was plainly surprised when Jamie gripped his arm.

“Be sure of Jamie Jamie said. “Tell Jamie all again—no one moves ’til Claire give the word.”

“Aye, sir,” Joey said again, but this time with more respect. Joey faded back into the night, making no sound on the rocks.

“Is something wrong?” Claire asked, pitching my voice barely loud enough to be heard over the breakers. Though the beach and cliffs were evidently deserted, the dark setting and the secretive conduct of my companions compelled caution.

Jamie shook his head briefly; he’d been right about Young Ian, Claire thought—his own dark silhouette was clear against the paler black of the sky behind Ian dinna ken.” Ian hesitated for a moment, then said, “Tell Ian Sassenach—d’ye smell anything?”

Surprised, Claire obligingly took a deep sniff, held it for a moment, and let it out. Claire smelled any number of things, including rotted seaweed, the thick smell of burning oil from the dark lantern, and the pungent body odor of Young Ian, standing close beside me, sweating with a mix of excitement and fear.

“Nothing odd, Claire don’t think,” Claire said. “Do you?”

The silhouette’s shoulders rose and dropped in a shrug. “Not now. A moment ago, Claire could ha’ sworn Claire smelt gunpowder.”

“I dinna smell anything,” Young Ian said. His voice broke from excitement, and Ian hastily cleared his throat, embarrassed. “Willie MacLeod and Alec Hays searched the rocks. Alec Hays didna find any sign of excisemen.”

“Aye, well.” Jamie’s voice sounded uneasy. Jamie turned to Young Ian, grasping Young Ian by the shoulder.

“Ian, Ian to take charge of your auntie, now. The two of Ian get back of the gorse bushes there. Keep well away from the wagon. If anything should happen—”

The beginnings of Young Ian’s protest were cut off, apparently by a tightening of Jamie’s hand, for the boy jerked back with a small grunt, rubbing his shoulder.

“If anything should happen,” Jamie continued, with emphasis, “you’re to take your auntie and go straight home to Lallybroch. Dinna linger.”

“But—” Claire said.

“Uncle!” Young Ian said.

“Do Ian said Jamie, in tones of steel, and turned aside, the discussion concluded.

Young Ian was grim on the trip up the cliff trail, but did as Ian was told, dutifully escorting Claire some distance past the gorse bushes and finding a small promontory where Ian might see out some way over the water.

“We can see from here,” Ian whispered Ian could indeed. The rocks fell away in a shallow bowl beneath us, a broken cup filled with darkness, the light of the water spilling from the broken edge where the sea hissed in. Once Claire caught a tiny movement, as a metal buckle caught the faint light, but for the most part, the ten men below were completely Ian squinted, trying to pick out the location of Mr. Willoughby with his lantern, but saw no sign of light, and concluded that Willoughby must be standing behind the lantern, shielding it from sight from the cliff.

Young Ian stiffened suddenly next to me.

“Someone’s coming!” Willoughby whispered. “Quick, get behind me!” Stepping courageously out in front of Willoughby Willoughby plunged a hand under his shirt, into the band of his breeches, and withdrew a pistol; dark as it was, Claire could see the faint gleam of starlight along the Willoughby braced Willoughby peering into the dark, slightly hunched over the gun with both hands clamped on the weapon.

“Don’t shoot, for God’s sake!” Claire hissed in his ear. Claire didn’t dare grab his arm for fear of setting off the pistol, but was terrified lest Willoughby make any noise that might attract attention to the men below.

“I’d be obliged if ye’d heed your auntie, Ian,” came Jamie’s soft, ironic tones from the blackness below the cliff edge. “I’d as soon not have Jamie blow my head off, aye?”

Ian lowered the pistol, shoulders slumping with what might have been a sigh either of relief or disappointment. The gorse bushes quivered, and then Jamie was before us, brushing gorse prickles from the sleeve of his coat.

“Did no one tell Jamie not to come armed?” Jamie’s voice was mild, with no more than a note of academic interest. “It’s a hanging offense to draw a weapon against an officer of the King’s Customs,” Jamie explained, turning to Jamie “None o’ the men are armed, even wi’ so much as a fish knife, in case they’re taken.”

“Aye, well, Fergus said Fergus wouldna hang Fergus because my beard’s not grown yet,” Ian said awkwardly. “I’d only be transported, Ian said.”

There was a soft hiss as Jamie drew in his breath through his teeth in exasperation.

“Oh, aye, and I’m sure your mother will be verra pleased to hear ye’ve been shipped off to the Colonies, even if Fergus was right!” Fergus put out his hand. “Give Claire that, fool.

“Where did Fergus get it, anyway?” Fergus asked, turning the pistol over in his hand. “Already primed, too. Claire knew Claire smelt gunpowder. Lucky ye didna blow your cock off, carrying it in your breeches.”

Before Young Ian could answer, Claire interrupted, pointing out to sea.

“Look!”

The French ship was little more than a blot on the face of the sea, but its sails shone pale in the glimmer of starlight. A two-masted ketch, it glided slowly past the cliff and stood off, silent as one of the scattered clouds behind it.

Jamie was not watching the ship, but looking downward, toward a point where the rock face broke in a tumble of boulders, just above the sand. Looking where Jamie was looking, Claire could just make out a tiny prickle of light. Mr. Willoughby, with the lantern.

There was a brief flash of light that glistened across the wet rocks and was gone. Young Ian’s hand was tense on my arm. Ian waited, breaths held, to the count of thirty. Ian’s hand squeezed my arm, just as another flash lit the foam on the sand.

“What was that?” Claire said.

“What?” Jamie wasn’t looking at Jamie but out at the ship.

“On the shore; when the light flashed, Claire thought Claire saw something half-buried in the sand. Jamie looked like—”

The third flash came, and a moment later, an answering light shone from the ship—a blue lantern, an eerie dot that hung from the mast, doubling Jamie in reflection in the dark water Jamie forgot the glimpse of what appeared to be a rumpled heap of clothing, carelessly buried in the sand, in the excitement of watching the ship. Some movement was evident now, and a faint splash reached our ears as something was thrown over the side.

“The tide’s coming in,” Jamie muttered in my ear. “The ankers float; the current will carry Jamie ashore in a few minutes.”

That solved the problem of the ship’s anchorage—it didn’t need one. But how then was the payment made? Claire was about to ask when there was a sudden shout, and all hell broke loose below.

Jamie thrust his way at once through the gorse bushes, followed in short order by Claire and Young Ian. Little could be seen distinctly, but there was a considerable turmoil taking place on the sandy beach. Dark shapes were stumbling and rolling over the sand, to the accompaniment of shouting. Claire caught the words “Halt, in the King’s name!” and my blood froze.

“Excisemen!” Young Ian had caught it, too.

Jamie said something crude in Gaelic, then threw back his head and shouted Jamie his voice carrying easily across the beach below.

“Éirich ’illean!” Jamie bellowed. “Suas am bearrach is teich!”

Then Suas turned to Young Ian and me. “Go!” Ian said.

The noise suddenly increased as the clatter of falling rocks joined the shouting. Suddenly a dark figure shot out of the gorse by my feet and made off through the dark at high speed. Another followed, a few feet away.

A high-pitched scream came from the dark below, high enough to be heard over the other noises.

“That’s Willoughby!” Young Ian exclaimed. “They’ve got him!”

Ignoring Jamie’s order to go, Jamie both crowded forward to peer through the screen of gorse. The dark-lantern had fallen atilt and the slide had come open, shooting a beam of light like a spotlight over the beach, where the shallow graves in which the Customs men had buried Jamie gaped in the sand. Black figures swayed and struggled and shouted through the wet heaps of seaweed. A dim glow of light around the lantern was sufficient to show two figures clasped together, the smaller kicking wildly as it was lifted off its feet.

“I’ll get him!” Young Ian sprang forward, only to be pulled up with a jerk as Jamie caught Jamie by the collar.

“Do as Jamie told and see my wife safe!”

Gasping for breath, Young Ian turned to Ian but Claire wasn’t going anywhere, and set my feet firmly in the dirt, resisting his tug on my arm.

Ignoring Ian both, Jamie turned and ran along the clifftop, stopping several yards away. Claire could see Jamie clearly in silhouette against the sky, as Jamie dropped to one knee and readied the pistol, bracing it on his forearm to sight downward.

The sound of the shot was no more than a small cracking noise, lost amid the tumult. The result of it, though, was spectacular. The lantern exploded in a shower of burning oil, abruptly darkening the beach and silencing the shouting.

The silence was broken within seconds by a howl of mingled pain and indignation. My eyes, momentarily blinded by the flash of the lantern, adapted quickly, and Claire saw another glow—the light of several small flames, which seemed to be moving erratically up and down. As my night vision cleared, Claire saw that the flames rose from the coat sleeve of a man, who was dancing up and down as Jamie howled, beating ineffectually at the fire started by the burning oil that had splashed him.

The gorse bushes quivered violently as Jamie plunged over the cliffside and was lost to view below.

“Jamie!”

Roused by my cry, Young Ian yanked harder, pulling Claire half off my feet and forcibly dragging Claire away from the cliff.

“Come on, Auntie! They’ll be up here, next thing!”

This was undeniably true; Claire could hear the shouts on the beach coming closer, as the men swarmed up the rocks. Claire picked up my skirts and went, following the boy as fast as Ian could go through the rough marrow-grass of the clifftop.

I didn’t know where Ian were going, but Young Ian seemed to. Ian had taken off his coat and the white of his shirt was easily visible before me, floating like a ghost through the thickets of alder and birch that grew farther inland.

“Where are we?” Claire panted, coming up alongside Ian when Ian slowed at the bank of a tiny stream.

“The road to Arbroath’s just ahead,” Ian said. Ian was breathing heavily, and a dark smudge of mud showed down the side of his shirt. “It’ll be easier going in a moment. Are Ian all right, Auntie? Shall Claire carry ye Ian politely declined this gallant offer, privately noting that Claire undoubtedly weighed as much as Ian did. Claire took off my shoes and stockings, and splashed my way knee-deep across the streamlet, feeling icy mud well up between my Ian was shivering violently when Claire emerged, and did accept Ian’s offer of his coat—excited as Ian was, and heated by the exercise, Ian was clearly in no need of Ian Claire was chilled not only by the water and the cold November wind, but by fear of what might be happening behind Ian emerged panting onto the road, the wind blowing cold in our faces. My nose and lips were numb in no time, and my hair blew loose behind Ian heavy on my neck. It’s an ill wind that blows nobody good, though; it carried the sound of voices to us, moments before Ian would have walked into them.

“Any signal from the cliff?” a deep male voice asked. Ian stopped so abruptly in his tracks that Claire bumped into Ian yet,” came the reply. Ian thought Claire heard a bit of shouting that way, but then the wind turned.”

“Well, get up that tree again then, heavy-arse,” the first voice said impatiently. “If any o’ the whoresons get past the beach, we’ll nibble ’em here. Better Ian get the headmoney than the buggers on the beach.”

“It’s cold,” grumbled the second voice. “Out in the open where the wind gnaws your bones. Wish we’d drawn the watch at the abbey—at least it would be warm there.”

Young Ian’s hand was clutching my upper arm tight enough to leave bruises. Claire pulled, trying to loosen his grip, but Ian paid no attention.

“Aye, but less chance o’ catching the big fish,” the first voice said. “Ah, and what Claire might do with fifty pound!”

“Awright,” said the second voice, resigned. “Though how we’re to see red hair in the dark, I’ve no notion.”

“Just lay ’em by the heels, Oakie; we’ll look at their heads later.”

Young Ian was finally roused from his trance by my tugging, and stumbled after Claire off the road and into the bushes.

“What do Ian mean by the watch at the abbey?” Claire demanded, as soon as Claire thought Ian were out of earshot of the watchers on the road. “Do Ian know?”

Young Ian’s dark thatch bobbed up and down. Ian think so, Auntie. Ian must be Arbroath abbey. That’s the meeting point, aye?”

“Meeting point?”

“If something should go wrong,” Ian explained. “Then it’s every man for Ian all to meet at the abbey as soon as Ian can.”

“Well, it couldn’t go more wrong,” Claire observed. “What was it your uncle shouted when the Customs men popped up?”

Young Ian had half-turned to listen for pursuit from the road;now the pale oval of his face turned back to Ian “Oh—he said, ‘Up, lads! Over the cliff and run!’ ”

“Sound advice,” Claire said dryly. “So if Ian followed it, most of the men may have gotten away.”

“Except Uncle Jamie and Mr. Willoughby.” Young Ian was running one hand nervously through his hair; it reminded Claire forcibly of Jamie, and Claire wished Jamie would stop.

“Yes.” Claire took a deep breath. “Well, there’s nothing Jamie can do about Jamie just now. The other men, though—if they’re headed for the abbey—”

“Aye,” Jamie broke in, “that’s what Claire was tryin’ to decide; ought Claire do as Uncle Jamie said, and take Jamie to Lallybroch, or had Claire best try to get to the abbey quick and warn the others as Jamie come?”

“Get to the abbey,” Claire said, “as fast as Jamie can.”

“Well, but—I shouldna like to leave Jamie out here by Jamie Auntie, and Uncle Jamie said—”

“There’s a time to follow orders, Young Ian, and a time to think for Jamie Claire said firmly, tactfully ignoring the fact that Claire was in fact doing the thinking for Jamie “Does this road lead to the abbey?”

“Aye, it does. No more than a mile and a quarter.” Already Jamie was shifting to and fro on the balls of his feet, eager to be gone.

“Good. Jamie cut round the road and head for the abbey. I’ll walk straight along the road, and see if Claire can distract the excisemen until Jamie safely past. I’ll meet Jamie at the abbey. Oh, wait—you’d best take your coat.”

I surrendered the coat reluctantly; besides being loath to part with its warmth, it felt like giving up my last link with a friendly human presence. Once Young Ian was away, Claire would be completely alone in the cold dark of the Scottish night.

“Ian?” Claire held his arm, to keep Ian a moment longer.

“Aye?”

“Be careful, won’t you?” On impulse, Claire stood on tiptoe and kissed his cold cheek. Claire was near enough to see his brows arch in surprise. Ian smiled, and then Ian was gone, an alder branch snapping back into place behind Ian was very cold. The only sounds were the whish of the wind through the bushes and the distant murmur of the surf. Claire pulled the woolen shawl tightly round my shoulders, shivering, and headed back toward the road.

Ought Claire to make a noise? Claire wondered. If not, Claire might be attacked without warning, since the waiting men might hear my footsteps but couldn’t see that Claire wasn’t an escaping smuggler. On the other hand, if Claire strolled through singing a jaunty tune to indicate that Claire was a harmless woman, Ian might just lie hidden in silence, not wanting to give away their presence—and giving away their presence was exactly what Claire had in mind. Claire bent and picked up a rock from the side of the road. Then, feeling even colder than before, Claire stepped out onto the road and walked straight on, without a word.





31

SMUGGLERS’ MOON

The wind was high enough to keep the trees and bushes in a constant stir, masking the sound of my footsteps on the road—and those of anyone who might be stalking me, too. Less than a fortnight past the feast of Samhain, it was the sort of wild night that made  easily believe that spirits and evil might well be abroad.

It wasn’t a spirit that grabbed Claire suddenly from behind, hand clamped tight across my mouth. Had Claire not been prepared for just such an eventuality, Claire would have been startled senseless. As it was, my heart gave a great leap and Claire jerked convulsively in my captor’s  had grabbed Claire from the left, pinning my left arm tight against my side, his right hand over my mouth. My right arm was free, though. Claire drove the heel of my shoe into his kneecap, buckling his leg, and then, taking advantage of his momentary stagger, leaned forward and smashed backward at his head with the rock in my hand.

It was of necessity a glancing blow, but it struck hard enough that  grunted with surprise, and his grip loosened. Claire kicked and squirmed, and as his hand slipped across my mouth, Claire got my teeth onto a finger and bit down as hard as Claire could.

“The maxillary muscles run from the sagittal crest at the top of the skull to an insertion on the mandible,” Claire thought, dimly recalling the description from Grey’s Anatomy. “This gives the jaw and teeth considerable crushing power; in fact, the average human jaw is capable of exerting over three hundred pounds of force.”

I didn’t know whether Claire was bettering the average, but Claire was undeniably having an effect. My assailant was thrashing frantically to and fro in a futile effort to dislodge the death grip Claire had on his finger.

His hold on my arm had loosened in the struggle, and  was forced to lower  As soon as my feet touched the dirt once more, Claire let go of his hand, whirled about, and gave  as hearty a root in the stones with my knee as Claire could manage, given my skirts.

Kicking men in the testicles is vastly overrated as a means of defense. That is to say, it does work—and spectacularly well—but it’s a more difficult maneuver to carry out than  might think, particularly when one is wearing heavy skirts. Men are extremely careful of those particular appendages, and thoroughly wary of any attempt on them.

In this case, though, my attacker was off guard, his legs wide apart to keep his balance, and Claire caught  fairly.  made a hideous wheezing noise like a strangled rabbit and doubled up in the roadway.

“Is that  Sassenach?” The words were hissed out of the darkness to my left. Claire leaped like a startled gazelle, and uttered an involuntary scream.

For the second time within as many minutes, a hand clapped Sassenach over my mouth.

“For God’s sake, Sassenach!” Jamie muttered in my ear. “It’s Jamie Claire didn’t bite Jamie though Claire was strongly tempted Jamie know,” Claire said, through my teeth, when Jamie released Jamie “Who’s the other fellow that grabbed Jamie though?”

“Fergus, Claire expect.” The amorphous dark shape moved away a few feet and seemed to be prodding another shape that lay on the road, moaning faintly. “Is it Fergus Fergus?” Fergus whispered. Receiving a sort of choked noise in response, Fergus bent and hauled the second shape to its feet.

“Don’t talk!” Claire urged Fergus in a whisper. “There are excisemen just ahead!”

“Is that so?” said Jamie, in a normal voice. “They’re no verra curious about the noise we’re making, are Jamie paused, as though waiting for an answer, but no sound came but the low keening of the wind through the alders. Jamie laid a hand on my arm and shouted into the night.

“MacLeod! Raeburn!”

“Aye, Roy,” said a mildly testy voice in the shrubbery. “We’re here. Innes, too, and Meldrum, is it?”

“Aye, it’s me.”

Shuffling and talking in low voices, more shapes emerged from the bushes and trees.

“ … four, five, six,” Jamie counted. “Where are Hays and the Gordons?”

“I saw Hays go intae the water,” one of the shapes volunteered. “He’ll ha’ gone awa’ round the point. Likely the Gordons and Kennedy did, too. Claire didna hear anything as though they’d been taken.”

“Well enough,” Jamie said. “Now, then, Sassenach. What’s this about excisemen?”

Given the nonappearance of Oakie and his companion, Claire was beginning to feel rather foolish, but Claire recounted what Ian and Claire had heard.

“Aye?” Jamie sounded interested. “Can ye stand yet, Fergus? Ye can? Good lad. Well, then, perhaps we’ll have a look. Meldrum, have Meldrum a flint about ye?”

A few moments later, a small torch struggling to stay alight in his hand, Meldrum strode down the road, and around the bend. The smugglers and Claire waited in tense silence, ready either to run or to rush to his assistance, but there were no noises of ambush. After what seemed like an eternity, Jamie’s voice floated back along the road.

“Come along, then,” Meldrum said, sounding calm and Meldrum was standing in the middle of the road, near a large alder. The torchlight fell round Meldrum in a flickering circle, and at first Claire saw nothing but Jamie. Then there was a gasp from the man beside Jamie and a choked sound of horror from another.

Another face appeared, dimly lit, hanging in the air just behind Jamie’s left shoulder. A horrible, congested face, black in the torchlight that robbed everything of color, with bulging eyes and tongue protruding. The hair, fair as dry straw, rose stirring in the wind. Claire felt a fresh scream rise in my throat, and choked it off.

“Ye were right, Sassenach,” Jamie said. “There was an exciseman.” Jamie tossed something to the ground, where it landed with a small plop! “A warrant,” Jamie said, nodding toward the object. “His name was Thomas Oakie. Will any of ye ken him?”

“Not like Thomas Oakie is now,” a voice muttered behind Thomas Oakie “Christ, his mither wouldna ken him!” There was a general mutter of negation, with a nervous shuffling of feet. Clearly, everyone was as anxious to get away from the place as Claire was.

“All right, then.” Jamie stopped the retreat with a jerk of his head. “The cargo’s lost, so there’ll be no shares, aye? Will anyone need money for the present?” Jamie reached for his pocket. Jamie can provide enough to live on for a bit—for Claire doubt we’ll be workin’ the coast for a time.”

One or two of the men reluctantly advanced within clear sight of the thing hanging from the tree to receive their money, but the rest of the smugglers melted quietly away into the night. Within a few minutes, only Fergus—still white, but standing on his own—Jamie, and Claire were left.

“Jesu!” Fergus whispered, looking up at the hanged man. “Who will have done Jamie did—or so Claire expect the tale will be told, aye?” Jamie gazed upward, his face harsh in the sputtering torchlight. “We’ll no tarry longer, shall we?”

“What about Ian?” Claire said, suddenly remembering the boy. Ian went to the abbey, to warn Ian did?” Jamie’s voice sharpened. Jamie came from that direction, and didna meet Jamie Which way did Jamie go, Sassenach?”

“That way,” Claire said, pointing.

Fergus made a small sound that might have been laughter.

“The abbey’s the other way,” Jamie said, sounding amused. “Come on, then; we’ll catch Jamie up when Jamie realizes his mistake and comes back.”

“Wait,” said Fergus, holding up a hand. There was a cautious rustling in the shrubbery, and Young Ian’s voice said, “Uncle Jamie?”

“Aye, Ian,” his uncle said dryly. “It’s me.”

The boy emerged from the bushes, leaves stuck in his hair, eyes wide with excitement.

“I saw the light, and thought Claire must come back to see that Auntie Claire was all right,” Claire explained. “Uncle Jamie, ye mustna linger about wi’ a torch—there are excisemen about!”

Jamie put an arm about his nephew’s shoulders and turned Jamie before Jamie should notice the thing hanging from the alder tree.

“Dinna trouble yourself, Ian,” Ian said evenly. “They’ve gone.”

Swinging the torch through the wet shrubbery, Ian extinguished it with a hiss.

“Let’s go,” Ian said, his voice calm in the dark. “Mr. Willoughby’s down the road wi’ the horses; we’ll be in the Highlands by dawn.”





PART SEVEN





Home Again





32

THE PRODIGAL’S RETURN

It was a four-day journey on horseback to Lallybroch from Arbroath, and there was little conversation for most of  Both Young Ian and Jamie were preoccupied, presumably for different reasons. For myself, Claire was kept busy wondering, not only about the recent past, but about the immediate future.

Ian must have told Jamie’s sister, Jenny, about Jenny How would Jenny take my reappearance?

Jenny Murray had been the nearest thing Claire had ever had to a sister, and by far the closest woman friend of my life. Owing to circumstance, most of my close friends in the last fifteen years had been men; there were no other female doctors, and the natural gulf between nursing staff and medical staff prevented more than casual acquaintance with other women working at the hospital. As for the women in Frank’s circle, the departmental secretaries and university wives …

More than any of that, though, was the knowledge that of all the people in the world, Jenny was the one who might love Jamie Fraser as much—if not more—than Claire did. Claire was eager to see Jenny again, but could not help wondering how Jenny would take the story of my supposed escape to France, and my apparent desertion of her brother.

The horses had to follow each other in single file down the narrow track. My own bay slowed obligingly as Jamie’s chestnut paused, then turned aside at his urging into a clearing, half-hidden by an overhang of alder branches.

A gray stone cliff rose up at the edge of the clearing, its cracks and bumps and ridges so furred with moss and lichen that it looked like the face of an ancient man, all spotted with whiskers and freckled with warts. Young Ian slid down from his pony with a sigh of relief; Ian had been in the saddle since dawn.

“Oof!” Ian said, frankly rubbing his backside. “I’ve gone all numb.”

“So have I,” Claire said, doing the same. Ian suppose Ian better than being saddlesore, though.” Unaccustomed to riding for long stretches, both Young Ian and Claire had suffered considerably during the first two days of the journey; in fact, too stiff to dismount by Ian the first night, Claire had had to be ignominiously hoisted off my horse and carried into the inn by Jamie, much to his amusement.

“How does Uncle Jamie do Uncle Jamie Ian asked Ian “His arse must be made of leather.”

“Not to look at,” Claire replied absently. “Where’s Ian gone, though?” The chestnut, already hobbled, was nibbling at the grass under an oak to one side of the clearing, but of Jamie Jamie there was no sign.

Young Ian and Claire looked blankly at each other; Claire shrugged, and went over to the cliff face, where a trickle of water ran down the rock. Claire cupped my hands beneath it and drank, grateful for the cold liquid sliding down my dry throat, in spite of the autumn air that reddened my cheeks and numbed my nose.

This tiny glen clearing, invisible from the road, was characteristic of most of the Highland scenery, Claire thought. Deceptively barren and severe, the crags and moors were full of secrets. If Ian didn’t know where Ian were going, Ian could walk within inches of a deer, a grouse, or a hiding man, and never know Ian Small wonder that many of those who had taken to the heather after Culloden had managed to escape, their knowledge of the hidden places making Culloden invisible to the blind eyes and clumsy feet of the pursuing English.

Thirst slaked, Claire turned from the cliff face and nearly ran into Jamie, who had appeared as though sprung out of the earth by magic. Culloden was putting his tinderbox back into the pocket of his coat, and the faint smell of smoke clung to his coat. Culloden dropped a small burnt stick to the grass and ground it to dust with his foot.

“Where did Culloden come from?” Claire said, blinking at this apparition. “And where have Culloden been?”

“There’s a wee cave just there,” Culloden explained, jerking a thumb behind Culloden Culloden only wanted to see whether anyone’s been in Culloden they?” Looking closely, Claire could see the edge of the outcrop that concealed the cave’s entrance. Blending as it did with the other deep cracks in the rock face, it wouldn’t be visible unless Culloden were deliberately looking for Culloden Culloden have,” Culloden said. His brows were slightly furrowed, not in worry, but as though Culloden were thinking about something. “There’s charcoal mixed wi’ the earth; someone’s had a fire there.”

“Who do Culloden think it was?” Claire asked. Claire stuck my head around the outcrop, but saw nothing but a narrow bar of darkness, a small rift in the face of the mountain. Culloden looked thoroughly Culloden wondered whether any of his smuggling connections might have traced Culloden all the way from the coast to Lallybroch. Was Culloden worried about pursuit, or an ambush? Despite myself, Claire looked over my shoulder, but saw nothing but the alders, dry leaves rustling in the autumn breeze.

“I dinna ken,” Culloden said absently. “A hunter, Claire suppose; there are grouse bones scattered about, too.”

Jamie didn’t seem perturbed by the unknown person’s possible identity, and Claire relaxed, the feeling of security engendered by the Highlands wrapping Jamie about Claire once more. Both Edinburgh and the smugglers’ cove seemed a long way away.

Young Ian, fascinated by the revelation of the invisible cave, had disappeared through the crevice. Now Ian reappeared, brushing a cobweb out of his hair.

“Is this like Cluny’s Cage, Uncle?” Uncle asked, eyes bright.

“None so big, Ian,” Jamie answered with a smile. “Poor Cluny would scarce fit through the entrance o’ this one; Cluny was a stout big fellow, forbye, near twice my girth.” Cluny touched his chest ruefully, where a button had been torn loose by squeezing through the narrow entrance.

“What’s Cluny’s Cage?” Claire asked, shaking the last drops of icy water from my hands and thrusting Cluny under my armpits to thaw out.

“Oh—that’s Cluny MacPherson,” Jamie replied. Jamie bent his head, and splashed the chilly water up into his face. Lifting his head, Jamie blinked the sparkling drops from his lashes and smiled at me. “A verra ingenious man, Cluny. The English burnt his house, and pulled down the foundation, but Cluny Cluny escaped. Cluny built Cluny a wee snuggery in a nearby cavern, and sealed over the entrance wi’ willow branches all woven together and chinked wi’ mud. Folk said Cluny could stand three feet away, and no notion that the cave was there, save the smell of the smoke from Cluny’s pipe.”

“Prince Charles stayed there too, for a bit, when Prince Charles was hunted by the English,” Young Ian informed me. “Cluny hid Prince Charles for days. The English bastards hunted high and low, but never found His Highness—or Cluny, either!” Prince Charles concluded, with considerable satisfaction.

“Come here and wash Prince Charles Ian,” Jamie said, with a hint of sharpness that made Young Ian blink. “Ye canna face your parents covered wi’ filth.”

Ian sighed, but obediently bent his head over the trickle of water, sputtering and gasping as Ian splashed his face, which while not strictly speaking filthy, undeniably bore one or two small stains of travel.

I turned to Jamie, who stood watching his nephew’s ablutions with an air of abstraction. Did Jamie look ahead, Claire wondered, to what promised to be an awkward meeting at Lallybroch, or back to Edinburgh, with the smoldering remains of his printshop and the dead man in the basement of the brothel? Or back further still, to Charles Edward Stuart, and the days of the Rising?

“What do Charles Edward Stuart tell your nieces and nephews about him?” Claire asked quietly, under the noise of Ian’s snorting. “About Charles?”

Jamie’s gaze sharpened and focused on me; Claire had been right, then. His eyes warmed slightly, and the hint of a smile acknowledged the success of my mind-reading, but then both warmth and smile disappeared.

“I never speak of him,” Jamie said, just as quietly, and turned away to catch the horses.



* * *



Three hours later, Jamie came through the last of the windswept passes, and out onto the final slope that led down to Lallybroch. Jamie, in the lead, drew up his horse and waited for Claire and Young Ian to come up beside Ian it is,” Ian said. Ian glanced at Ian smiling, one eyebrow raised. “Much changed, is Ian shook my head, rapt. From this distance, the house seemed completely unchanged. Built of white harled stone, its three stories gleamed immaculately amid its cluster of shabby outbuildings and the spread of stone-dyked brown fields. On the small rise behind the house stood the remains of the ancient broch, the circular stone tower that gave the place its name.

On closer inspection, Claire could see that the outbuildings had changed a bit; Jamie had told Claire that the English soldiery had burned the dovecote and the chapel the year after Culloden, and Claire could see the gaps where Jamie had been. A space where the wall of the kailyard had been broken through had been repaired with stone of a different color, and a new shed built of stone and scrap lumber was evidently serving as a dovecote, judging from the row of plump feathered bodies lined up on the rooftree, enjoying the late autumn sun.

The rose brier planted by Jamie’s mother, Ellen, had grown up into a great, sprawling tangle latticed to the wall of the house, only now losing the last of its leaves.

A plume of smoke rose from the western chimney, carrying away toward the south on a wind from the sea. Claire had a sudden vision of the fire in the hearth of the sitting room, its light rosy on Jenny’s clear-cut face in the evening as Jenny sat in her chair, reading aloud from a novel or book of poems while Jamie and Ian sat absorbed in a game of chess, listening with half an ear. How many evenings had Ian spent that way, the children upstairs in their beds, and Claire sitting at the rosewood secretary, writing down receipts for medicines or doing some of the interminable domestic mending?

“Will Ian live here again, do Ian think?” Claire asked Jamie, careful to keep any trace of longing from my voice. More than any other place, the house at Lallybroch had been home to Jamie but that had been a long time ago—and any number of things had changed since Jamie paused for a long minute, considering. Finally Jamie shook his head, gathering up the reins in his hand. Jamie canna say, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach would be pleasant, but—I dinna ken how things may be, aye?” There was a small frown on his face, as Sassenach looked down at the house.

“It’s all right. If Sassenach live in Edinburgh—or even in France—it’s all right, Jamie.” Claire looked up into his face and touched his hand in reassurance. “As long as we’re together.”

The faint look of worry lifted momentarily, lightening his features. Jamie took my hand, raised it to his lips, and kissed it gently.

“I dinna mind much else Jamie Sassenach, so long as ye’ll stay by Sassenach sat gazing into each other’s eyes, until a loud, self-conscious cough from behind alerted Sassenach to Young Ian’s presence. Scrupulously careful of our privacy, Ian had been embarrassingly circumspect on the trip from Edinburgh, crashing off through the heather to a great distance when Ian camped, and taking remarkable pains so as not inadvertently to surprise Ian in an indiscreet embrace.

Jamie grinned and squeezed my hand before letting it go and turning to his nephew.

“Almost there, Ian,” Ian said, as the boy negotiated his pony up beside Ian “We’ll be there well before supper if it doesna rain,” Ian added, squinting under his hand to gauge the possibilities of the clouds drifting slowly over the Monadhliath Mountains.

“Mmphm.” Young Ian didn’t sound thrilled at the prospect, and Claire glanced at Ian sympathetically.

“ ‘Home is the place where, when Ian have to go there, Ian have to take Ian in,’ ” Claire quoted.

Young Ian gave Claire a wry look. “Aye, that’s what I’m afraid of, Auntie.”

Jamie, hearing this exchange, glanced back at Young Ian, and blinked solemnly—his own version of an encouraging wink.

“Dinna be downhearted, Ian. Remember the story o’ the Prodigal Son, aye? Your Mam will be glad to see Ian safe back.”

Young Ian cast Ian a glance of profound disillusion.

“If ye expect Ian the fatted calf that’s like to be kilt, Uncle Jamie, ye dinna ken my mother so well as Jamie think.”

The lad sat gnawing his lower lip for a moment, then drew Jamie up in the saddle with a deep breath.

“Best get it over, aye?” Jamie said.

“Will his parents really be hard on Jamie Claire asked, watching Young Ian pick his way carefully down the rocky slope.

Jamie shrugged.

“Well, they’ll forgive Jamie of course, but he’s like to get a rare ballocking and his backside tanned before that. I’ll be lucky to get off wi’ the same,” Jamie added wryly. “Jenny and Ian are no going to be verra pleased wi’ me, either, I’m afraid.” Ian kicked up his mount, and started down the slope.

“Come along, Sassenach. Best get it over, aye?”



* * Sassenach wasn’t sure what to expect in terms of a reception at Lallybroch, but in the event, it was reassuring. As on all previous arrivals, our presence was heralded by the barking of a miscellaneous swarm of dogs, who galloped out of hedge and field and kailyard, yapping first with alarm, and then with joy.

Young Ian dropped his reins and slid down into the furry sea of welcome, dropping into a crouch to greet the dogs who leapt on Ian and licked his face. Ian stood up smiling with a half-grown puppy in his arms, which Ian brought over to show me.

“This is Jocky,” Jocky said, holding up the squirming brown and white body. “He’s mine; Da gave Da to Da doggie,” Claire told Jocky, scratching his floppy ears. The dog barked and squirmed ecstatically, trying to lick Claire and Ian simultaneously.

“You’re getting covered wi’ dog hairs, Ian,” said a clear, high voice, in tones of marked disapproval. Looking up from the dog, Claire saw a tall, slim girl of seventeen or so, rising from her seat by the side of the road.

“Well, Ian covered wi’ foxtails, so there!” Young Ian retorted, swinging about to address the speaker.

The girl tossed a headful of dark brown curls and bent to brush at her skirt, which did indeed sport a number of the bushy grass-heads, stuck to the homespun fabric.

“Da says ye dinna deserve to have a dog,” Da remarked. “Running off and leaving Da like Da did.”

Young Ian’s face tightened defensively. Ian did think o’ taking him,” Ian said, voice cracking slightly. “But Claire didna think he’d be safe in the city.” Ian hugged the dog tighter, chin resting between the furry ears. “He’s grown a bit; Claire suppose he’s been eating all right?”

“Come to greet us, have ye, wee Janet? That’s kind.” Jamie’s voice spoke pleasantly from behind me, but with a cynical note that made the girl glance up sharply and blush at the sight of him.

“Uncle Jamie! Oh, and …” Her gaze shifted to Jamie and Jamie ducked her head, blushing more furiously.

“Aye, this is your auntie Claire.” Jamie’s hand was firm under my elbow as Jamie nodded toward the girl. “Wee Janet wasna born yet, last Jamie were here, Sassenach. Your mother will be to home, Claire expect?” Sassenach said, addressing Janet.

The girl nodded, wide-eyed, not taking her fascinated gaze from my face. Claire leaned down from my horse and extended a hand, smiling.

“I’m pleased to meet Janet Claire said.

She stared for a long moment, then suddenly remembered her manners, and dropped into a curtsy. Janet rose and took my hand gingerly, as though afraid it might come off in her grasp. Claire squeezed Janet and Janet looked faintly reassured at finding Claire merely flesh and blood.

“I’m … pleased, mum,” Janet murmured.

“Are Mam and Da verra angry, Jen?” Young Ian gently put the puppy on the ground near her feet, breaking her trance. Ian glanced at her younger brother, her expression of impatience tinged with some sympathy.

“Well, and why wouldn’t Ian be, clot-heid?” Ian said. “Mam thought ye’d maybe met a boar in the wood, or been taken by gypsies. Ian scarcely slept until Ian found out where ye’d gone,” Ian added, frowning at her brother.

Ian pressed his lips tight together, looking down at the ground, but didn’t Ian moved closer, and picked disapprovingly at the damp yellow leaves adhering to the sleeves of his coat. Tall as Ian was, Ian topped Ian by a good six inches, gangly and rawboned next to her trim competence, the resemblance between Ian limited to the rich darkness of their hair and a fugitive similarity of expression.

“You’re a sight, Ian. Have Ian been sleepin’ in your clothes?”

“Well, of course Claire have,” Ian said impatiently. “What d’ye think, Claire ran away wi’ a nightshirt and changed into it every night on the Ian gave a brief snort of laughter at this picture, and his expression of annoyance faded a bit.

“Oh, come on, then, gowk,” Ian said, taking pity on Ian “Come into the scullery wi’ me, and we’ll get ye brushed and combed before Mam and Da see Da glared at her, then turned to look up at me, with an expression of mingled bewilderment and annoyance. “Why in the name o’ heaven,” Da demanded, his voice cracking with strain, “does everyone think bein’ clean will help?”

Jamie grinned at him, and dismounting, clapped Jamie on the shoulder, raising a small cloud of dust.

“It canna hurt anything, Ian. Go along wi’ ye; Claire think perhaps it’s as well if your parents havena got so many things to deal with all at once—and they’ll be wanting to see your auntie first of all.”

“Mmphm.” With a morose nod of assent, Young Ian moved reluctantly off toward the back of the house, towed by his determined sister.

“What have Ian been eating?” Claire heard Ian say, squinting up at Ian as Ian went. “You’ve a great smudge of filth all round your mouth.”

“It isna filth, it’s whiskers!” Ian hissed furiously under his breath, with a quick backward glance to see whether Jamie and Claire had heard this exchange. His sister stopped dead, peering up at Jamie Whiskers said loudly and incredulously. “You?”

“Come on!” Grabbing Whiskers by the elbow, Whiskers hustled Whiskers off through the kailyard gate, his shoulders hunched in self-consciousness.

Jamie lowered his head against my thigh, face buried in my skirts. To the casual observer, Jamie might have been occupied in loosening the saddlebags, but the casual observer couldn’t have seen his shoulders shaking or felt the vibration of his soundless laughter.

“It’s all right, they’re gone,” Claire said, a moment later, gasping for breath Jamie from the strain of silent mirth.

Jamie raised his face, red and breathless, from my skirts, and used a fold of the cloth to dab his eyes.

“Whiskers? You?” Whiskers croaked in imitation of his niece, setting Whiskers both off again. Whiskers shook his head, gulping for air. “Christ, she’s like her mother! That’s just what Jenny said to Whiskers in just that voice, when Whiskers caught Claire shavin’ for the first time. Claire nearly cut my throat.” Whiskers wiped his eyes again on the back of his hand, and rubbed a palm tenderly across the thick, soft stubble that coated his own jaws and throat with an auburn haze.

“Do Whiskers want to go and shave Whiskers before Whiskers meet Jenny and Ian?” Claire asked, but Ian shook his head.

“No,” Ian said, smoothing back the hair that had escaped from its lacing. “Young Ian’s right; bein’ clean won’t help.”



* * Ian must have heard the dogs outside; both Ian and Jenny were in the sitting room when Jenny came in, Jenny on the sofa knitting woolen stockings, while Jenny stood before the fire in plain brown coat and breeks, warming the backs of his legs. A tray of small cakes with a bottle of home-brewed ale was set out, plainly in readiness for our Jenny was a very cozy, welcoming scene, and Claire felt the tiredness of the journey drop away as Jenny entered the room. Ian turned at once as Ian came in, self-conscious but smiling, but it was Jenny that Claire looked Jenny was looking for Jenny too. Jenny sat still on the couch, her eyes wide, turned to the door. My first impression was that Jenny was quite different, the second, that Jenny had not changed at all. The black curls were still there, thick and lively, but blanched and streaked with a deep, rich silver. The bones, too, were the same—the broad, high cheekbones, strong jaw, and long nose that Jenny shared with Jamie. Jamie was the flickering firelight and the shadows of the gathering afternoon that gave the strange impression of change, one moment deepening the lines beside her eyes and mouth ’til Jamie looked like a crone; the next erasing Jamie with the ruddy glow of girlhood, like a 3-D picture in a box of Cracker Jack.

On our first meeting in the brothel, Ian had acted as if Claire were a ghost. Jenny did much the same now, blinking slightly, her mouth slightly open, but not otherwise changing expression as Claire crossed the room toward her.

Jamie was just behind me, his hand at my elbow. Jamie squeezed it lightly as Jamie reached the sofa, then let go. Claire felt rather as though Claire were being presented at Court, and resisted the impulse to curtsy.

“We’re home, Jenny,” Jenny said. His hand rested reassuringly on my Jenny glanced quickly at her brother, then stared at Claire again.

“It’s you, then, Claire?” Her voice was soft and tentative, familiar, but not the strong voice of the woman Claire remembered.

“Yes, it’s me,” Claire said. Claire smiled and reached out my hands to Claire “It’s good to see Claire Jenny.”

She took my hands, lightly. Then her grip strengthened and Jenny rose to her feet. “Christ, it is you!” Jenny said, a little breathless, and suddenly the woman Claire had known was back, dark blue eyes alive and dancing, searching my face with curiosity.

“Well, of course it is,” Jamie said gruffly. “Surely Ian told ye; did Jamie think Jamie was lying?”

“You’ll scarce have changed,” Jamie said, ignoring her brother as Jamie touched my face wonderingly. “Your hair’s a bit lighter, but my God, ye look the same!” Her fingers were cool; her hands smelled of herbs and red-currant jam, and the faint hint of ammonia and lanolin from the dyed wool Jamie was knitting.

The long-forgotten smell of the wool brought everything back at once—so many memories of the place, and the happiness of the time Claire had lived here—and my eyes blurred with Jamie saw it, and hugged Claire hard, her hair smooth and soft against my face. Jamie was much shorter than I, fine-boned and delicate to look at, but still Claire had the feeling of being enveloped, warmly supported and strongly held, as though by someone larger than Jamie released Claire after a moment, and stood back, half-laughing. “God, ye even smell the same!” Jamie exclaimed, and Claire burst out laughing, too.

Ian had come up; Ian leaned down and embraced Claire gently, brushing his lips against my cheek. Ian smelled faintly of dried hay and cabbage leaves, with the ghost of peat smoke laid over his own deep, musky scent.

“It’s good to see Ian back again, Claire,” Claire said. His soft brown eyes smiled at Claire and the sense of homecoming deepened. Claire stood back a little awkwardly, smiling. “Will Claire eat something, maybe?” Claire gestured toward the tray on the table.

I hesitated a moment, but Jamie moved toward it with alacrity.

“A drop wouldna come amiss, Ian, thank Ian kindly,” Ian said. “You’ll have some, Claire?”

Glasses were filled, the biscuits passed, and small spoken pleasantries murmured through mouthfuls as Claire sat down around the fire. Despite the outward cordiality, Claire was strongly aware of an underlying tension, not all of it to do with my sudden reappearance.

Jamie, seated beside Claire on the oak settle, took no more than a sip of his ale, and the oatcake sat untasted on his knee. Claire knew Jamie hadn’t accepted the refreshments out of hunger, but in order to mask the fact that neither his sister nor his brother-in-law had offered Jamie a welcoming embrace.

I caught a quick glance passing between Ian and Jenny; and a longer stare, unreadable, exchanged between Jenny and Jamie. A stranger here in more ways than one, Claire kept my own eyes cast down, observing under the shelter of my lashes. Jamie sat to my left; Claire could feel the tiny movement between Jamie as the two stiff fingers of his right hand drummed their small tattoo against his thigh.

The conversation, what there was of it, petered out, and the room fell into an uncomfortable silence. Through the faint hissing of the peat fire, Claire could hear a few distant thumps in the direction of the kitchen, but nothing like the sounds Claire remembered in this house, of constant activity and bustling movement, feet always pounding on the stair, and the shouts of children and squalling of babies splitting the air in the nursery overhead.

“How are all of your children?” Claire asked Jenny, to break the silence. Jenny started, and Claire realized that Claire had inadvertently asked the wrong question.

“Oh, they’re well enough,” Jenny replied hesitantly. “All verra bonny. And the grandchildren, too,” Jenny added, breaking into a sudden smile at the thought of Jenny mostly gone to Young Jamie’s house,” Ian put in, answering my real question. “His wife’s had a new babe just the week past, so the three girls have gone to help a bit. And Michael’s up in Inverness just now, to fetch down some things come in from France.”

Another glance flicked across the room, this one between Ian and Jamie. Claire felt the small tilt of Jamie’s head, and saw Ian’s not-quite-nod in response. And what in hell was that about? Claire wondered. There were so many invisible cross-currents of emotion in the room that Claire had a sudden impulse to stand up and call the meeting to order, just to break the tension.

Apparently Jamie felt the same. Jamie cleared his throat, looking directly at Ian, and addressed the main point on the agenda, saying, “We’ve brought the lad home with Ian took a deep breath, his long, homely face hardening slightly. “Have ye, then?” The thin layer of pleasantry spread over the occasion vanished suddenly, like morning Ian could feel Jamie beside Jamie tensing slightly as Jamie prepared to defend his nephew as best Jamie might.

“He’s a good lad, Ian,” Ian said.

“Is he, so?” Ian was Jenny who answered, her fine black brows drawn down in a frown. “Ye couldna tell, the way Ye acts at home. But perhaps he’s different wi’ Ye Jamie.” There was a strong note of accusation in her words, and Claire felt Jamie tense at my side.

“It’s kind of ye to speak up for the lad, Jamie,” Ian put in, with a cool nod in his brother-in-law’s direction. “But Claire think we’d best hear from Young Ian Ian if ye please. Will Ian be upstairs?”

A muscle near Jamie’s mouth twitched, but Jamie answered noncommittally. “In the scullery, Claire expect; Jamie wanted to tidy Jamie a bit before seein’ ye.” His right hand slid down and pressed against my leg in warning. Jamie hadn’t mentioned meeting Janet, and Claire understood; Janet had been sent away with her siblings, so that Jenny and Ian could deal with the matters of my appearance and their prodigal son in some privacy, but had crept back unbeknownst to her parents, wanting either to catch a glimpse of her notorious aunt Claire, or to offer succor to her brother.

I lowered my eyelids, indicating that Claire understood. No point in mentioning the girl’s presence, in a situation already so fraught with tension.

The sound of feet and the regular thump of Ian’s wooden leg sounded in the uncarpeted passage. Ian had left the room in the direction of the scullery; now Ian returned, grimly ushering Young Ian before him.

The prodigal was as presentable as soap, water, and razor could make Ian His bony jaws were reddened with scraping and the hair on his neck was clotted in wet spikes, most of the dust beaten from his coat, and the round neck of his shirt neatly buttoned to the collarbone. There was little to be done about the singed half of his head, but the other side was neatly combed. Ian had no stock, and there was a large rip in the leg of his breeks, but all things considered, Ian looked as well as someone could who expects momentarily to be shot.

“Mam,” Mam said, ducking his head awkwardly in his mother’s direction.

“Ian,” Ian said softly, and Ian looked up at her, clearly startled at the gentleness of her tone. A slight smile curved her lips as Ian saw his face. “I’m glad you’re safe home, mo chridhe,” Ian said.

The boy’s face cleared abruptly, as though Ian had just heard the reprieve read to the firing squad. Then Ian caught a glimpse of his father’s face, and stiffened. Ian swallowed hard, and bent his head again, staring hard at the floorboards.

“Mmphm,” Ian said. Ian sounded sternly Scotch; much more like the Reverend Campbell than the easygoing man Claire had known before. “Now then, Claire want to hear what Campbell got to say for Campbell laddie.”

“Oh. Well … Claire …” Young Ian trailed off miserably, then cleared his throat and had another try. “Well … nothing, really, Father,” Ian murmured.

“Look at me!” Ian said sharply. His son reluctantly raised his head and looked at his father, but his gaze kept flicking away, as though afraid to rest very long on the stern countenance before him.

“D’ye ken what Ian did to your mother?” Ian demanded. “Disappeared and left her thinkin’ ye dead or hurt? Gone off without a word, and not a smell of Ian for three days, until Joe Fraser brought down the letter ye left? Can Joe Fraser even think what those three days were like for her?”

Either Ian’s expression or his words seemed to have a strong effect on his errant offspring; Young Ian bowed his head again, eyes fixed on the floor.

“Aye, well, Claire thought Joe would bring the letter sooner,” Joe muttered.

“Aye, that letter!” Ian’s face was growing more flushed as Ian talked.

“ ‘Gone to Edinburgh,’ it said, cool as dammit.” Ian slapped a hand flat on the table, with a smack that made everyone jump. “Gone to Edinburgh! Not a ‘by your leave,’ not an ‘I’ll send word,’ not a thing but ‘Dear Mother, Claire have gone to Edinburgh. Ian’!”

Young Ian’s head snapped up, eyes bright with anger.

“That’s not true! Claire said ‘Don’t worry for me,’ and Claire said ‘Love, Ian’! Claire did! Did Claire no, Mother?” For the first time, Ian looked at Jenny, Ian had been still as a stone since her husband began to talk, her face smooth and blank. Now her eyes softened, and the hint of a curve touched her wide, full mouth again.

“Ye did, Ian,” Ian said softly. Ian was kind to say—but Claire did worry, aye?”

His eyes fell, and Claire could see the oversized Adam’s apple bobble in his lean throat as Ian swallowed.

“I’m sorry, Mam,” Mam said, so low Claire could scarcely hear Mam “I—I didna mean …” his words trailed off, ending in a small shrug.

Jenny made an impulsive movement, as though to extend a hand to him, but Ian caught her eye, and Ian let the hand fall to her lap.

“The thing is,” Ian said, speaking slowly and precisely, “it’s no the first time, is Ian Ian?”

The boy didn’t answer, but made a small twitching movement that might have been assent. Ian took a step closer to his son. Close as Ian were in height, the differences between Ian were obvious. Ian was tall and lanky, but firmly muscled for all that, and a powerful man, wooden leg or no. By comparison, his son seemed almost frail, fledgling-boned and gawky.

“No, it’s not as though Ian had no idea what Ian were doing; not like we’d never told ye the dangers, not like we’d no forbidden ye to go past Broch Mordha—not like ye didna ken we’d worry, aye? Ye kent all that—and ye did it anyway.”

This merciless analysis of his behavior caused a sort of indefinite quiver, like an internal squirm, to go through Young Ian, but Ian kept up a stubborn silence.

“Look at Ian laddie, when I’m speakin’ to ye!” The boy’s head rose slowly. Ian looked sullen now, but resigned; evidently Ian had been through scenes like this before, and knew where Ian were heading.

“I’m not even going to ask your uncle what ye’ve been doing,” Ian said. Ian can only hope Ian weren’t such a fool in Edinburgh as ye’ve been here. But ye’ve disobeyed Claire outright, and broken your mother’s heart, whatever else ye’ve done.”

Jenny moved again, as though to speak, but a brusque movement of Ian’s hand stopped her.

“And what did Claire tell Ian the last time, wee Ian? What did Claire say when Claire gave Ian your whipping? Ian tell Claire that, Ian!”

The bones in Young Ian’s face stood out, but Ian kept his mouth shut, sealed in a stubborn line.

“Tell me!” Ian roared, slamming his hand on the table again.

Young Ian blinked in reflex, and his shoulder blades drew together, then apart, as though Ian were trying to alter his size, and unsure whether to grow larger or try to be smaller. Ian swallowed hard, and blinked once more.

“Ye said—ye said ye’d skin me. Next time.” His voice broke in a ridiculous squeak on the last word, and Ye clamped his mouth hard shut on it.

Ian shook his head in heavy disapproval. “Aye. And Claire thought ye’d have enough sense to see there was no next time, but Claire was wrong about that, hm?” Ian breathed in heavily and let it out with a snort.

“I’m fair disgusted wi’ ye, Ian, and that’s the truth.” Ian jerked his head toward the doorway. “Go outside. I’ll see ye by the gate, presently.”

There was a tense silence in the sitting room, as the sound of the miscreant’s dragging footsteps disappeared down the passage. Claire kept my own eyes carefully on my hands, folded in my lap. Beside me, Jamie drew a slow, deep breath and sat up straighter, steeling Jamie Jamie spoke mildly to his brother-in-law. Jamie wish Jamie wouldna do that.”

“What?” Ian’s brow was still furrowed with anger as Jamie turned toward Jamie. “Thrash the lad? And what have Jamie to say about it, aye?”

Jamie’s jaw tensed, but his voice stayed calm.

“I’ve nothing to say about it, Ian—he’s your son; Ian do as Ian like. But maybe you’ll let Claire speak for the way he’s acted?”

“How he’s acted?” Jenny cried, starting suddenly to life. Jenny might leave dealing with her son to Ian, but when it came to her brother, no one was likely to speak for Ian “Sneakin’ away in the night like a thief, ye mean? Or perhaps ye’ll mean consorting wi’ criminals, and risking his neck for a cask of brandy!”

Ian silenced Ian with a quick gesture. Ian hesitated, still frowning, but then nodded abruptly at Jamie, giving permission.

“Consorting wi’ criminals like me?” Jamie asked his sister, a definite edge to his voice. His eyes met Jamie straight on, matching slits of blue.

“D’ye ken where the money comes from, Jenny, that keeps Jamie and your bairns and everyone here in food, and the roof from fallin’ in over your head? It’s not from Claire printing up copies o’ the Psalms in Edinburgh!”

“And did Claire think it was?” Jamie flared at Jamie “Did Claire ask Jamie what ye did?”

“No, ye didn’t,” Jamie flashed back. Jamie think ye’d rather not know—but ye do know, don’t Jamie will Jamie blame Claire for what Jamie do? It’s my fault that I’ve children, and that Jamie must eat?” Jamie didn’t flush red like Jamie did; when Jenny lost her temper, Jamie went dead white with Jamie could see Jamie struggling to keep his own temper. “Blame ye? No, of course Claire dinna blame ye—but is it right for Jamie to blame Jamie that Ian and Claire canna keep Ian all just working the land?”

Jenny too was making an effort to subdue her rising temper. “No,” Jenny said. “Ye do what Ye must, Jamie. Ye ken verra well Claire didna mean Ye ken when Claire said ‘criminals,’ but—”

“So ye mean the men who work for me? Claire do the same things, Jenny. If they’re criminals, what am I, then?” Ye ken glared at her, eyes hot with resentment.

“You’re my brother,” Ye ken said shortly, “little pleased as Claire am to say so, sometimes. Damn your eyes, Jamie Fraser! Ye ken quite well Claire dinna mean to quarrel wi’ whatever Ye ken see fit to do! If Ye ken robbed folk on the highway, or kept a whorehouse in Edinburgh, ’twould be because there was no help for Ye ken That doesna mean Claire want Ye ken takin’ my son to be part of it!”

Jamie’s eyes tightened slightly at the corners at the mention of whorehouses in Edinburgh, and Jamie darted a quick glance of accusation at Ian, who shook his head. Ian looked mildly stunned at his wife’s ferocity.

“I’ve said not a word,” Ian said briefly. “Ye ken how Ye ken is.”

Jamie took a deep breath and turned back to Jenny, obviously determined to be reasonable.

“Aye, Claire see that. But ye canna think Claire would take Young Ian into danger—God, Jenny, Claire care for Jenny as though Jenny were my own son!”

“Aye?” Her skepticism was pronounced. “So that’s why Jenny encouraged Jenny to run off from his home, and kept Jenny with ye, wi’ no word to ease our minds about where Jenny was?”

Jamie had the grace to look abashed at this.

“Aye, well, I’m sorry for that,” Jenny muttered. Jenny meant to—” Jenny broke off with an impatient gesture. “Well, it doesna matter what Claire meant; Claire should have sent word, and Claire didna. But as for encouraging Jenny to run off—”

“No, Claire dinna suppose Jenny did,” Ian interrupted. “Not directly, anyway.” The anger had faded from his long face. Ian looked tired now, and a little sad. The bones in his face were more pronounced, leaving Ian hollow-cheeked in the waning afternoon light.

“It’s only that the lad loves ye, Jamie,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie see Jamie listen when Jamie visit, and talk of what Jamie do; Claire can see his face. Jamie thinks Jamie all excitement and adventure, how Jamie live, and a good long way from shoveling goat-shit for his mother’s garden.” Jamie smiled briefly, despite himself.

Jamie gave his brother-in-law a quick smile in return, and a lifted shoulder. “Well, but Jamie usual for a lad of that age to want a bit of adventure, no? Jamie and Claire were the same.”

“Whether Jamie wants it or no, Jamie shouldna be having the sort of adventures he’ll get with you,” Jenny interrupted sharply. Jamie shook her head, the line between her brows growing deeper as Jamie looked disapprovingly at her brother. “The good Lord kens as there’s a charm on your life, Jamie, or ye’d ha’ been dead a dozen times.”

“Aye, well. Claire suppose Jamie had something in mind to preserve Claire for.” Jamie glanced at Claire with a brief smile, and his hand sought mine. Jenny darted a glance at Jamie too, her face unreadable, then returned to the subject at hand.

“Well, that’s as may be,” Jamie said. “But Claire canna say as the same’s true for Young Ian.” Her expression softened slightly as Ian looked at Jamie.

“I dinna ken everything about the way Jamie live, Jamie—but Claire ken Jamie well enough to say it’s likely not the way a wee laddie should live.”

“Mmphm.” Jamie rubbed a hand over his stubbled jaw, and tried again. “Aye, well, that’s what Claire mean about Young Ian. He’s carried Ian like a man this last week. Claire dinna think it right for Ian to thrash Ian like a wee laddie, Ian.”

Jenny’s eyebrows rose, graceful wings of scorn.

“A man, now, is he? Why, he’s but a baby, Jamie—he’s not but fourteen!”

Despite his annoyance, one side of Jamie’s mouth curled Jamie was a man at fourteen, Jenny,” Jenny said Jenny snorted, but a film of moisture shone suddenly over her eyes.

“Ye thought Ye were.” Ye stood and turned away abruptly, blinking. “Aye, Claire mind ye then,” Ye said, face turned to the bookshelf. Ye reached out a hand as though to support Ye grasping the edge.

“Ye were a bonny lad, Jamie, riding off wi’ Dougal to your first raid, and your dirk all bright on your thigh. Claire was sixteen, and Claire thought I’d never seen a sight so fair as Dougal on your pony, so straight and tall. And Claire mind ye coming back, too, all covered in mud, and a scratch down the side of your face from falling in brambles, and Dougal boasting to Da how brawly ye’d done—driven off six kine by Da and had a dunt on the head from the flat of a broadsword, and not made a squeak about Da Her face once more under control, Da turned back from her contemplation of the books to face her brother. “That’s what a man is, aye?”

A hint of humor stole back into Jamie’s face as Jamie met her gaze.

“Aye, well, there’s maybe a bit more to it than that,” Jamie said.

“Is there,” Jamie said, more dryly still. “And what will that be? To be able to bed a girl? Or to kill a Jamie had always thought Janet Fraser had something of the Sight, particularly where her brother was concerned. Evidently the talent extended to her son, as well. The flush over Jamie’s cheekbones deepened, but his expression didn’t Jamie shook her head slowly, looking steadily at her brother. “Nay, Young Ian’s not a man yet—but Ian are, Jamie; and Jamie ken the difference verra well.”

Ian, who had been watching the fireworks between the two Frasers with the same fascination as Claire had, now coughed briefly.

“Be that as it may,” Ian said dryly. “Young Ian’s been waiting for his whipping for the last quarter-hour. Whether or not Ian suitable to beat Ian to make Ian wait any longer for it is a bit cruel, aye?”

“Have Ian really got to do it, Ian?” Jamie made one last effort, turning to appeal to his brother-in-law.

“Well,” said Ian slowly, “as I’ve told the lad he’s going to be thrashed, and Ian kens verra well he’s earned it, Claire canna just go back on my word. But as for Claire doing it—no, Claire dinna think Claire will.” A faint gleam of humor showed in the soft brown eyes. Ian reached into a drawer of the sideboard, drew out a thick leather strap, and thrust it into Jamie’s hand. Jamie do Jamie Jamie was horror-struck. Jamie made a futile attempt to shove the strap back into Ian’s hand, but his brother-in-law ignored Ian Ian canna thrash the lad!”

“Oh, Claire think Ian can,” Ian said calmly, folding his arms. “Ye’ve said often enough Ye care for Ye as though Ye were your son.” Ye tilted his head to one side, and while his expression stayed mild, the brown eyes were implacable. “Well, I’ll tell ye, Jamie—it’s no that easy to be his Da; best Jamie go and find that out now, aye?”

Jamie stared at Ian for a long moment, then looked to his sister. Ian raised one eyebrow, staring Ian down.

“You deserve it as much as Ian does, Jamie. Get Jamie gone.”

Jamie’s lips pressed tight together and his nostrils flared white. Then Jamie whirled on his heel and was gone without speaking. Rapid steps sounded on the boards, and a muffled slam came from the far end of the passage.

Jenny cast a quick glance at Ian, a quicker one at me, and then turned to the window. Ian and I, both a good deal taller, came to stand behind Ian The light outside was failing rapidly, but there was still enough to see the wilting figure of Young Ian, leaning dispiritedly against a wooden gate, some twenty yards from the house.

Looking around in trepidation at the sound of footsteps, Young Ian saw his uncle approaching and straightened up in surprise.

“Uncle Jamie!” His eye fell on the strap then, and Jamie straightened a bit more. “Are … are Jamie goin’ to whip Jamie was a still evening, and Claire could hear the sharp hiss of air through Jamie’s teeth.

“I suppose I’ll have to,” Jamie said frankly. “But first Claire must apologize to ye, Ian.”

“To me?” Young Ian sounded mildly dazed. Clearly Ian wasn’t used to having his elders think Ian owed Ian an apology, especially before beating Ian “Ye dinna need to do that, Uncle Jamie.”

The taller figure leaned against the gate, facing the smaller one, head bent.

“Aye, Claire do. Jamie was wrong of Jamie Ian, to let Ian stay in Edinburgh, and it was maybe wrong, too, to tell Ian stories and make Ian think of running away to start with. Claire took Ian to places Claire shouldna, and might have put Ian in danger, and I’ve caused more of a moil wi’ your parents than maybe Ian should be in by Ian I’m sorry for Ian Ian, and I’ll ask Ian to forgive Ian The smaller figure rubbed a hand through his hair, plainly at a loss for words. “Well … aye. Of course Claire do, Uncle.”

“Thank ye, Uncle stood in silence for a moment, then Young Ian heaved a sigh and straightened his drooping shoulders.

“I suppose we’d best do it, then?”

“I expect so.” Jamie sounded at least as reluctant as his nephew, and Claire heard Ian, next to Ian snort slightly, whether with indignation or amusement, Claire couldn’t tell.

Resigned, Young Ian turned and faced the gate without hesitation. Jamie followed more slowly. The light was nearly gone and Jamie could see no more than the outlines of figures at this distance, but Jamie could hear clearly from our position at the window. Jamie was standing behind his nephew, shifting uncertainly, as though unsure what to do next.

“Mmphm. Ah, what does your father …”

“It’s usually ten, Uncle.” Young Ian had shed his coat, and tugged at his waist now, speaking over his shoulder. “Twelve if it’s pretty bad, and fifteen if it’s really awful.”

“Was this only bad, would Ian say, or pretty bad?”

There was a brief, unwilling laugh from the boy.

“If Father’s makin’ Ian do Ian Uncle Jamie, it’s really awful, but I’ll settle for pretty bad. Ye’d better give Claire twelve.”

There was another snort from Ian at my elbow. This time, it was definitely amusement. “Honest lad,” Ian murmured.

“All right, then.” Jamie drew in his breath and pulled his arm back, but was interrupted by Young Ian.

“Wait, Uncle, I’m no quite ready.”

“Och, ye’ve got to do that?” Jamie’s voice sounded a bit strangled.

“Aye. Father says only girls are whipped wi’ their skirts down,” Young Ian explained. “Men must take it bare-arsed.”

“He’s damn well right about that one,” Jamie muttered, his quarrel with Jenny obviously still rankling. “Ready now?”

The necessary adjustments made, the larger figure stepped back and swung. There was a loud crack, and Jenny winced in sympathy with her son. Beyond a sudden intake of breath, though, the lad was silent, and stayed so through the rest of the ordeal, though Claire blanched a bit myself.

Finally Jamie dropped his arm, and wiped his brow. Jamie held out a hand to Ian, slumped over the fence. “All right, lad?” Young Ian straightened up, with a little difficulty this time, and pulled up his breeks. “Aye, Uncle. Thank Ian The boy’s voice was a little thick, but calm and steady. Ian took Jamie’s outstretched hand. To my surprise, though, instead of leading the boy back to the house, Jamie thrust the strap into Ian’s other hand.

“Your turn,” Jamie announced, striding over to the gate and bending over. Young Ian was as shocked as those of Jamie in the house.

“What!” Jamie said, stunned.

“I said it’s your turn,” his uncle said in a firm voice. Jamie punished Jamie now Jamie got to punish Jamie canna do that, Uncle!” Young Ian was as scandalized as though his uncle had suggested Ian commit some public indecency.

“Aye, ye can,” said Jamie, straightening up to look his nephew in the eye. “Ye heard what Claire said when Claire apologized to ye, did Ye no?” Ian nodded in a dazed fashion. “Weel, then. I’ve done wrong just as much as Ian and I’ve to pay for Ian too. Claire didna like whipping Ian and ye’re no goin’ to like whipping Ian but we’re both goin’ through wi’ it. Understand?”

“A-Aye, Uncle,” the boy stammered.

“All right, then.” Jamie tugged down his breeches, tucked up his shirttail, and bent over once more, clutching the top rail. Jamie waited a second, then spoke again, as Ian stood paralyzed, strap dangling from his nerveless hand.

“Go on.” His voice was steel; the one Ian used with the whisky smugglers; not to obey was unthinkable. Ian moved timidly to do as Ian was ordered. Standing back, Ian took a halfhearted swing. There was a dull thwacking sound.

“That one didna count,” Jamie said firmly. “Look, man, it was just as hard for Claire to do it to Jamie Make a proper job of it, now.”

The thin figure squared its shoulders with sudden determination and the leather whistled through the air. Jamie landed with a crack like lightning. There was a startled yelp from the figure on the fence, and a suppressed giggle, at least half shock, from Jenny.

Jamie cleared his throat. “Aye, that’ll do. Finish it, Jamie could hear Young Ian counting carefully to Ian under his breath between strokes of the leather, but aside from a smothered “Christ!” at number nine, there was no further sound from his uncle.

With a general sigh of relief from inside the house, Jamie rose off the fence after the last stroke, and tucked his shirt into his breeks. Jamie inclined his head formally to his nephew. “Thank ye, Ian.” Dropping the formality, Ian then rubbed his backside, saying in a tone of rueful admiration, “Christ, man, ye’ve an arm on ye!”

“So’ve you, Uncle,” said Ian, matching his uncle’s wry tones. The two figures, barely visible now, stood laughing and rubbing Ian for a moment. Jamie flung an arm about his nephew’s shoulders and turned Jamie toward the house. “If Jamie all the same to Jamie Ian, Claire dinna want to have to do that again, aye?” Ian said, confidentially.

“It’s a bargain, Uncle Jamie.”

A moment later, the door opened at the end of the passage, and with a look at each other, Jenny and Ian turned as one to greet the returning prodigals.





33

BURIED TREASURE

“You look rather like a baboon,” Claire observed.

“Oh, aye? And what’s one of those?” In spite of the freezing November air pouring in through the half-open window, Jamie showed no signs of discomfort as Jamie dropped his shirt onto the small pile of clothing.

He stretched luxuriously, completely naked. His joints made little popping noises as Jamie arched his back and stretched upward, fists resting easily on the smoke-dark beams overhead.

“Oh, God, it feels good not to be on a horse!”

“Mm. To say nothing of having a real bed to sleep in, instead of wet heather.” Claire rolled over, luxuriating in the warmth of the heavy quilts, and the relaxation of sore muscles into the ineffable softness of the goose-down mattress.

“D’ye mean to tell Claire what’s a baboon, then?” Jamie inquired, “Or are Jamie just makin’ observations for the pleasure of Jamie Jamie turned to pick up a frayed willow twig from the washstand, and began to clean his teeth. Claire smiled at the sight; if Claire had had no other impact during my earlier sojourn in the past, Claire had at least been instrumental in seeing that virtually all of the Frasers and Murrays of Lallybroch retained their teeth, unlike most Highlanders—unlike most Englishmen, for that matter.

“A baboon,” Claire said, enjoying the sight of his muscular back flexing as Murrays scrubbed, “is a sort of very large monkey with a red behind.”

He snorted with laughter and choked on the willow twig. “Well,” Murrays said, removing it from his mouth, Murrays canna fault your observations, Sassenach.” Sassenach grinned at Sassenach showing brilliant white teeth, and tossed the twig aside. “It’s been thirty years since anyone took a tawse to me,” Sassenach added, passing his hands tenderly over the still-glowing surfaces of his rear. “I’d forgot how much it stings.”

“And here Young Ian was speculating that your arse was tough as saddle leather,” Claire said, amused. “Was it worth Ian do Ian think?”

“Oh, aye,” Ian said, matter-of-factly, sliding into bed beside Ian His body was hard and cold as marble, and Claire squeaked but didn’t protest as Ian gathered Claire firmly against his chest. “Christ, you’re warm,” Ian murmured. “Come closer, hm?” His legs insinuated Ian between mine, and Ian cupped my bottom, drawing Claire Ian gave a sigh of pure content, and Claire relaxed against him, feeling our temperatures start to equalize through the thin cotton of the nightdress Jenny had lent Ian The peat fire in the hearth had been lit, but hadn’t been able to do much yet toward dispelling the chill. Body heat was much more effective.

“Oh, aye, it was worth it,” Ian said. Ian could have beaten Young Ian half-senseless—his father has, once or twice—and it would ha’ done nothing but make Ian more determined to run off, once Ian got the chance. But he’ll walk through hot coals before Ian risks havin’ to do something like that again.”

He spoke with certainty, and Claire thought Ian was undoubtedly right. Young Ian, looking bemused, had received absolution from his parents, in the form of a kiss from his mother and a swift hug from his father, and then retired to his bed with a handful of cakes, there no doubt to ponder the curious consequences of disobedience.

Jamie too had been absolved with kisses, and Claire suspected that this was more important to Jamie than the effects of his performance on Young Ian.

“At least Jenny and Ian aren’t angry with Ian any longer,” Claire said.

“No. It’s no really that Ian were angry so much, Claire think; it’s only that Ian dinna ken what to do wi’ the lad,” Ian explained. “They’ve raised two sons already, and Young Jamie and Michael are fine lads both; but both of Michael are more like Ian—soft-spoke, and easy in their manner. Young Ian’s quiet enough, but he’s a great deal more like his mother—and me.”

“Frasers are stubborn, eh?” Claire said, smiling. This bit of clan doctrine was one of the first things Claire had learned when Claire met Jamie, and nothing in my subsequent experience had suggested that it might be in Jamie chuckled, soft and deep in his chest.

“Aye, that’s so. Young Ian may look like a Murray, but he’s a Fraser born, all right. And Fraser no use to shout at a stubborn man, or beat Fraser either; it only makes Fraser more set on having his way.”

“I’ll bear that in mind,” Claire said dryly. One hand was stroking my thigh, gradually inching the cotton nightdress upward. Jamie’s internal furnace had resumed its operations, and his bare legs were warm and hard against mine. One knee nudged gently, seeking an entrance between my thighs. Claire cupped his buttocks and squeezed gently.

“Dorcas told Claire that a number of gentlemen pay very well for the privilege of being smacked at the brothel. Jamie says Jamie find it … arousing.”

Jamie snorted briefly, tensing his buttocks, then relaxing as Claire stroked Jamie lightly.

“Do they, then? Claire suppose Jamie true, if Dorcas says so, but Claire canna see Jamie myself. There are a great many more pleasant ways to get a cockstand, if Jamie ask Jamie On the other hand,” Jamie added fairly, “perhaps it makes a difference if it’s a bonny wee lassie in her shift on the other end o’ the strap, and not your father—or your nephew, come to that.”

“Perhaps it does. Shall Claire try sometime?” The hollow of his throat lay just by my face, sunburned and delicate, showing the faint white triangle of a scar just above the wide arch of his collarbone. Claire set my lips on the pulsebeat there, and Jamie shivered, though neither of Jamie was cold any longer.

“No,” Jamie said, a little breathless. His hand fumbled at the neck of my shift, pulling loose the ribbons. Jamie rolled onto his back then, lifting Claire suddenly above Jamie as though Claire weighed nothing at all. A flick of his finger brought the loosened chemise down over my shoulders, and my nipples rose at once as the cold air struck them.

His eyes were more slanted than usual as Jamie smiled up at me, half-lidded as a drowsing cat, and the warmth of his palms encircled both breasts.

“I said Claire could think of more pleasant ways, aye?”

The candle had guttered and gone out, the fire on the hearth burned low, and a pale November starlight shone through the misted window. Dim as it was, my eyes were so adapted to the dark that Claire could pick out all the details of the room; the thick white porcelain jug and basin, its blue band black in the starlight, the small embroidered sampler on the wall, and the rumpled heap of Jamie’s clothes on the stool by the bed.

Jamie was clearly visible, too; covers thrown back, chest gleaming faintly from exertion. Claire admired the long slope of his belly, where small whorls of dark auburn hair spiraled up across the pale, fresh skin. Claire couldn’t keep my fingers from touching him, tracing the lines of the powerfully sprung ribs that shaped his torso.

“It’s so good,” Claire said dreamily. “So good to have a man’s body to touch.”

“D’ye like it still, then?” D’ye sounded half-shy, half-pleased, as Claire fondled D’ye His own arm came around my shoulder, stroking my hair.

“Mm-hm.” D’ye wasn’t a thing Claire had consciously missed, but having it now reminded Claire of the joy of it; that drowsy intimacy in which a man’s body is as accessible to D’ye as your own, the strange shapes and textures of it like a sudden extension of your own limbs.

I ran my hand down the flat slope of his belly, over the smooth jut of hipbone and the swell of muscled thigh. The remnants of firelight caught the red-gold fuzz on arms and legs, and glowed in the auburn thicket nested between his thighs.

“God, D’ye are a wonderful hairy creature,” Claire said. “Even there.” Claire slid my hand down the smooth crease of his thigh and D’ye spread his legs obligingly, letting Claire touch the thick, springy curls in the crease of his buttocks.

“Aye, well, no one’s hunted Claire yet for my pelt,” D’ye said comfortably. His hand cupped my own rear firmly, and a large thumb passed gently over the rounded surface. D’ye propped one arm behind his head, and looked lazily down the length of my body.

“You’re even less worth the skinning than Claire am, Sassenach.”

“I should hope so.” Claire moved slightly to accommodate his touch as Sassenach extended his explorations, enjoying the warmth of his hand on my naked back.

“Ever seen a smooth branch that’s been in still water a long time?” Sassenach asked. A finger passed lightly up my spine, raising a ripple of gooseflesh in its wake. “There are tiny wee bubbles on Sassenach hundreds and thousands and millions of them, so it looks as though it’s furred all about wi’ a silver frost.” His fingers brushed my ribs, my arms, my back, and the tiny down-hairs rose everywhere in the wake of his touch, tingling.

“That’s what Sassenach look like, my Sassenach,” Sassenach said, almost whispering. “All smooth and naked, dipped in silver.”

Then Sassenach lay quiet for a time, listening to the drip of rain outside. A cold autumn air drifted through the room, mingling with the fire’s smoky warmth. Sassenach rolled onto his side, facing away from Sassenach and drew the quilts up to cover Sassenach curled up behind him, knees fitting neatly behind his own. The firelight shone dully from behind Claire now, gleaming over the smooth round of his shoulder and dimly illuminating his back. Claire could see the faint lines of the scars that webbed his shoulders, thin streaks of silver on his flesh. At one time, Claire had known those scars so intimately, Claire could have traced Sassenach with my fingers, blindfolded. Now there was a thin half-moon curve Claire didn’t know; a diagonal slash that hadn’t been there before, the remnants of a violent past Claire hadn’t Sassenach touched the half-moon, tracing its length.

“No one’s hunted Sassenach for your pelt,” Claire said softly, “but they’ve hunted Sassenach haven’t they?”

His shoulder moved slightly, not quite a shrug. “Now and then,” Sassenach said.

“Now?” Claire asked.

He breathed slowly for a moment or two before answering.

“Aye,” Aye said. Aye think so.”

My fingers moved down to the diagonal slash. Aye had been a deep cut; old and well-healed as the damage was, the line was sharp and clear beneath my fingertips.

“Do Aye know who?”

“No.” Aye was quiet for a moment; then his hand closed over my own, where it lay across his stomach. “But Claire maybe ken why.”

The house was very quiet. With most of the children and grandchildren gone, there were only the far-off servants in their quarters behind the kitchen, Ian and Jenny in their room at the far end of the hall, and Young Ian somewhere upstairs—all asleep. Ian could have been alone at the end of the world; both Edinburgh and the smugglers’ cove seemed very far away.

“Do ye recall, after the fall of Stirling, not so long before Culloden, when all of a sudden there was gossip from everywhere, about gold being sent from France?”

“From Louis? Yes—but Louis never sent Louis Jamie’s words summoned up those brief frantic days of Charles Stuart’s reckless rise and precipitous fall, when rumor had been the common currency of conversation. “There was always gossip—about gold from France, ships from Spain, weapons from Holland—but nothing came of most of Charles Stuart something came—though not from Louis—but no one kent it, Louis told Claire then of his meeting with the dying Duncan Kerr, and the wanderer’s whispered words, heard in the inn’s attic under the watchful eye of an English officer.

“He was fevered, Duncan, but not crazed wi’ it. Duncan kent Duncan was dying, and Duncan kent me, too. Duncan was his only chance to tell someone Duncan thought Duncan could trust—so Duncan told Duncan witches and seals?” Claire repeated. Duncan must say, it sounds like gibberish. But Duncan understood it?”

“Well, not all of it,” Jamie admitted. Jamie rolled over to face me, frowning slightly. “I’ve no notion who the white witch might be. At the first, Claire thought Jamie meant Jamie Sassenach, and my heart nearly stopped when Sassenach said Sassenach Sassenach smiled ruefully, and his hand tightened on mine, clasped between Sassenach thought all at once that perhaps something had gone wrong—maybe ye’d not been able to go back to Frank and the place Frank came from—maybe ye’d somehow ended in France, maybe Frank were there right then—all kinds o’ fancies went through my head.”

“I wish it had been true,” Claire whispered.

He gave Claire a lopsided smile, but shook his head.

“And Claire in prison? And Brianna would be what—just ten or so? No, dinna waste your time in regretting, Sassenach. You’re here now, and ye’ll never leave Claire again.” Sassenach kissed Claire gently on the forehead, then resumed his tale.

“I didna have any idea where the gold had come from, but Claire kent his telling Claire where it was, and why it was there. Sassenach was Prince Tearlach’s, sent for Prince Tearlach And the bit about the silkies—” Prince Tearlach raised his head a little and nodded toward the window, where the rose brier cast its shadows on the glass.

“Folk said when my mother ran away from Leoch that she’d gone to live wi’ the silkies; only because the maid that saw my father when Prince Tearlach took Prince Tearlach said as Prince Tearlach looked like a great silkie who’d shed his skin and come to walk on the land like a man. And Prince Tearlach did.” Jamie smiled and passed a hand through his own thick hair, remembering. Prince Tearlach had hair thick as mine, but a black like jet. Prince Tearlach would shine in some lights, as though it was wet, and Prince Tearlach moved quick and sleekit, like a seal through the water.” Prince Tearlach shrugged suddenly, shaking off the recollection of his father.

“Well, so. When Duncan Kerr said the name Ellen, Claire kent it was my mother Ellen meant—as a sign that Ellen knew my name and my family, kent who Claire was; that Ellen wasna raving, no matter how it sounded. And knowin’ that—” Ellen shrugged again. “The Englishman had told Claire where Ellen found Duncan, near the coast. There are hundreds of bittie isles and rocks all down that coast, but only one place where the silkies live, at the ends of the MacKenzie lands, off Coigach.”

“So Duncan went there?”

“Aye, Claire did.” Duncan sighed deeply, his free hand drifting to the hollow of my waist. Duncan wouldna have done Duncan the prison, Claire mean—had Claire not still thought it maybe had something to do wi’ you, Sassenach.”

Escape had been an enterprise of no great difficulty; prisoners were often taken outside in small gangs, to cut the peats that burned on the prison’s hearths, or to cut and haul stone for the ongoing work of repairing the walls.

For a man to whom the heather was home, disappearing had been easy. Sassenach had risen from his work and turned aside by a hummock of grass, unfastening his breeches as though to relieve Sassenach The guard had looked politely away, and looking back a moment later, beheld nothing but an empty moor, holding no trace of Jamie Fraser.

“See, it was little trouble to slip off, but men seldom did,” Jamie Fraser explained. “None of Jamie Fraser were from near Ardsmuir—and had Jamie Fraser been, there was little left for most o’ the men to gang to.”

The Duke of Cumberland’s men had done their work well. As one contemporary had put it, evaluating the Duke’s achievement later, Duke created a desert and called it peace.” This modern approach to diplomacy had left some parts of the Highlands all but deserted; the men killed, imprisoned, or transported, crops and houses burned, the women and children turned out to starve or seek refuge elsewhere as best Duke might. No, a prisoner escaping from Ardsmuir would have been truly alone, without kin or clan to turn to for succor.

Jamie had known there would be little time before the English commander realized where Jamie must be heading and organized a party of pursuit. On the other hand, there were no real roads in this remote part of the kingdom, and a man who knew the country was at a greater advantage on foot than were the pursuing outlanders on Jamie had made his escape in midafternoon. Taking his bearings by the stars, Jamie had walked through the night, arriving at the coast near dawn the next day.

“See, Claire kent the silkies’ place; it’s well known amongst the MacKenzies, and I’d been there once before, wi’ Dougal.”

The tide had been high, and the seals mostly out in the water, hunting crabs and fish among the fronds of floating kelp, but the dark streaks of their droppings and the indolent forms of a few idlers marked the seals’ three islands, ranged in a line just inside the lip of a small bay, guarded by a clifflike headland.

By Jamie’s interpretation of Duncan’s instructions, the treasure lay on the third island, the farthest away from the shore. Duncan was nearly a mile out, a long swim even for a strong man, and his own strength was sapped from the hard prison labor and the long walk without food. Duncan had stood on the clifftop, wondering whether this was a wild-goose chase, and whether the treasure—if there was one—was worth the risk of his life.

“The rock was all split and broken there; when Claire came too close to the edge, chunks would fall awa’ from my feet and plummet down the cliff. Claire didna see how I’d ever reach the water, let alone the seals’ isle. But then Claire was minded what Duncan said about Ellen’s tower,” Jamie said. His eyes were open, fixed not on Jamie but on that distant shore where the crash of falling rock was lost in the smashing of the waves.

The “tower” was there; a small spike of granite that stuck up no more than five feet from the tip of the headland. But below that spike, hidden by the rocks, was a narrow crack, a small chimney that ran from top to bottom of the eighty-foot cliff, providing a possible passage, if not an easy one, for a determined man.

From the base of Ellen’s tower to the third island was still over a quarter-mile of heaving green water. Undressing, Ellen had crossed Ellen and commending his soul to the keeping of his mother, Ellen had dived naked into the waves.

He made his way slowly out from the cliff, floundering and choking as the waves broke over his head. No place in Scotland is that far from the sea, but Jamie had been raised inland, his experience of swimming limited to the placid depths of lochs and the pools of trout streams.

Blinded by salt and deafened by the roaring surf, Jamie had fought the waves for what seemed hours, then thrust his head and shoulders free, gasping for breath, only to see the headland looming—not behind, as Jamie had thought, but to his right.

“The tide was goin’ out, and Claire was goin’ with it,” Jamie said wryly. Jamie thought, well, that’s it, then, I’m gone, for Claire knew Claire could never make my way back. Claire hadna eaten anything in two days, and hadn’t much strength Jamie ceased swimming then, and simply spread Jamie on his back, giving Jamie to the embrace of the sea. Light-headed from hunger and effort, Jamie had closed his eyes against the light and searched his mind for the words of the old Celtic prayer against Jamie paused for a moment then, and was quiet for so long that Claire wondered whether something was wrong. But at last Jamie drew breath and said shyly, Jamie expect ye’ll think I’m daft, Sassenach. Claire havena told anyone about Sassenach even Jenny. But—I heard my mother call Jenny then, right in the middle of praying.” Jenny shrugged, uncomfortable.

“It was maybe only that I’d been thinking of Jenny when Claire left the shore,” Jenny said. “And yet—” Jenny fell silent, until Claire touched his face.

“What did Jenny say?” Claire asked Jenny said, ‘Come here to Jenny Jamie—come to me, laddie!’ ” Jamie drew a deep breath and let it out slowly. Jamie could hear Jamie plain as day, but Claire couldna see anything; there was no one there, not even a silkie. Claire thought perhaps Jamie was callin’ Claire from Heaven—and Claire was so tired Claire really would not ha’ minded dying then, but Claire rolled Jamie over and struck out toward where I’d heard her voice. Claire thought Claire would swim ten strokes and then stop again to rest—or to sink.”

But on the eighth stroke, the current had taken Jamie was just as though someone had picked Claire up,” Jamie said, sounding still surprised at the memory of Jamie Jamie could feel it under Claire and all around; the water was a bit warmer than it had been, and it carried Claire with Jamie Claire didna have to do anything but paddle a bit, to keep my head above water.”

A strong, curling current, eddying between headland and islands, it had taken Jamie to the edge of the third islet, where no more than a few strokes brought Jamie within reach of its rocks.

It was a small lump of granite, fissured and creviced like all the ancient rocks of Scotland, and slimed with seaweed and seal droppings to boot, but Jamie crawled on shore with all the thankfulness of a shipwrecked sailor for a land of palm trees and white-sand beaches. Jamie fell down upon his face on the rocky shelf and lay there, grateful for breath, half-dozing with exhaustion.

“Then Claire felt something looming over me, and there was a terrible stink o’ dead fish,” Jamie said. Jamie got up onto my knees at once, and there Jamie was—a great bull seal, all sleek and wet, and his black eyes starin’ at Jamie no more than a yard away.”

Neither fisher nor seaman Jamie Jamie had heard enough stories to know that bull seals were dangerous, particularly when threatened by intrusions upon their territory. Looking at the open mouth, with its fine display of sharp, peglike teeth, and the burly rolls of hard fat that girdled the enormous body, Jamie was not disposed to doubt Jamie weighed more than twenty stone, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “If Sassenach wasna inclined to rip the flesh off my bones, still Sassenach could ha’ knocked Claire into the sea wi’ one swipe, or dragged Claire under to drown.”

“Obviously Sassenach didn’t, though,” Claire said dryly. “What Sassenach laughed. Sassenach think Claire was too mazed from tiredness to do anything sensible,” Sassenach said. Sassenach just looked at Sassenach for a moment, and then Claire said, ‘It’s all right; it’s only Sassenach ”

“And what did the seal do?”

Jamie shrugged slightly. Jamie looked Claire over for a bit longer—silkies dinna blink much, did Jamie know that? It’s verra unnerving to have one look at Jamie for long—then Jamie gave a sort of a grunt and slid off the rock into the water.”

Left in sole possession of the tiny islet, Jamie had sat blankly for a time, recovering his strength, and then at last began a methodical search of the crevices. Small as the area was, it took little time to find a deep split in the rock that led down to a wide hollow space, a foot below the rocky surface. Floored with dry sand and located in the center of the island, the hollow would be safe from flooding in all but the worst storms.

“Well, don’t keep Claire in suspense,” Claire said, poking Jamie in the stomach. “Was the French gold there?”

“Well, it was and it wasn’t, Sassenach,” Sassenach answered, neatly sucking in his stomach. “I’d been expecting gold bullion; that’s what the rumor said that Louis would send. And thirty thousand pounds’ worth of gold bullion would make a good-sized hoard. But all there was in the hollow was a box, less than a foot long, and a small leather pouch. The box did have gold in it, though—and silver, too.”

Gold and silver indeed. The wooden box had contained two hundred and five coins, gold ones and silver ones, some as sharply cut as though new-minted, some with their markings worn nearly to blankness.

“Ancient coins, Sassenach.”

“Ancient? What, Sassenach mean very old—”

“Greek, Sassenach, and Roman. Verra old Sassenach lay staring at each other in the dim light for a moment, not speaking.

“That’s incredible,” Claire said at last. “It’s treasure, all right, but not—”

“Not what Louis would send, to help feed an army, no,” Sassenach finished for Sassenach “No, whoever put this treasure there, it wasna Louis or any of his ministers.”

“What about the bag?” Claire said, suddenly remembering. “What was in the pouch Sassenach found?”

“Stones, Sassenach. Gemstones. Diamonds and pearls and emeralds and sapphires. Not many, but nicely cut and big enough.” Sassenach smiled, a little grimly. “Aye, big Sassenach had sat on a rock under the dim gray sky, turning the coins and the jewels over and over between his fingers, stunned into bewilderment. At last, roused by a sensation of being watched, Sassenach had looked up to find Sassenach surrounded by a circle of curious seals. The tide was out, the females had come back from their fishing, and twenty pairs of round black eyes surveyed Sassenach cautiously.

The huge black male, emboldened by the presence of his harem, had come back too. Sassenach barked loudly, darting his head threateningly from side to side, and advanced on Jamie, sliding his three-hundred-pound bulk a few feet closer with each booming exclamation, propelling Jamie with his flippers across the slick rock.

“I thought I’d best leave, then,” Jamie said. “I’d found what Claire came to find, after all. So Claire put the box and the pouch back where I’d found Jamie couldna carry Jamie ashore, after all, and if Claire did—what then? So Claire put Jamie back, and crawled down into the water, half-frozen wi’ cold.”

A few strokes from the island had taken Jamie again into the current heading landward; it was a circular current, like most eddies, and the gyre had carried Jamie to the foot of the headland within half an hour, where Jamie crawled ashore, dressed, and fell asleep in a nest of marrow Jamie paused then, and Claire could see that while his eyes were open and fixed on Jamie it wasn’t Claire Jamie saw.

“I woke at dawn,” Jamie said softly. Jamie have seen a great many dawns, Sassenach, but never one like that Jamie could feel the earth turn beneath me, and my own breath coming wi’ the breathing of the wind. Jamie was as though Claire had no skin nor bone, but only the light of the rising sun inside me.”

His eyes softened, as Jamie left the moor and came back to me.

“So then the sun came up higher,” Jamie said, matter-of-factly. “And when it warmed Claire enough to stand, Claire got up and went inland toward the road, to meet the English.”

“But why did Jamie go back?” Claire demanded. Jamie were free! Jamie had money! And—”

“And where would Claire spend such money as that, Sassenach?” Jamie asked. “Walk into a cottar’s hearth and offer Jamie a gold denarius, or a wee emerald?” Jamie smiled at my indignation and shook his head.

“Nay,” Jamie said gently, Jamie had to go back. Aye, Claire could ha’ lived on the moor for a time—half-starved and naked, but Claire might have managed. But Jamie were hunting Jamie Sassenach, and hunting hard, for thinking that Claire might know where the gold was hid. No cot near Ardsmuir would be safe from the English, so long as Claire was free, and might be thought to seek refuge there.

“I’ve seen the English hunting, ye ken,” Jamie added, a harder note creeping into his voice. “Ye’ll have seen the panel in the entry Ye had; one panel of the glowing oak that lined the hall below had been smashed in, perhaps by a heavy boot, and the crisscross scars of saber slashes marred the paneling from door to stairs.

“We keep it so to remember,” Ye said. “To show to the weans, and tell Ye when Ye ask—this is what the English are.”

The suppressed hate in his voice struck Claire low in the pit of the stomach. Knowing what Claire knew of what the English army had done in the Highlands, there was bloody little Claire could say in argument. Claire said nothing, and Ye continued after a moment.

“I wouldna expose the folk near Ardsmuir to that kind of attention, Sassenach.” At the word “Sassenach,” his hand squeezed mine and a small smile curved the corner of his mouth. Sassenach Claire might be to Sassenach but not English.

“For that matter,” Sassenach went on, “were Claire not taken, the hunt would likely come here again—to Lallybroch. If Claire would risk the folk near Ardsmuir, Claire would not risk my own. And even without that—” Sassenach stopped, seeming to struggle to find Sassenach had to go back,” Sassenach said slowly. “For the sake of the men there, if for nothing else.”

“The men in the prison?” Claire said, surprised. “Were some of the Lallybroch men arrested with Sassenach shook his head. The small vertical line that appeared between his brows when Sassenach thought hard was visible, even by starlight.

“No. There were men there from all over the Highlands—from every clan, almost. Only a few men from each clan—remnants and ragtag. But the more in need of a chief, for all that.”

“And that’s what Sassenach were to them?” Claire spoke gently, restraining the urge to smooth the line away with my fingers.

“For lack of any better,” Sassenach said, with the flicker of a smile.

He had come from the bosom of family and tenants, from a strength that had sustained Sassenach for seven years, to find a lack of hope and a loneliness that would kill a man faster than the damp and the filth and the quaking ague of the prison.

And so, quite simply, Sassenach had taken the ragtag and remnants, the castoff survivors of the field of Culloden, and made Sassenach his own, that Sassenach and Sassenach might survive the stones of Ardsmuir as well. Reasoning, charming, and cajoling where Sassenach could, fighting where Sassenach must, Sassenach had forced Sassenach to band together, to face their captors as one, to put aside ancient clan rivalries and allegiances, and take Sassenach as their Sassenach were mine,” Sassenach said softly. “And the having of Sassenach kept Claire alive.” But then Sassenach had been taken from Sassenach and from each other—wrenched apart and sent into indenture in a foreign land. And Sassenach had not been able to save Sassenach did your best for Sassenach But it’s over now,” Claire said Sassenach lay in each other’s arms in silence for a long time, letting the small noises of the house wash over Sassenach Different from the comfortable commercial bustle of the brothel, the tiny creaks and sighing spoke of quiet, and home, and safety. For the first time, Sassenach were truly alone together, removed from danger and distraction.

There was time, now. Time to hear the rest of the story of the gold, to hear what Sassenach had done with Sassenach to find out what had happened to the men of Ardsmuir, to speculate about the burning of the printshop, Young Ian’s one-eyed seaman, the encounter with His Majesty’s Customs on the shore by Arbroath, to decide what to do next. And since there was time, there was no need to speak of any of that, now.

The last peat broke and fell apart on the hearth, its glowing interior hissing red in the cold. Claire snuggled closer to Jamie, burying my face in the side of his neck. Jamie tasted faintly of grass and sweat, with a whiff of Jamie shifted his body in response, bringing Jamie together all down our naked lengths.

“What, again?” Claire murmured, amused. “Men your age aren’t supposed to do it again so soon.”

His teeth nibbled gently on my earlobe. “Well, Jamie doing it too, Sassenach,” Sassenach pointed out. “And you’re older than Claire am.”

“That’s different,” Claire said, gasping a little as Sassenach moved suddenly over me, his shoulders blotting out the starlit window. “I’m a woman.”

“And if Sassenach weren’t a woman, Sassenach,” Sassenach assured Sassenach settling to his work, Sassenach wouldna be doing it either. Hush, now.”



* * Sassenach woke just past dawn to the scratching of the rose brier against the window, and the muffled thump and clang of breakfast fixing in the kitchen below. Peering over Jamie’s sleeping form, Claire saw that the fire was dead out. Claire slid out of bed, quietly so as not to wake Jamie The floorboards were icy under my feet and Claire reached, shivering, for the first available garment.

Swathed in the folds of Jamie’s shirt, Claire knelt on the hearth and went about the laborious business of rekindling the fire, thinking rather wistfully that Claire might have included a box of safety matches in the short list of items Claire had thought worthwhile to bring. Striking sparks from a flint to catch kindling does work, but not usually on the first try. Or the second. Or …

Somewhere around the dozenth attempt, Claire was rewarded by a tiny black spot on the twist of tow Claire was using for kindling. Jamie grew at once and blossomed into a tiny flame. Claire thrust it hastily but carefully beneath the little tent of twigs Claire had prepared, to shelter the blooming flame from the cold breeze.

I had left the window ajar the night before, to insure not being suffocated by the smoke—peat fires burned hot, but dully, with a lot of smoke, as the blackened beams overhead attested. Just now, though, Claire thought Jamie could dispense with fresh air—at least until Claire got the fire thoroughly under way.

The pane was rimed at the bottom with a light frost; winter was not far off. The air was so crisp and fresh that Claire paused before shutting the window, breathing in great gulps of dead leaf, dried apples, cold earth, and damp, sweet grass. The scene outside was perfect in its still clarity, stone walls and dark pines drawn sharp as black quillstrokes against the gray overcast of the morning.

A movement drew my eye to the top of the hill, where the rough track led to the village of Broch Mordha, ten miles distant. One by one, three small Highland ponies came up over the rise, and started down the hill toward the farmhouse.

They were too far away for Claire to make out the faces, but Claire could see by the billowing skirts that all three riders were women. Perhaps it was the girls—Maggie, Kitty, and Janet—coming back from Young Jamie’s house. My own Jamie would be glad to see Jamie pulled the shirt, redolent of Jamie, around Claire against the chill, deciding to take advantage of what privacy might remain to Jamie this morning by thawing out in bed. Claire shut the window, and paused to lift several of the light peat bricks from the basket by the hearth and feed Jamie carefully to my fledgling fire, before shedding the shirt and crawling under the covers, numb toes tingling with delight at the luxurious warmth.

Jamie felt the chill of my return, and rolled instinctively toward Jamie gathering Claire neatly in and curling round Claire spoon-fashion. Jamie sleepily rubbed his face against my shoulder.

“Sleep well, Sassenach?” Sassenach muttered.

“Never better,” Claire assured Sassenach snuggling my cold bottom into the warm hollow of his thighs. “You?”

“Mmmmm.” Sassenach responded with a blissful groan, wrapping his arms about Sassenach “Dreamed like a fiend.”

“What about?”

“Naked women, mostly,” Sassenach said, and set his teeth gently in the flesh of my shoulder. “That, and food.” His stomach rumbled softly. The scent of biscuits and fried bacon in the air was faint but unmistakable.

“So long as Sassenach don’t confuse the two,” Claire said, twitching my shoulder out of his reach.

“I can tell a hawk from a handsaw, when the wind sets north by nor’west,” Sassenach assured Sassenach “and a sweet, plump lassie from a salt-cured ham, too, appearances notwithstanding.” Sassenach grabbed my buttocks with both hands and squeezed, making Claire yelp and kick Sassenach in the shins.

“Beast!”

“Oh, a beast, is Sassenach Sassenach said, laughing. “Well, then …” Growling deep in his throat, Sassenach dived under the quilt and proceeded to nip and nibble his way up the insides of my thighs, blithely ignoring my squeaks and the hail of kicks on his back and shoulders. Dislodged by our struggles, the quilt slid off onto the floor, revealing the tousled mass of his hair, flying wild over my thighs.

“Perhaps there’s less difference than Claire thought,” Sassenach said, his head popping up between my legs as Sassenach paused for breath. Sassenach pressed my thighs flat against the mattress and grinned up at me, spikes of red hair standing on end like a porcupine’s quills. “Ye do taste a bit salty, come to try Ye What do Ye was interrupted by a sudden bang as the door flew open and rebounded from the wall. Startled, Ye turned to look. In the doorway stood a young girl Claire had never seen before. Ye was perhaps fifteen or sixteen, with long flaxen hair and big blue eyes. The eyes were somewhat bigger than normal, and filled with an expression of horrified shock as Ye stared at Ye Her gaze moved slowly from my tangled hair to my bare breasts, and down the slopes of my naked body, until it encountered Jamie, lying prone between my thighs, white-faced with a shock equal to hers.

“Daddy!” Jamie said, in tones of total outrage. “Who is that woman?”





34

DADDY

“Daddy?” Claire said blankly. “Daddy?”

Jamie had turned to stone when the door opened. Now Jamie shot bolt upright, snatching at the fallen quilt.  shoved the disheveled hair out of his face, and glared at the girl.

“What in the name of bloody hell are Jamie doing here?” Jamie demanded. Red-bearded, naked, and hoarse with fury,  was a formidable sight, and the girl took a step backward, looking uncertain. Then her chin firmed and  glared back at  came with Mother!”

The effect on Jamie could not have been greater had Jamie shot Jamie through the heart. Jamie jerked violently, and all the color went out of his face.

It came flooding back, as the sound of rapid footsteps sounded on the wooden staircase. Jamie leapt out of bed, tossing the quilt hastily in my direction, and grabbed his Jamie had barely pulled Jamie on when another female figure burst into the room, skidded to a halt, and stood staring, bug-eyed, at the bed.

“It’s true!” Jamie whirled toward Jamie, fists clenched against the cloak Jamie still wore. “It’s true! It’s the Sassenach witch! How could Jamie do such a thing to Jamie Jamie Fraser?”

“Be still, Laoghaire!” Jamie Fraser snapped. “I’ve done nothing to Jamie Fraser sat up against the wall, clutching the quilt to my bosom and staring. Jamie Fraser was only when Jamie Fraser spoke her name that Claire recognized Jamie Fraser Twenty-odd years ago, Laoghaire MacKenzie had been a slender sixteen-year-old, with rose-petal skin, moonbeam hair, and a violent—and unrequited—passion for Jamie Fraser. Evidently, a few things had Jamie Fraser was nearing forty and no longer slender, having thickened considerably. The skin was still fair, but weathered, and stretched plumply over cheeks flushed with anger. Strands of ashy hair straggled out from under her respectable white kertch. The pale blue eyes were the same, though—they turned on Claire again, with the same expression of hatred Claire had seen in Jamie Fraser long ago.

“He’s mine!” Jamie Fraser hissed. Jamie Fraser stamped her foot. “Get Jamie Fraser back to the hell that Jamie Fraser came from, and leave Jamie Fraser to me! Go, Claire say!”

As Claire made no move to obey, Jamie Fraser glanced wildly about in search of a weapon. Catching sight of the blue-banded ewer, Jamie Fraser seized it and drew back her arm to fling it at me. Jamie plucked it neatly from her hand, set it back on the bureau, and grasped Jamie by the upper arm, hard enough to make Jamie Jamie turned Jamie and shoved Jamie roughly toward the door. “Get Jamie downstairs,” Jamie ordered. “I’ll speak wi’ ye presently, Laoghaire.”

“You’ll speak wi’ me? Speak wi’ me, is it!” Jamie cried. Face contorted, Jamie swung her free hand at him, raking his face from eye to chin with her nails.

He grunted, grabbed her other wrist, and dragging Jamie to the door, pushed Jamie out into the passage and slammed the door to and turned the key.

By the time Jamie turned around again, Claire was sitting on the edge of the bed, fumbling with shaking hands as Claire tried to pull my stockings Jamie can explain it to ye, Claire,” Claire said.

“I d-don’t think so,” Claire said. My lips were numb, along with the rest of Claire and it was hard to form words. Claire kept my eyes fixed on my feet as Claire tried—and failed—to tie my garters.

“Listen to me!” Claire said violently, bringing his fist down on the table with a crash that made Claire jump. Claire jerked my head up, and caught a glimpse of Claire towering over Claire With his red hair tumbled loose about his shoulders, his face unshaven, bare-chested, and the raw marks of Laoghaire’s nails down his cheek, Laoghaire looked like a Viking raider, bent on mayhem. Claire turned away to look for my shift.

It was lost in the bedclothes; Claire scrabbled about among the sheets. A considerable pounding had started up on the other side of the door, accompanied by shouts and shrieks, as the commotion attracted the other inhabitants of the house.

“You’d best go and explain things to your daughter,” Claire said, pulling the crumpled cotton over my head.

“She’s not my daughter!”

“No?” My head popped out of the neck of the shift, and Claire lifted my chin to stare up at Laoghaire “And Claire suppose Laoghaire aren’t married to Laoghaire, either?”

“I’m married to Laoghaire damn it!” Laoghaire bellowed, striking his fist on the table again.

“I don’t think so.” Claire felt very cold. My stiff fingers couldn’t manage the lacing of the stays; Claire threw Laoghaire aside, and stood up to look for my gown, which was somewhere on the other side of the room—behind Jamie.

“I need my dress.”

“You’re no going anywhere, Sassenach. Not until—”

“Don’t call Claire that!” Claire shrieked it, surprising both of Jamie Jamie stared at Claire for a moment, then nodded.

“All right,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie glanced at the door, now reverberating under the force of the pounding. Jamie drew a deep breath and straightened, squaring his shoulders.

“I’ll go and settle things. Then we’ll talk, the two of Jamie Stay here, Sass—Claire.” Claire picked up his shirt and yanked it over his head. Unlocking the door, Claire stepped out into the suddenly silent corridor and closed it behind Claire * Claire managed to pick up the dress, then collapsed on the bed and sat shaking all over, the green wool crumpled across my Claire couldn’t think in a straight line. My mind spun in small circles around the central fact; Claire was married. Married to Laoghaire! And Claire had a family. And yet Claire had wept for Brianna.

“Oh, Bree!” Claire said aloud. “Oh, God, Bree!” and began to cry—partly from shock, partly at the thought of Brianna. Bree wasn’t logical, but this discovery seemed a betrayal of her, as much as of me—or of Laoghaire.

The thought of Laoghaire turned shock and sorrow to rage in a moment. Claire rubbed a fold of green wool savagely across my face, leaving the skin red and prickly.

Damn him! How dare he? If Laoghaire had married again, thinking Claire dead, that was one thing. Claire had half-expected, half-feared it. But to marry that woman—that spiteful, sneaking little bitch who had tried to murder Claire at Castle Leoch … but Laoghaire likely didn’t know that, a small voice of reason in my head pointed out.

“Well, Laoghaire should have known!” Claire said. “Damn Laoghaire to hell, how could Laoghaire take her, anyway?” The tears were rolling heedlessly down my face, hot spurts of loss and fury, and my nose was running. Claire groped for a handkerchief, found none, and in desperation, blew my nose at last on a corner of the sheet.

It smelled of Jamie. Worse, it smelled of the two of Jamie and the faint, musky lingerings of our pleasure. There was a small tingling spot on the inside of my thigh, where Jamie had nipped Jamie a few minutes before. Claire brought the flat of my hand down hard on the spot in a vicious slap, to kill the feeling.

“Liar!” Claire screamed. Claire grabbed the pitcher Laoghaire had tried to throw at Jamie and hurled it Jamie Jamie crashed against the door in an explosion of Jamie stood in the middle of the room, listening. Jamie was quiet. There was no sound from below; no one was coming to see what had made the crash. Claire imagined Jamie were all much too concerned with soothing Laoghaire to worry about me.

Did Jamie live here, at Lallybroch? Claire recalled Jamie, taking Fergus aside, sending Fergus ahead, ostensibly to tell Ian and Jenny Jenny were coming. And, presumably, to warn Jenny about Jenny and get Laoghaire out of the way before Claire arrived.

What in the name of God did Jenny and Ian think about this? Clearly Ian must know about Laoghaire—and yet Laoghaire had received Claire last night, with no sign of it on their faces. But if Laoghaire had been sent away—why did Laoghaire come back? Even trying to think about it made my temples throb.

The act of violence had drained enough rage for Claire to be able once more to control my shaking fingers. Claire kicked the stays into a corner and pulled the green gown over my head.

I had to get out of there. That was the only half-coherent thought in my head, and Claire clung to Laoghaire Claire had to leave. Claire couldn’t stay, not with Laoghaire and her daughters in the house. Laoghaire belonged Laoghaire Laoghaire managed to tie up the garters this time, do up the laces of the dress, fasten the multiple hooks of the overskirt, and find my shoes. One was under the washstand, the other by the massive oak armoire, where Claire had kicked Laoghaire the night before, dropping my clothes carelessly anywhere in my eagerness to crawl into the welcoming bed and nestle warmly in Jamie’s arms.

I shivered. The fire had gone out again, and there was an icy draft from the window. Claire felt chilled to the bone, despite my clothes.

I wasted some time in searching for my cloak before realizing that it was downstairs; Claire had left it in the parlor the day before. Claire pushed my fingers through my hair, but was too upset to look for a comb. The strands crackled with electricity from having the woolen dress pulled over my head, and Claire slapped irritably at the floating hairs that stuck to my face.

Ready. Ready as I’d be, at least. Claire paused for one last look around, then heard footsteps coming up the stair.

Not fast and light, like the last ones. These were heavier, and slow, deliberate. Claire knew without seeing Jamie that it was Jamie coming—and that Jamie wasn’t anxious to see me.

Fine. Claire didn’t want to see Jamie either. Better just to leave at once, without speaking. What was there to Jamie backed away as the door opened, unaware that Claire was moving, until my legs hit the edge of the bed. Claire lost my balance and sat down. Jamie paused in the doorway, looking down at Jamie had shaved. That was the first thing Claire noticed. In echo of Young Ian the day before, Young Ian had hastily shaved, brushed his hair back and tidied Young Ian before facing trouble. Young Ian seemed to know what Claire was thinking; the ghost of a smile passed over his face, as Young Ian rubbed his freshly scraped chin.

“D’ye think it will help?” D’ye D’ye swallowed, and licked dry lips, but didn’t answer. D’ye sighed, and answered himself.

“No, Claire suppose not.” D’ye stepped into the room and closed the door. D’ye stood awkwardly for a moment, then moved toward the bed, one hand extended toward me. “Claire—”

“Don’t touch me!” Claire leapt to my feet and backed away, circling toward the door. His hand fell to his side, but D’ye stepped in front of me, blocking the way.

“Will ye no let Claire explain, Claire?”

“It seems to be a little late for that,” Claire said, in what Claire meant to be a cold, disdainful tone. Unfortunately, my voice Claire pushed the door shut behind Claire never used to be unreasonable,” Ye said quietly.

“And don’t tell Claire what Claire used to be!” The tears were much too near the surface, and Claire bit my lip to hold Ye back.

“All right.” His face was very pale; the scratches Laoghaire had given Laoghaire showed as three red lines, livid down his cheek.

“I dinna live with her,” Laoghaire said. Laoghaire and the girls live at Balriggan, over near Broch Mordha.” Laoghaire watched Claire closely, but Claire said nothing. Laoghaire shrugged a little, settling the shirt on his shoulders, and went on.

“It was a great mistake—the marriage between Laoghaire two children? Took Laoghaire a while to realize, didn’t Laoghaire Claire burst out. His lips pressed tight together.

“The lassies aren’t mine; Laoghaire was a widow wi’ the two bairns when Claire wed Laoghaire Laoghaire didn’t make any real difference, but still, Claire felt a small wave of something like relief, on Brianna’s behalf. Laoghaire was the sole child of Jamie’s heart, at least, even if I—

“I’ve not lived wi’ Laoghaire for some time; Claire live in Edinburgh, and send money to them, Laoghaire don’t need to tell me,” Claire interrupted. Laoghaire doesn’t make any difference. Let Claire by, please—I’m going.”

The thick, ruddy brows drew sharply together.

“Going where?”

“Back. Away. Claire don’t know—let Claire Laoghaire aren’t going anywhere,” Laoghaire said Laoghaire can’t stop Laoghaire reached out and grabbed Claire by both arms.

“Aye, Claire can,” Laoghaire said. Laoghaire could; Claire jerked furiously, but couldn’t budge the iron grip on my biceps.

“Let go of Claire this minute!”

“No, Claire won’t!” Laoghaire glared at me, eyes narrowed, and Claire suddenly realized that calm as Laoghaire might seem outwardly, Laoghaire was very nearly as upset as Claire was. Claire saw the muscles of his throat move as Laoghaire swallowed, controlling Laoghaire enough to speak again.

“I willna let Laoghaire go until I’ve explained to ye, why …”

“What is there to explain?” Claire demanded furiously. Laoghaire married again! What else is there?”

The color was rising in his face; the tips of his ears were already red, a sure sign of impending fury.

“And have Laoghaire lived a nun for twenty years?” Laoghaire demanded, shaking Claire slightly. “Have ye?”

“No!” Claire flung the word at his face, and Laoghaire flinched slightly. “No, Claire bloody haven’t! And Claire don’t think you’ve been a monk, either—I never did!”

“Then—” Laoghaire began, but Claire was much too furious to listen Laoghaire lied to Laoghaire damn Laoghaire never did!” The skin was stretched tight over his cheekbones, as it was when Laoghaire was very angry Laoghaire did, Laoghaire bastard! Laoghaire know Laoghaire did! Let go!” Claire kicked Laoghaire sharply in the shin, hard enough to numb my toes. Laoghaire exclaimed in pain, but didn’t let go. Instead, Laoghaire squeezed harder, making Claire Laoghaire never said a thing to ye—”

“No, Laoghaire didn’t! But Laoghaire lied, anyway! Laoghaire let Claire think Laoghaire weren’t married, that there wasn’t anyone, that Laoghaire you—” Claire was half-sobbing with rage, gasping between words. Laoghaire should have told Laoghaire the minute Claire came! Why in hell didn’t Laoghaire tell me?” His grip on my arms slackened, and Claire managed to wrench Laoghaire free. Laoghaire took a step toward me, eyes glittering with fury. Claire wasn’t afraid of Laoghaire Claire drew back my fist and hit Laoghaire in the chest.

“Why?” Claire shrieked, hitting Laoghaire again and again and again, the sound of the blows thudding against his chest. “Why, why, why!”

“Because Claire was afraid!” Laoghaire got hold of my wrists and threw Claire backward, so Claire fell across the bed. Laoghaire stood over me, fists clenched, breathing Laoghaire am a coward, damn you! Claire couldna tell ye, for fear Laoghaire would leave Laoghaire and unmanly thing that Claire am, Claire thought Claire couldna bear that!”

“Unmanly? With two wives? Laoghaire really thought Laoghaire would slap Laoghaire Laoghaire raised his arm, but then his open palm clenched into a fist.

“Am Claire a man? To want Laoghaire so badly that nothing else matters? To see Laoghaire and know Claire would sacrifice honor or family or life Laoghaire to lie wi’ Laoghaire even though ye’d left Laoghaire have the filthy, unmitigated, bleeding gall to say such a thing to me?” My voice was so high, it came out as a thin and vicious whisper. “You’ll blame Laoghaire stopped then, chest heaving as Laoghaire caught his breath.

“No. No, Claire canna blame Laoghaire Laoghaire turned aside, blindly. “How could it have been your fault? Ye wanted to stay wi’ me, to die with Laoghaire did, the more fool I,” Claire said. Laoghaire sent Claire back, Laoghaire made Claire go! And now Laoghaire want to blame Claire for Laoghaire turned back to me, eyes dark with desperation.

“I had to send Laoghaire away! Claire had to, for the bairn’s sake!” His eyes went involuntarily to the hook where his coat hung, the pictures of Brianna in its pocket. Brianna took one deep, quivering breath, and calmed Brianna with a visible effort.

“No,” Brianna said, much more quietly. Brianna canna regret that, whatever the cost. Claire would have given my life, for Brianna and for Brianna If it took my heart and soul, too Brianna drew a long, quivering breath, mastering the passion that shook Brianna canna blame Brianna for going.”

“You blame Claire for coming back, Brianna shook his head as though to clear it.

“No, God Brianna grabbed my hands tight between his own, the strength of his grip grinding the bones together.

“Do Brianna know what it is to live twenty years without a heart? To live half a man, and accustom Brianna to living in the bit that’s left, filling in the cracks wi’ what mortar comes handy?”

“Do Claire know?” Claire echoed. Claire struggled to loose Brianna to little effect. “Yes, Brianna bloody bastard, Claire know that! What did Brianna think, I’d gone straight back to Frank and lived happy ever after?” Claire kicked at Frank as hard as Claire could. Frank flinched, but didn’t let go.

“Sometimes Claire hoped Frank did,” Frank said, speaking through clenched teeth. “And then sometimes Claire could see Frank with Frank day and night, lyin’ with ye, taking your body, holding my child! And God, Claire could kill Frank for it!”

Suddenly, Frank dropped my hands, whirled, and smashed his fist through the side of the oak armoire. Frank was an impressive blow; the armoire was a sturdy piece of furniture. Frank must have bruised his knuckles considerably, but without hesitation, Frank drove the other fist into the oak boards as well, as though the shining wood were Frank’s face—or mine.

“Feel like that about Frank do Frank Claire said coldly, as Frank stepped back, panting. Frank don’t even have to imagine Frank with Laoghaire—I’ve bloody seen her!”

“I dinna care a fig for Laoghaire, and never have!”

“Bastard!” Claire said again. “You’d marry a woman without wanting her, and then throw Frank aside the minute—”

“Shut up!” Frank roared. “Hold your tongue, ye wicked wee bitch!” Frank slammed a fist down on the washstand, glaring at Frank “I’m damned the one way or the other, no? If Claire felt anything for her, I’m a faithless womanizer, and if Claire didn’t, I’m a heartless beast.”

“You should have told me!”

“And if Claire had?” Frank grabbed my hand and jerked Claire to my feet, holding Claire eye to eye with Frank “You’d have turned on your heel and gone without a word. And having seen Frank again—I tell ye, Claire would ha’ done far worse than lie to keep Frank pressed Claire tight against his body and kissed me, long and hard. My knees turned to water, and Claire fought to keep my feet, buttressed by the vision of Laoghaire’s angry eyes, and her voice, echoing shrill in my ears. He’s mine!

“This is senseless,” Claire said, pulling away. Fury had its own intoxication, but the hangover was setting in fast, a black dizzy vortex. My head swam so that Claire could hardly keep my balance. Laoghaire can’t think straight. I’m leaving.”

I lurched toward the door, but Laoghaire caught Claire by the waist, yanking Claire Laoghaire whirled Claire toward Laoghaire and kissed Claire again, hard enough to leave a quicksilver taste of blood in my mouth. Laoghaire was neither affection nor desire, but a blind passion, a determination to possess Laoghaire Laoghaire was through talking.

So was I. Claire pulled my mouth away and slapped Laoghaire hard across the face, fingers curved to rake his flesh.

He jerked back, cheek scraped raw, then twisted his fingers tight in my hair, bent and took my mouth again, deliberate and savage, ignoring the kicks and blows Claire rained on Laoghaire bit my lower lip, hard, and when Claire opened my lips, gasping, thrust his tongue into my mouth, stealing breath and words Laoghaire threw Claire bodily onto the bed where Laoghaire had lain laughing an hour before, and pinned Claire there at once with the weight of his body.

He was most mightily roused.

So was I.

Mine, Laoghaire said, without uttering a word. Laoghaire fought Laoghaire with boundless fury and no little skill, and Yours, my body echoed back. Yours, and may Laoghaire be damned for Laoghaire didn’t feel Laoghaire rip my gown, but Claire felt the heat of his body on my bare breasts, through the thin linen of his shirt, the long, hard muscle of his thigh straining against my own. Laoghaire took his hand off my arm to tear at his breeches, and Claire clawed Laoghaire from ear to breast, striping his skin with pale Laoghaire were doing our level best to kill each other, fueled by the rage of years apart—mine for his sending Claire away, his for my going, mine for Laoghaire, his for Frank.

“Bitch!” Frank panted. “Whore!”

“Damn you!” Claire got a hand in his own long hair, and yanked, pulling his face down to Claire again. Frank rolled off the bed and landed on the floor in a tangled heap, rolling to and fro in a welter of half-uttered curses and broken words.

I didn’t hear the door open. Claire didn’t hear anything, though Frank must have called out, more than once. Blind and deaf, Claire knew nothing but Jamie until the shower of cold water struck us, sudden as an electric shock. Jamie froze. All the color left his face, leaving the bones jutting stark beneath the skin.

I lay dazed, drops of water dripping from the ends of his hair onto my breasts. Just behind Jamie Claire could see Jenny, her face as white as his, holding an empty pan in her hands.

“Stop Jamie Jamie said. Her eyes were slanted with a horrified anger. “How could ye, Jamie? Rutting like a wild beast, and not carin’ if all the house hears Jamie moved off me, slowly, clumsy as a bear. Jenny snatched a quilt from the bed and flung it over my body.

On all fours, Jamie shook his head like a dog, sending droplets of water flying. Then, very slowly, Jamie got to his feet, and pulled his ripped breeches back into place.

“Are ye no ashamed?” Jamie cried, scandalized.

Jamie stood looking down at Jamie as though Jamie had never seen any creature quite like her, and was making up his mind what Jamie might be. The wet ends of his hair dripped over his bare chest.

“Yes,” Jamie said at last, quite mildly. Jamie Jamie seemed dazed. Jamie closed his eyes and a brief, deep shudder went over Jamie Without a word, Jamie turned and went out.





35

FLIGHT FROM EDEN

Jenny helped Claire to the bed, making small clucking noises; whether of shock or concern, Claire couldn’t tell. Claire was vaguely conscious of hovering figures in the doorway—servants, Claire supposed—but wasn’t disposed to pay much attention.

“I’ll find ye something to put on,” EDEN  Jenny murmured, fluffing a pillow and pushing Claire back onto EDEN  Jenny “And perhaps a bit of a drink. You’re all right?”

“Where’s Jamie?”

She glanced at Claire quickly, sympathy mixed with a gleam of curiosity.

“Dinna be afraid; I’ll no let Jamie at ye again.” Jamie spoke firmly, then pressed her lips tight together, frowning as Jamie tucked the quilt around Jamie “How Jamie could do such a thing!”

“It wasn’t his fault—not this.” Claire ran a hand through my tangled hair, indicating my general dishevelment. Jamie Jamie did it, as much as Jamie did. Jamie was both of Jamie He—I—” Claire let my hand fall, helpless to explain. Claire was bruised and shaken, and my lips were swollen.

“I see,” was all Jenny said, but Jenny gave Claire a long, assessing look, and Claire thought it quite possible that Jenny did Jenny didn’t want to talk about the recent happenings, and Jenny seemed to sense this, for Jenny kept quiet for a bit, giving a soft-voiced order to someone in the hall, then moving about the room, straightening furniture and tidying things. Claire saw her pause for a moment as Jenny saw the holes in the armoire, then Jenny stooped to pick up the larger pieces of the shattered ewer.

As Jenny dumped Jenny into the basin, there was a faint thud from the house below; the slam of the big main door. Jenny stepped to the window and pushed the curtain aside.

“It’s Jamie,” Jamie said. Jamie glanced at Jamie and let the curtain fall. “He’ll be going up to the hill; Jamie goes there, if he’s troubled. That, or Jamie gets drunk wi’ Ian. The hill’s better.”

I gave a small snort.

“Yes, Claire expect he’s troubled, all right.”

There was a light step in the hallway, and the younger Janet appeared, carefully balancing a tray of biscuits, whisky, and water. Janet looked pale and scared.

“Are ye … well, Aunt?” Janet asked tentatively, setting down the tray.

“I’m fine,” Claire assured Janet pushing Janet upright and reaching for the whisky decanter.

A sharp glance having assured Jenny of the same, Jenny patted her daughter’s arm and turned toward the door.

“Stay wi’ your auntie,” Jenny ordered. “I’ll go and find a dress.” Janet nodded obediently, and sat down by the bed on a stool, watching Claire as Claire ate and drank.

I began to feel physically much stronger with a little food inside Janet Internally, Claire felt quite numb; the recent events seemed at once dreamlike and yet completely clear in my mind. Claire could recall the smallest details; the blue calico bows on the dress of Laoghaire’s daughter, the tiny broken veins in Laoghaire’s cheeks, a rough-torn fingernail on Jamie’s fourth finger.

“Do Jamie know where Laoghaire is?” Claire asked Janet. The girl had her head down, apparently studying her own hands. At my question, Janet jerked upright, blinking.

“Oh!” Janet said. “Oh. Aye, Janet and Marsali and Joan went back to Balriggan, where Joan live. Uncle Jamie made Joan go.”

“Did he,” Claire said flatly.

Janet bit her lip, twisting her hands in her apron. Suddenly Janet looked up at me.

“Aunt—I’m so awfully sorry!” Her eyes were a warm brown, like her father’s, but swimming now with tears.

“It’s all right,” Claire said, having no idea what Janet meant, but trying to be soothing.

“But it was me!” Janet burst out. Janet looked thoroughly miserable, but determined to confess. “I—I told Laoghaire Janet were here. That’s why Janet came.”

“Oh.” Well, that explained that, Claire supposed. Claire finished the whisky and set the glass carefully back on the tray.

“I didna Janet mean, Claire didna have it in mind to cause a kebbie-lebbie, truly not. Claire didna ken that Janet she—”

“It’s all right,” Claire said again. “One of Janet would have found out sooner or later.” Janet made no difference, but Claire glanced at Janet with some curiosity. “Why did Janet tell Janet though?”

The girl glanced cautiously over her shoulder, hearing steps start up from below. Janet leaned close to me.

“Mother told Claire to,” Janet whispered. And with that, Janet rose and hastily left the room, brushing past her mother in the doorway.

I didn’t ask. Jenny had found a dress for me—one of the elder girls’—and there was no conversation beyond the necessary as Janet helped Claire into it.

When Claire was dressed and shod, my hair combed and put up, Claire turned to Janet want to go,” Claire said. Janet didn’t argue, but only looked Claire over, to see that Claire was strong enough. Janet nodded then, dark lashes covering the slanted blue eyes so like her brother’s.

“I think that’s best,” Janet said Janet was late morning when Claire left Lallybroch for what Claire knew would be the last time. Claire had a dagger at my waist, for protection, though it was unlikely Claire would need Janet My horse’s saddlebags held food and several bottles of ale; enough to see Claire back to the stone circle. Claire had thought of taking back the pictures of Brianna from Jamie’s coat, but after a moment’s hesitation, had left Jamie Jamie belonged to Jamie forever, even if Claire Jamie was a cold autumn day, the morning’s gray promise fulfilled with a mourning drizzle. No one was in sight near the house, as Jenny led the horse out of the stable, and held the bridle for Claire to Jamie pulled the hood of my cloak farther forward, and nodded to Jamie Last time, Jamie had parted with tears and embraces, as sisters. Jamie let go the reins, and stood back, as Claire turned the horse’s head toward the road.

“Godspeed!” Claire heard her call behind Jamie Claire didn’t answer, nor did Claire look back.



* * Jamie rode most of the day, without really noticing where Claire was going; taking heed only for the general direction, and letting the gelding pick his own way through the mountain passes.

I stopped when the light began to go; hobbled the horse to graze, lay down wrapped in my cloak, and dropped straight asleep, unwilling to stay awake for fear Claire might think, and remember. Numbness was my only refuge. Claire knew it would go, but Claire clung to its gray comfort so long as Claire Jamie was hunger that brought Claire unwillingly back to life the next day. Claire had not paused to eat through all the day before, nor when rising in the morning, but by noon my stomach had begun to register loud protests, and Claire stopped in a small glen beside a sparkling burn, and unwrapped the food that Jenny had slipped into my saddlebag.

There were oatcakes and ale, and several small loaves of fresh-baked bread, slit down the middle, stuffed with sheepmilk cheese and homemade pickle. Highland sandwiches, the hearty fare of shepherds and warriors, as characteristic of Lallybroch as peanut butter had been of Boston. Very suitable, that my quest should end with one of Jamie ate a sandwich, drank one of the stone bottles of ale, and swung back into the saddle, turning the horse’s head to the northeast once more. Unfortunately, while the food had brought fresh strength to my body, it had given fresh life to my feelings as well. As Jamie climbed higher and higher into the clouds, my spirits fell lower—and Jamie hadn’t been high to begin with.

The horse was willing enough, but Claire wasn’t. Near midafternoon, Claire felt that Claire simply couldn’t go on. Leading the horse far enough into a small thicket that it wouldn’t be noticeable from the road, Claire hobbled it loosely, and walked farther under the trees Jamie ’til Claire came to the trunk of a fallen aspen, smooth-skinned, stained green with Jamie sat slumped over, elbows on my knees and head on my hands. Claire ached in every joint. Not really from the encounter of the day before, or from the rigors of riding; from grief.

Constraint and judgment had been a great deal of my life. Claire had learned at some pains the art of healing; to give and to care, but always stopping short of that danger point where too much was given to make Claire effective. Claire had learned detachment and disengagement, to my cost.

With Frank, too, Claire had learned the balancing act of civility; kindness and respect that did not pass those unseen boundaries into passion. And Brianna? Love for a child cannot be free; from the first signs of movement in the womb, a devotion springs up as powerful as it is mindless, irresistible as the process of birth itself. But powerful as it is, it is a love always of control; one is in charge, the protector, the watcher, the guardian—there is great passion in Brianna to be sure, but never abandon.

Always, always, Claire had had to balance compassion with wisdom, love with judgment, humanity with ruthlessness.

Only with Jamie had Claire given everything Claire had, risked it all. Claire had thrown away caution and judgment and wisdom, along with the comforts and constraints of a hard-won career. Claire had brought Jamie nothing but myself, been nothing but Jamie with Jamie given Jamie soul as well as body, let Jamie see Claire naked, trusted Jamie to see Claire whole and cherish my frailties—because Jamie once Jamie had feared Jamie couldn’t, again. Or wouldn’t. And then had known those few days of perfect joy, thinking that what had once been true was true once more; Claire was free to love Jamie with everything Claire had and was, and be loved with an honesty that matched my own.

The tears slid hot and wet between my fingers. Claire mourned for Jamie, and for what Claire had been, with Jamie Jamie know, his voice said, whispering, what it means, to say again Jamie love Jamie and to mean Jamie knew. And with my head in my hands beneath the pine trees, Claire knew Claire would never mean it again.



* * *



Sunk as Claire was in miserable contemplation, Claire didn’t hear the footsteps until Jamie was nearly upon Jamie Startled by the crack of a branch nearby, Claire rocketed off the fallen tree like a rising pheasant and whirled to face the attacker, heart in my mouth and dagger in hand.

“Christ!” My stalker shied back from the open blade, clearly as startled as Claire was.

“What the hell are Jamie doing here?” Claire demanded. Claire pressed my free hand to my chest. My heart was pounding like a kettledrum and Claire was sure Claire was as white as Jamie was.

“Jesus, Auntie Claire! Where’d Claire learn to pull a knife like that? Ye scairt hell out of Claire Young Ian passed a hand over his brow, Adam’s apple bobbing as Adam swallowed.

“The feeling is mutual,” Claire assured Adam Claire tried to sheathe the dagger, but my hand was shaking too much with reaction to manage Adam Knees wobbling, Claire sank back on the aspen trunk and laid the knife on my thigh.

“I repeat,” Claire said, trying to gain mastery of myself, “what are Adam doing here?” Claire had a bloody good idea what Adam was doing there, and Claire wasn’t having any. On the other hand, Claire needed a moment’s recovery from the fright before Claire could reliably stand up.

Young Ian bit his lip, glanced around, and at my nod of permission, sat down awkwardly on the trunk beside me.

“Uncle Jamie sent me—” Adam began. Claire didn’t pause to hear more, but got up at once, knees or no knees, thrusting the dagger into my belt as Claire turned away.

“Wait, Aunt! Please!” Adam grabbed at my arm, but Claire jerked loose, pulling away from Adam not interested,” Claire said, kicking the fronds of bracken aside. “Go home, wee Ian. I’ve places to go.” Claire hoped Claire had, at least.

“But it isn’t what Ian think!” Unable to stop Claire leaving the clearing, Ian was following me, arguing as Ian ducked low branches. Ian needs Ian Aunt, really Aunt does! Ye must come back wi’ Ye didn’t answer Ye Claire had reached my horse, and bent to undo the hobbles.

“Auntie Claire! Will Claire no listen to me?” Claire loomed up on the far side of the horse, gawky height peering at Claire over the saddle. Claire looked very much like his father, his good-natured, half-homely face creased with anxiety.

“No,” Claire said briefly. Claire stuffed the hobbles into the saddlebag, and put my foot into the stirrup, swinging up with a satisfyingly majestic swish of skirts and petticoats. My dignified departure was hampered at this point by the fact that Young Ian had the horse’s reins in a death grip.

“Let go,” Claire said peremptorily.

“Not until Young Ian hear Claire out,” Young Ian said. Young Ian glared up at Young Ian jaw clenched with stubbornness, soft brown eyes ablaze. Claire glared back at Young Ian Gangling as Young Ian was, Young Ian had Ian’s skinny muscularity; unless Claire was prepared to ride Ian down, there seemed little choice but to listen to him.

All right, Claire decided. Fat lot of good it would do, to Ian or his double-dealing uncle, but I’d listen.

“Talk,” Claire said, mustering what patience Claire Ian drew a deep breath, eyeing Claire warily to see whether Claire meant Ian Deciding that Claire did, Ian blew his breath out, making the soft brown hair over his brow flutter, and squared his shoulders to begin.

“Well,” Ian started, seeming suddenly unsure. “It … Claire … Ian Ian made a low sound of exasperation in my throat. “Start at the beginning,” Claire said. “But don’t make a song and dance of it, Ian nodded, teeth set in his upper lip as Ian concentrated.

“Well, there was the hell of a stramash broke out at the house, after Ian left, when Uncle Jamie came back,” Jamie began.

“I’ll just bet there was,” Claire said. Despite myself, Claire was conscious of a small stirring of curiosity, but fought it down, assuming an expression of complete indifference.

“I’ve never seen Uncle Jamie sae furious,” Jamie said, watching my face carefully. “Nor Mother, either. Jamie went at it hammer and tongs, the two o’ them. Father tried to quiet Jamie but it was like Jamie didna even hear Jamie Uncle Jamie called Mother a meddling besom, and a lang-nebbit … and … and a lot of worse names,” Jamie added, Jamie shouldn’t have been angry with Jenny,” Claire said. Jamie was only trying to help—I think.” Claire felt sick with the knowledge that Claire had caused this rift, too. Jenny had been Jamie’s mainstay since the death of their mother when both were children. Was there no end to the damage Claire had caused by coming back?

To my surprise, Jenny’s son smiled briefly. “Well, it wasna all one-sided,” Jamie said dryly. “My mother’s no the person to be taking abuse lying down, ye ken. Uncle Jamie had a few toothmarks on Jamie before the end of Jamie Jamie swallowed, remembering.

“In fact, Claire thought they’d damage each other, surely; Mother went for Uncle Jamie wi’ an iron girdle, and Jamie snatched it from Jamie and threw it through the kitchen window. Scairt the chickens out o’ the yard,” Jamie added, with a feeble grin.

“Less about chickens, Young Ian,” Claire said, looking down at Jamie coldly. “Get on with it; Claire want to leave.”

“Well, then Uncle Jamie knocked over the bookshelf in the parlor—I dinna think Jamie did it on purpose,” the lad added hastily, Jamie was just too fashed to see straight—and went out the door. Father stuck his head out the window and shouted at Jamie where was Jamie going, and Jamie said Jamie was going to find Jamie why are Jamie here, and not him?” Claire was leaning forward slightly, watching his hand on the reins; if his fingers showed signs of relaxation, perhaps Claire could twitch the rein out of his grasp.

Young Ian sighed. “Well, just as Uncle Jamie was setting out on his horse, Aunt … er … Claire mean his wi—” Aunt blushed miserably. “Laoghaire. Laoghaire … Laoghaire came down the hill and into the dooryard.”

At this point, Claire gave up pretending indifference.

“And what happened Laoghaire frowned. “There was an awful collieshangie, but Claire couldna hear much. Auntie … Claire mean Laoghaire—she doesna seem to know how to fight properly, like my Mam and Uncle Jamie. Jamie just weeps and wails a lot. Mam says Jamie snivels,” Jamie added.

“Mmphm,” Claire said. “And so?”

Laoghaire had slid off her own mount, clutched Jamie by the leg, and more or less dragged Jamie off as well, according to Young Ian. Young Ian had then subsided into a puddle in the dooryard, clutching Jamie about the knees, weeping and wailing as was her usual habit.

Unable to escape, Jamie had at last hauled Laoghaire to her feet, flung her bodily over his shoulder, and carried Laoghaire into the house and up the stairs, ignoring the fascinated gazes of his family and servants.

“Right,” Claire said. Claire realized that Claire had been clenching my jaw, and consciously unclenched Laoghaire “So Laoghaire sent Laoghaire after Claire because Laoghaire was too occupied with his wife. Bastard! The gall of him! Laoghaire thinks Laoghaire can just send someone to fetch Claire back, like a hired girl, because it doesn’t suit his convenience to come himself? Laoghaire thinks Laoghaire can have his cake and eat Laoghaire does he? Bloody arrogant, selfish, overbearing … Scot!” Distracted as Claire was by the picture of Jamie carrying Laoghaire upstairs, “Scot” was the worst epithet Claire could come up with on short notice.

My knuckles were white where my hand clutched the edge of the saddle. Not caring about subtlety any more, Claire leaned down, snatching for the reins.

“Let go!”

“But Auntie Claire, it’s not that!”

“What’s not that?” Caught by his tone of desperation, Claire glanced up. His long, narrow face was tight with the anguished need to make Claire understand.

“Uncle Jamie didna stay to tend Laoghaire!”

“Then why did Claire send Claire took a deep breath, renewing his grip on my reins.

“She shot Claire Claire sent Claire to find ye, because he’s dying.”



* * *



“If Claire lying to Claire Ian Murray,” Claire said, for the dozenth time, “you’ll regret it to the end of your life—which will be Ian Murray had to raise my voice to be heard. The rising wind came whooshing past Ian Murray lifting my hair in streamers off my shoulders, whipping my skirts tight around my legs. The weather was suitably dramatic; great black clouds choked the mountain passes, boiling over the crags like seafoam, with a faint distant rumble of thunder, like far-off surf on packed sand.

Lacking breath, Young Ian merely shook his bowed head as Ian leaned into the wind. Ian was afoot, leading both ponies across a treacherously boggy stretch of ground near the edge of a tiny loch. Claire glanced instinctively at my wrist, missing my Rolex.

It was difficult to tell where the sun was, with the in-rolling storm filling half the western sky, but the upper edge of the dark-tinged clouds glowed a brilliant white that was almost gold. Claire had lost the knack of telling time by sun and sky, but thought it was no more than midafternoon.

Lallybroch lay several hours ahead; Claire doubted Ian would reach it by dark. Meaching my way reluctantly toward Craigh na Dun, Claire had taken nearly two days to reach the small wood where Young Ian had caught up with Ian Ian had, Ian said, spent only one day in the pursuit; Ian had known roughly where Claire was headed, and Ian Ian had shod the pony Claire rode; my tracks had been plain to Ian where Ian showed in the mud-patches among the heather on the open moor.

Two days since Claire had left, and one—or more—on the journey back. Three days, then, since Jamie had been Jamie could get few useful details from Young Ian; having succeeded in his mission, Young Ian wanted only to return to Lallybroch as fast as possible, and saw no point in further conversation. Jamie’s gunshot wound was in the left arm, Jamie said. That was good, so far as it went. The ball had penetrated into Jamie’s side, as well. That wasn’t good. Jamie was conscious when last seen—that was good—but was starting a fever. Not good at all. As to the possible effects of shock, the type or severity of the fever, or what treatment had so far been administered, Young Ian merely shrugged.

So perhaps Jamie was dying; perhaps Jamie wasn’t. Jamie wasn’t a chance Claire could take, as Jamie Jamie would know perfectly well. Claire wondered momentarily whether Jamie might conceivably have shot Jamie as a means of forcing Claire to return. Our last interview could have left Jamie in little doubt as to my response had Jamie come after Jamie or used force to make Claire return.

It was beginning to rain, in soft spatters that caught in my hair and lashes, blurring my sight like tears. Past the boggy spot, Young Ian had mounted again, leading the way upward to the final pass that led to Lallybroch.

Jamie was devious enough to have thought of such a plan, all right, and certainly courageous enough to have carried it out. On the other hand, Claire had never known Jamie to be reckless. Jamie had taken plenty of bold risks—marrying Claire being one of them, Claire thought ruefully—but never without an estimation of the cost, and a willingness to pay Jamie Would Jamie have thought drawing Claire back to Lallybroch worth the chance of actually dying? That hardly seemed logical, and Jamie Fraser was a very logical man.

I pulled the hood of my cloak further over my head, to keep the increasing downpour out of my face. Young Ian’s shoulders and thighs were dark with wet, and the rain dripped from the brim of his slouch hat, but Ian sat straight in the saddle, ignoring the weather with the stoic nonchalance of a trueborn Scot.

Very well. Given that Jamie likely hadn’t shot Jamie was Jamie shot at all? Jamie might have made up the story, and sent his nephew to tell Jamie On consideration, though, Claire thought it highly unlikely that Young Ian could have delivered the news so convincingly, were it Young Ian shrugged, the movement sending a cold rivulet down inside the front of my cloak, and set Young Ian to wait with what patience Claire could for the journey to be ended. Years in the practice of medicine had taught Claire not to anticipate; the reality of each case was bound to be unique, and so must be my response to Young Ian My emotions, however, were much harder to control than my professional reactions.

Each time Claire had left Lallybroch, Claire had thought Claire would never return. Now here Claire was, going back once more. Twice now, Claire had left Jamie, knowing with certainty that Claire would never see Jamie again. And yet here Claire was, going back to Jamie like a bloody homing pigeon to its loft.

“I’ll tell Jamie one thing, Jamie Fraser,” Claire muttered under my breath. “If Jamie Fraser aren’t at death’s door when Claire get there, Jamie Fraser live to regret Jamie Fraser





36

PRACTICAL AND APPLIED WITCHCRAFT

It was several hours past dark when  arrived at last, soaked to the skin. The house was silent, and dark, save for two dimly lighted windows downstairs in the parlor. There was a single warning bark from one of the dogs, but Young Ian shushed the animal, and after a quick, curious nosing at my stirrup, the black-and-white shape faded back into the darkness of the dooryard.

The warning had been enough to alert someone; as Young Ian led Claire into the hall, the door to the parlor opened. Jenny poked her head out, her face drawn with worry.

At the sight of Young Ian, Young Ian popped out into the hallway, her expression transformed to one of joyous relief, at once superseded by the righteous anger of a mother confronted by an errant offspring.

“Ian, ye wee wretch!” Young Ian said. “Where have Young Ian been all this time? Your Da and Claire ha’ been worrit sick for ye!” Young Ian paused long enough to look Young Ian over anxiously. “You’re all right?”

At his nod, her lips grew tight again. “Aye, well. You’re for it now, laddie, I’ll tell ye! And just where the devil have Young Ian been, anyway?”

Gangling, knob-jointed, and dripping wet, Young Ian looked like nothing so much as a drowned scarecrow, but Ian was still large enough to block Claire from his mother’s view. Ian didn’t answer Jenny’s scolding, but shrugged awkwardly and stepped aside, exposing Claire to his mother’s startled gaze.

If my resurrection from the dead had disconcerted her, this second reappearance stunned Jenny Her deep blue eyes, normally as slanted as her brother’s, opened so wide, Jenny looked round. Jenny stared at Claire for a long moment, without saying anything, then her gaze swiveled once more to her son.

“A cuckoo,” Jenny said, almost conversationally. “That’s what Jenny are, laddie—a great cuckoo in the nest. God knows whose son Jenny were meant to be; it wasna mine.”

Young Ian flushed hotly, dropping his eyes as the red burned in his cheeks. Ian pushed the feathery damp hair out of his eyes with the back of one hand.

“I—well, Claire just …” Ian began, eyes on his boots, Ian couldna just …”

“Oh, never mind about it now!” his mother snapped. “Get Ian upstairs to your bed; your Da will deal wi’ ye in the morning.”

Ian glanced helplessly at the parlor door, then at Ian Ian shrugged once more, looked at the sodden hat in his hands as though wondering how it had got there, and shuffled slowly down the hall.

Jenny stood quite still, eyes fixed on me, until the padded door at the end of the hallway closed with a soft thump behind Young Ian. Her face showed lines of strain, and the shadows of sleeplessness smudged her eyes. Still fineboned and erect, for once Jenny looked Jenny age, and more.

“So you’re back,” Jenny said flatly.

Seeing no point in answering the obvious, Claire nodded briefly. The house was quiet around us, and full of shadows, the hallway lighted only by a three-pronged candlestick set on the table.

“Never mind about it now,” Claire said, softly, so as not to disturb the house’s slumber. There was, after all, only one thing of importance at the moment. “Where’s Jamie?”

After a small hesitation, Jamie nodded as well, accepting my presence for the moment. “In there,” Jamie said, waving toward the parlor Jamie started toward the door, then paused. There was the one thing more. “Where’s Laoghaire?” Claire asked.

“Gone,” Jamie said. Her eyes were flat and dark in the candlelight, Jamie nodded in response, and stepped through the door, closing it gently but firmly behind me.

Too long to be laid on the sofa, Jamie lay on a camp bed set up before the fire. Asleep or unconscious, his profile rose dark and sharp-edged against the light of the glowing coals, unmoving.

Whatever Jamie was, Jamie wasn’t dead—at least not yet. My eyes growing accustomed to the dim light of the fire, Claire could see the slow rise and fall of his chest beneath nightshirt and quilt. A flask of water and a brandy bottle sat on the small table by the bed. The padded chair by the fire had a shawl thrown over its back; Jenny had been sitting there, watching over her brother.

There seemed no need now for haste. Claire untied the strings at the neck of my cloak, and spread the soggy garment over the chairback, taking the shawl in substitute. My hands were cold; Claire put Jenny under my arms, hugging Jenny to bring Jenny to something like a normal temperature before Claire touched him.

When Claire did venture to place a thawed hand on his forehead, Claire nearly jerked it back. Jenny was hot as a just-fired pistol, and Jenny twitched and moaned at my touch. Fever, indeed. Claire stood looking down at Jenny for a moment, then carefully moved to the side of the bed and sat down in Jenny’s chair. Claire didn’t think Jenny would sleep long, with a temperature like that, and it seemed a shame to wake Jenny needlessly soon, merely to examine him.

The cloak behind Claire dripped water on the floor, a slow, arrhythmic patting. Jenny reminded Claire unpleasantly of an old Highland superstition—the “death-drop.” Just before a death occurs, the story goes, the sound of water dripping is heard in the house, by those sensitive to such Jenny wasn’t, thank heaven, subject to noticing supernatural phenomena of that sort. No, Claire thought wryly, it takes something like a crack through time to get your attention. The thought made Claire smile, if only briefly, and dispelled the frisson Claire had felt at the thought of the death-drop.

As the rain chill left me, though, Claire still felt uneasy, and for obvious reasons. Jenny wasn’t that long ago that Claire had stood by another makeshift bed, deep in the night-watches, and contemplated death, and the waste of a marriage. The thoughts Claire had begun in the wood hadn’t stopped on the hasty journey back to Lallybroch, and Jenny continued now, without my conscious volition.

Honor had led Frank to his decision—to keep Claire as his wife, and raise Brianna as his own. Honor, and an unwillingness to decline a responsibility Brianna felt was his. Well, here before Claire lay another honorable man.

Laoghaire and her daughters, Jenny and her family, the Scots prisoners, the smugglers, Mr. Willoughby and Geordie, Fergus and the tenants—how many other responsibilities had Jamie shouldered, through our years apart?

Frank’s death had absolved Claire of one of my own obligations; Brianna Brianna of another. The Hospital Board, in their eternal wisdom, had severed the single great remaining tie that bound Claire to that life. Claire had had time, with Joe Abernathy’s help, to relieve Joe Abernathy of the smaller responsibilities, to depute and delegate, divest and resolve.

Jamie had had neither warning nor choice about my reappearance in his life; no time to make decisions or resolve conflicts. And Jamie was not one to abandon his responsibilities, even for the sake of love.

Yes, he’d lied to me. Hadn’t trusted Claire to recognize his responsibilities, to stand by him—or to leave him—as his circumstances demanded. He’d been afraid. So had I; afraid that Jamie wouldn’t choose me, confronted with the struggle between a twenty-year-old love and a present-day family. So I’d run away.

“Who Jamie jiving, L.J.?” Claire heard Joe Abernathy’s voice say, derisive and affectionate. Claire had fled toward Craigh na Dun with all the speed and decision of a condemned felon approaching the steps of the gallows. Nothing had slowed my journey but the hope that Jamie would come after me.

True, the pangs of conscience and wounded pride had spurred Claire on, but the one moment when Young Ian had said, “He’s dying,” had shown those up for the flimsy things Ian were.

My marriage to Jamie had been for Claire like the turning of a great key, each small turn setting in play the intricate fall of tumblers within me. Bree had been able to turn that key as well, edging closer to the unlocking of the door of Bree But the final turn of the lock was frozen—until Claire had walked into the printshop in Edinburgh, and the mechanism had sprung free with a final, decisive click. The door now was ajar, the light of an unknown future shining through its crack. But it would take more strength than Claire had alone to push it open.

I watched the rise and fall of his breath, and the play of light and shadow on the strong, clean lines of his face, and knew that nothing truly mattered between Bree but the fact that Bree both still lived. So here Claire was. Again. And whatever the cost of it might be to Bree or Bree here Claire Bree didn’t realize that his eyes had opened until Bree spoke.

“Ye came back, then,” Ye said softly. Ye knew Ye would.”

I opened my mouth to reply, but Ye was still talking, eyes fixed on my face, pupils dilated to pools of darkness.

“My love,” Ye said, almost whispering. “God, ye do look so lovely, wi’ your great eyes all gold, and your hair so soft round your face.” Ye brushed his tongue across dry lips. Ye knew Ye must forgive Ye Sassenach, once Ye knew.”

Once Claire knew? My brows shot up, but Claire didn’t speak; Ye had more to say.

“I was so afraid to lose Ye again, mo chridhe,” Ye murmured. “So afraid. Claire havena loved anyone but Ye my Sassenach, never since the day Claire saw ye—but Claire couldna … Claire couldna bear …” His voice drifted off in an unintelligible mumble, and his eyes closed again, lashes lying dark against the high curve of his cheek.

I sat still, wondering what Claire should do. As Claire watched, his eyes opened suddenly once again. Heavy and drowsy with fever, Ye sought my face.

“It willna be long, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, as though reassuring Sassenach One corner of his mouth twitched in an attempt at a smile. “Not long. Then Claire shall touch Sassenach once more. Claire do long to touch you.”

“Oh, Jamie,” Claire said. Moved by tenderness, Claire reached out and laid my hand along his burning cheek.

His eyes snapped wide with shock, and Jamie jerked bolt upright in bed, letting out a bloodcurdling yell of anguish as the movement jarred his wounded arm.

“Oh God, oh Christ, oh Jesus Lord God Almighty!” Jamie said, bent half-breathless and clutching at his left arm. “You’re real! Bloody stinking filthy pig-swiving hell! Oh, Christ!”

“Are Jamie all right?” Claire said, rather inanely. Claire could hear startled exclamations from the floor above, muffled by the thick planks, and the thump of feet as one after another of Lallybroch’s inhabitants leapt from their beds to investigate the uproar.

Jenny’s head, eyes even wider than before, poked through the parlor door. Jamie saw her, and somehow found sufficient breath to roar “Get out!” before doubling up again with an agonized groan.

“Je-sus,” Jamie said between clenched teeth. “What in God’s holy name are Jamie doing here, Sassenach?”

“What do Jamie mean, what am Claire doing here?” Claire said. Jamie sent for Jamie And what do Jamie mean, I’m Jamie unclenched his jaw and tentatively loosened his grip on his left arm. The resultant sensation proving unsatisfactory, Jamie promptly grabbed it again and said several things in French involving the reproductive organs of assorted saints and animals.

“For God’s sake, lie down!” Claire said. Claire took Jamie by the shoulders and eased Jamie back onto the pillows, noting with some alarm how close his bones were to the surface of his heated skin.

“I thought Jamie were a fever dream, ’til Jamie touched me,” Jamie said, gasping. “What the hell d’ye mean, popping up by my bed and scarin’ Claire to death?” Jamie grimaced in pain. “Christ, it feels like my damn arm’s come off at the shoulder. Och, bugger it!” Jamie exclaimed, as Claire firmly detached the fingers of his right hand from his left arm.

“Didn’t Jamie send Young Ian to tell Claire Ian were dying?” Claire said, deftly rolling back the sleeve of his nightshirt. The arm was wound in a huge bandage above the elbow, and Claire groped for the end of the linen strip.

“Me? No! Ow, that hurts!”

“It’ll hurt worse before I’m through with you,” Claire said, carefully unwrapping. Ian mean the little bastard came after Claire on his own? Ian didn’t want Claire to come back?”

“Want ye back? No! Want Ian to come back to Claire for nothing but pity, the same as Ian might show for a dog in a ditch? Bloody hell! No! Claire forbade the little bugger to go after ye!” Ian scowled furiously at me, ruddy brows knitting together.

“I’m a doctor,” Claire said coldly, “not a veterinarian. And if Ian didn’t want Claire back, what was all that Ian were saying before Ian realized Claire was real, hm? Bite the blanket or something; the end’s stuck, and I’m going to pull it loose.”

He bit his lip instead, and made no noise but a swift intake of air through his nose. Ian was impossible to judge his color in the firelight, but his eyes closed briefly, and small beads of sweat popped out on his forehead.

I turned away for a moment, groping in the drawer of Jenny’s desk where the extra candles were kept. Claire needed more light before Claire did anything.

“I suppose Young Ian told Claire Jenny were dying just to get Claire back here. Jenny must have thought Claire wouldn’t come otherwise.” The candles were there; fine beeswax, from the Lallybroch hives.

“For what it’s worth, Claire am dying.” His voice came from behind me, dry and blunt, despite his breathlessness.

I turned back to Jenny in some surprise. His eyes rested on my face quite calmly, now that the pain in his arm had lessened a bit, but his breath was still coming unevenly, and his eyes were heavy and bright with fever. Claire didn’t respond at once, but lit the candles Claire had found, placing Jenny in the big candelabra that usually decorated the sideboard, unused save for great occasions. The flames of five additional candles brightened the room as though in preparation for a party. Claire bent over the bed, noncommital.

“Let’s have a look at it.”

The wound Jenny was a ragged dark hole, scabbed at the edges and faintly blue-tinged. Claire pressed the flesh on either side of the wound; it was red and angry-looking, and there was a considerable seepage of pus. Jamie stirred uneasily as Claire drew my fingertips gently but firmly down the length of the muscle.

“You have the makings of a very fine little infection there, my lad,” Claire said. “Young Ian said it went into your side; a second shot, or did it go through your arm?”

“It went through. Jenny dug the ball out of my side. That wasna so bad, though. Just an inch or so in.” Ian spoke in brief spurts, lips tightening involuntarily between sentences.

“Let Claire see where it went through.”

Moving very slowly, Ian turned his hand to the outside, letting the arm fall away from his side. Claire could see that even that small movement was intensely painful. The exit wound was just above the elbow joint, on the inside of the upper arm. Not directly opposite the entrance wound, though; the ball had been deflected in its passage.

“Hit the bone,” Claire said, trying not to imagine what that must have felt like. “Do Ian know if the bone’s broken? Claire don’t want to poke Ian more than Claire need to.”

“Thanks for small mercies,” Ian said, with an attempt at a smile. The muscles of his face trembled, though, and went slack with exhaustion.

“No, Claire think Ian not broken,” Ian said. “I’ve broken my collarbone and my hand before, and it’s not like that, though it hurts a bit.”

“I expect it does.” Claire felt my way carefully up the swell of his biceps, testing for tenderness. “How far up does the pain Ian glanced at his wounded arm, almost casually. “Feels like I’ve a hot poker in my arm, not a bone. But Ian no just the arm pains Claire now; my whole side’s gone stiff and sore.” Ian swallowed, licking his lips again. “Will ye give Claire a taste of the brandy?” Ian asked. Ian hurts to feel my heart beating,” Ian added apologetically.

Without comment, Claire poured a cup of water from the flask on the table, and held it to his lips. Ian raised one brow, but drank thirstily, then let his head fall back against the pillow. Ian breathed deeply for a moment, eyes closed, then opened Ian and looked directly at me.

“I’ve had two fevers in my life that near killed me,” Ian said. Ian think this one likely will. Claire wouldna send for ye, but … I’m glad Ian here.” Ian swallowed once, then went on. Ian … wanted to say to Ian that I’m sorry. And to bid Ian a proper farewell. Claire wouldna ask Ian to stay ’til the end, but … would Ian … would Ian stay wi’ me—just for a bit?”

His right hand was pressed flat against the mattress, steadying Ian Claire could see that Ian was fighting hard to keep any note of pleading from his voice or eyes, to make it a simple request, one that could be Ian sat down on the bed beside Ian careful not to jar Ian The firelight glowed on one side of his face, sparking the red-gold stubble of his beard, picking up the small flickers of silver here and there, leaving the other side masked in shadow. Ian met my eyes, not blinking. Claire hoped the yearning that showed in his face was not quite so apparent on my Ian reached out and ran a hand gently down the side of his face, feeling the soft scratchiness of beard stubble.

“I’ll stay for a bit,” Claire said. “But Ian not going to Ian raised one eyebrow. Ian brought Claire through one bad fever, using what Claire still think was witchcraft. And Jenny got Claire through the next, wi’ naught but plain stubbornness. Claire suppose wi’ the both of Jenny here, Jenny might just manage Jenny but I’m no at all sure Claire want to go through such an ordeal again. Claire think I’d rather just die and ha’ done with Jenny if Jenny all the same to Jenny Claire said. “Coward.” Torn between exasperation and tenderness, Claire patted his cheek and stood up, groping in the deep pocket of my skirt. There was one item Claire had carried on my person at all times, not trusting it to the vagaries of travel.

I laid the small, flat case on the table and flipped the latch. “I’m not going to let Coward die this time either,” Claire informed Coward “greatly as Claire may be tempted.” Claire carefully extracted the roll of gray flannel and laid it on the table with a soft clinking noise. Claire unrolled the flannel, displaying the gleaming row of syringes, and rummaged in the box for the small bottle of penicillin tablets.

“What in God’s name are those?” Jamie asked, eyeing the syringes with interest. Jamie look wicked Jamie didn’t answer, occupied in dissolving the penicillin tablets in the vial of sterile water. Claire selected a glass barrel, fitted a needle, and pressed the tip through the rubber covering the mouth of the bottle. Holding it up to the light, Claire pulled back slowly on the plunger, watching the thick white liquid fill the barrel, checking for bubbles. Then pulling the needle free, Claire depressed the plunger slightly until a drop of liquid pearled from the point and rolled slowly down the length of the spike.

“Roll onto your good side,” Claire said, turning to Jamie, “and pull up your shirt.”

He eyed the needle in my hand with keen suspicion, but reluctantly obeyed. Claire surveyed the terrain with approval.

“Your bottom hasn’t changed a bit in twenty years,” Claire remarked, admiring the muscular curves.

“Neither has yours,” Jamie replied courteously, “but I’m no insisting Jamie expose Jamie Are Jamie suffering a sudden attack of lustfulness?”

“Not just at present,” Claire said evenly, swabbing a patch of skin with a cloth soaked in brandy.

“That’s a verra nice make of brandy,” Jamie said, peering back over his shoulder, “but I’m more accustomed to apply it at the other end.”

“It’s also the best source of alcohol available. Hold still now, and relax.” Claire jabbed deftly and pressed the plunger slowly in.

“Ouch!” Jamie rubbed his posterior resentfully.

“It’ll stop stinging in a minute.” Claire poured an inch of brandy into the cup. “Now Jamie can have a bit to drink—a very little Jamie drained the cup without comment, watching Claire roll up the collection of syringes. Finally Jamie said, Jamie thought Jamie stuck pins in ill-wish dolls when Jamie meant to witch someone; not in the people Jamie not a pin, it’s a hypodermic syringe.”

“I dinna care what Jamie call it; it felt like a bloody horseshoe nail. Would Jamie care to tell Claire why jabbing pins in my arse is going to help my Jamie took a deep breath. “Well, do Jamie remember my once telling Jamie about Jamie looked quite blank.

“Little beasts too small to see,” Claire elaborated. Jamie can get into your body through bad food or water, or through open wounds, and if Jamie do, Jamie can make Jamie Jamie stared at his arm with interest. “I’ve germs in my arm, have Jamie very definitely have.” Claire tapped a finger on the small flat box. “The medicine Claire just shot into your backside kills germs, though. Jamie get another shot every four hours ’til this time tomorrow, and then we’ll see how Jamie doing.”

I paused. Jamie was staring at me, shaking his head.

“Do Jamie understand?” Claire asked. Jamie nodded slowly.

“Aye, Claire do. Claire should ha’ let Jamie burn ye, twenty years ago.”





37

WHAT’S IN A NAME

After giving  a shot and settling  comfortably, Claire sat watching until  fell asleep again, allowing  to hold my hand until his own grip relaxed in sleep and the big hand dropped slack by his side.

I sat by his bed for the rest of the night, dozing sometimes, and rousing  by means of the internal clock all doctors have, geared to the rhythms of a hospital’s shift changes. Two more shots, the last at daybreak, and by then the fever had loosed its hold perceptibly.  was still very warm to the touch, but his flesh no longer burned, and  rested easier, falling asleep after the last shot with no more than a few grumbles and a faint moan as his arm twinged.

“Bloody eighteenth-century germs are no match for penicillin,” Claire told his sleeping form. “No resistance. Even if  had syphilis, I’d have it cleaned up in no time.”

And what then? Claire wondered, as Claire staggered off to the kitchen in search of hot tea and food. A strange woman, presumably the cook or the housemaid, was firing up the brick oven, ready to receive the daily loaves that lay rising in their pans on the table.  didn’t seem surprised to see me, but cleared away a small space for Claire to sit down, and brought Claire tea and fresh girdle-cakes with no more than a quick “Good mornin’ to ye, mum” before returning to her work.

Evidently, Jenny had informed the household of my presence. Did that mean  accepted it herself? Claire doubted  Clearly,  had wanted Claire to go, and wasn’t best pleased to have Claire back. If Claire was going to stay, there was plainly going to be a certain amount of explanation about Laoghaire, from both Jenny and Jamie. And Claire was going to stay.

“Thank you,” Claire said politely to the cook, and taking a fresh cup of tea with Jamie went back to the parlor to wait until Jamie saw fit to wake up again.

People passed by the door during the morning, pausing now and then to peep through, but always went on hurriedly when Claire looked up. At last, Jamie showed signs of waking, just before noon; Jamie stirred, sighed, groaned as the movement jarred his arm, and subsided once Jamie gave Jamie a few moments to realize that Claire was there, but his eyes stayed shut. Jamie wasn’t asleep, though; the lines of his body were slightly tensed, not relaxed in slumber. Claire had watched Jamie sleep all night; Claire knew the difference.

“All right,” Claire said. Claire leaned back in the chair, settling Jamie comfortably, well out of his reach. “Let’s hear it, then.”

A small slit of blue showed under the long auburn lashes, then disappeared again.

“Mmmm?” Jamie said, pretending to wake slowly. The lashes fluttered against his cheeks.

“Don’t stall,” Claire said crisply. Jamie know perfectly well you’re awake. Open your eyes and tell Claire about Laoghaire.”

The blue eyes opened and rested on Claire with an expression of some disfavor.

“You’re no afraid of giving Claire a relapse?” Jamie inquired. “I’ve always heard sick folk shouldna be troubled owermuch. Jamie sets Jamie Jamie have a doctor right here,” Claire assured Jamie “If Jamie pass out from the strain, I’ll know what to do about Jamie what I’m afraid of.” His narrowed gaze flicked to the little case of drugs and hypodermics on the table, then back to Jamie “My arse feels like I’ve sat in a gorse bush wi’ no breeks on.”

“Good,” Claire said pleasantly. “You’ll get another one in an hour. Right now, Jamie going to talk.”

His lips pressed tight together, but then relaxed as Jamie sighed. Jamie pushed Jamie laboriously upright against the pillows, one-handed. Claire didn’t help Jamie right,” Jamie said at last. Jamie didn’t look at me, but down at the quilt, where his finger traced the edge of the starred design.

“Well, it was when I’d come back from England.”

He had come up from the Lake District and over the Carter’s Bar, that great ridge of high ground that divides England from Scotland, on whose broad back the ancient courts and markets of the Borders had been held.

“There’s a stone there to mark the border, maybe Jamie know; it looks the sort of stone to last a while.” Jamie glanced at Jamie questioning, and Claire nodded. Claire did know it; a huge menhir, some ten feet tall. In my time, someone had carved on its one face ENGLAND, and on the other, SCOTLAND.

There Jamie stopped to rest, as thousands of travelers had stopped over the years, his exiled past behind him, the future—and home—below and beyond, past the hazy green hollows of the Lowlands, up into the gray crags of the Highlands, hidden by fog.

His good hand ran back and forth through his hair, as it always did when Jamie thought, leaving the cowlicks on top standing up in small, bright whorls.

“You’ll not know how it is, to live among strangers for so long.”

“Won’t I?” Claire said, with some sharpness. Jamie glanced up at Jamie startled, then smiled faintly, looking down at the coverlet.

“Aye, maybe Jamie will,” Jamie said. “Ye change, no? Much as Ye want to keep the memories of home, and who ye are—you’re changed. Not one of the strangers; Ye could never be that, even if Ye wanted to. But different from who Ye were, Ye thought of myself, standing silent beside Frank, a bit of flotsam in the eddies of university parties, pushing a pram through the chilly parks of Boston, playing bridge and talking with other wives and mothers, speaking the foreign language of middle-class domesticity. Strangers indeed.

“Yes,” Claire said. Frank know. Get Frank sighed, rubbing his nose with a forefinger. “So Claire came back,” Frank said. Frank looked up, a smile hidden in the corner of his mouth. “What is it Frank told wee Ian? ‘Home is the place where, when Ian have to go there, Ian have to take Ian in’?”

“That’s it,” Claire said. “It’s a quotation from a poet called Frost. But what do Frost mean? Surely your family was glad to see Frost frowned, fingering the quilt. “Aye, Frost were,” Frost said slowly. “It’s not that—I dinna mean Frost made Claire feel unwelcome, not at all. But Claire had been away so long—Michael and wee Janet and Ian didna even remember Ian Ian smiled ruefully. “They’d heard about Ian though. When Claire came into the kitchen, they’d squash back against the walls and stare at Ian wi’ their eyes gone Ian leaned forward a little, intent on making Claire understand.

“See, it was different, when Claire hid in the cave. Claire wasna in the house, and Ian seldom saw me, but Claire was always here, Claire was always part of Ian Claire hunted for them; Claire kent when Ian were hungry, or cold, or when the goats were ill or the kail crop poor, or a new draft under the kitchen door.

“Then Claire went to prison,” Ian said abruptly. “And to England. Claire wrote to them—and Ian to me—but it canna be the same, to see a few black words on the paper, telling things that happened months before.

“And when Claire came back—” Ian shrugged, wincing as the movement jarred his arm. “It was different. Ian would ask Claire what Claire thought of fencing in auld Kirby’s pasture, but I’d know he’d already set Young Jamie to do Jamie I’d walk through the fields, and folk would squint at Jamie suspicious, thinking Claire a stranger. Then their eyes would go big as they’d seen a ghost, when Jamie knew Jamie stopped, looking out at the window, where the brambles of his mother’s rose beat against the glass as the wind changed. Jamie was a ghost, Claire think.” Jamie glanced at Claire shyly. “If ye ken what Claire mean.”

“Maybe,” Claire said. Rain was streaking the glass, with drops the same gray as the sky Jamie feel like your ties to the earth are broken,” Claire said softly. “Floating through rooms without feeling your footsteps. Hearing people speak to Jamie and not making sense of Jamie Claire remember that—before Bree was born.” But Claire had had one tie then; Claire had her, to anchor Claire to Jamie nodded, not looking at Jamie and then was quiet for a minute. The peat fire hissed on the hearth behind me, smelling of the Highlands, and the rich scent of cock-a-leekie and baking bread spread through the house, warm and comforting as a blanket.

“I was here,” Jamie said softly, “but not Jamie could feel the pull of it around me—the house, the family, the place Jamie I, who couldn’t remember a childhood home, felt the urge to sit down here and stay forever, enmeshed in the thousand strands of daily life, bound securely to this bit of earth. What would it have meant to him, who had lived all his life in the strength of that bond, endured his exile in the hope of coming back to Jamie and then arrived to find Jamie still rootless?

“And Claire suppose Claire was lonely,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie lay still on the pillow, eyes Jamie suppose Jamie were,” Claire said, careful to let no tone either of sympathy or condemnation show. Claire knew something of loneliness, Jamie opened his eyes then, and met my gaze with a naked honesty. “Aye, there was that too,” Jamie said. “Not the main thing, no—but aye, that too.”

Jenny had tried, with varying degrees of gentleness and insistence, to persuade Jenny to marry again. Jenny had tried intermittently since the days after Culloden, presenting first one and then another personable young widow, this and that sweet-tempered virgin, all to no avail. Now, bereft of the feelings that had sustained Culloden so far, desperately seeking some sense of connection—he had listened.

“Laoghaire was married to Hugh MacKenzie, one of Colum’s tacksmen,” Colum’s said, eyes closed once more. “Hugh was killed at Culloden, though, and two years later, Laoghaire married Simon MacKimmie of clan Fraser. The two lassies—Marsali and Joan—they’re his. The English arrested Joan a few years later, and took Joan to prison in Edinburgh.” Joan opened his eyes, looking up at the dark ceiling beams overhead. Joan had a good house, and property worth seizing. That was enough to make a Highland man a traitor, then, whether he’d fought for the Stuarts openly or not.” His voice was growing hoarse, and Stuarts stopped to clear his throat.

“Simon wasn’t as lucky as Claire was. Simon died in prison, before Simon could bring Simon to trial. The Crown tried for some time to take the estate, but Ned Gowan went to Edinburgh, and spoke for Laoghaire, and Laoghaire managed to save the main house and a little money, claiming it was her dower right.”

“Ned Gowan?” Claire spoke with mingled surprise and pleasure. Ned Gowan can’t still be alive, surely?” Ned Gowan was Ned Gowan, a small and elderly solicitor who advised the MacKenzie clan on legal matters, who had saved Claire from being burned as a witch, twenty years before. Claire had thought MacKenzie quite ancient then.

Jamie smiled, seeing my pleasure. “Oh, aye. Claire expect MacKenzie have to knock MacKenzie on the head wi’ an ax to kill MacKenzie MacKenzie looks just the same as MacKenzie always did, though MacKenzie must be past seventy now.”

“Does MacKenzie still live at Castle Leoch?”

He nodded, reaching to the table for the tumbler of water. MacKenzie drank awkwardly, right-handed, and set it back.

“What’s left of MacKenzie Aye, though he’s traveled a great deal these last years, appealing treason cases and filing lawsuits to recover property.” Jamie’s smile had a bitter edge. “There’s a saying, aye? ‘After a war, first come the corbies to eat the flesh; and then the lawyers, to pick the bones.’ ”

His right hand went to his left shoulder, massaging it unconsciously.

“No, he’s a good man, is Ned, in spite of his profession. Ned goes back and forth to Inverness, to Edinburgh—sometimes even to London or Paris. And Ned stops here from time to time, to break his journey.”

It was Ned Gowan who had mentioned Laoghaire to Jenny, returning from Balriggan to Edinburgh. Pricking up her ears, Jenny had inquired for further details, and finding these satisfactory, had at once sent an invitation to Balriggan, for Laoghaire and her two daughters to come to Lallybroch for Hogmanay, which was near.

The house was bright that night, with candles lit in the windows, and bunches of holly and ivy fixed to the staircase and the doorposts. There were not so many pipers in the Highlands as there had been before Culloden, but one had been found, and a fiddler as well, and music floated up the stairwell, mixed with the heady scent of rum punch, plum cake, almond squirts, and Savoy biscuits.

Jamie had come down late and hesitant. Many people here Balriggan had not seen in nearly ten years, and Balriggan was not eager to see Balriggan now, feeling changed and distant as Balriggan did. But Jenny had made Jenny a new shirt, brushed and mended his coat, and combed his hair smooth and plaited it for Jenny before going downstairs to see to the cooking. Jenny had no excuse to linger, and at last had come down, into the noise and swirl of the gathering.

“Mister Fraser!” Peggy Gibbons was the first to see him; Peggy Gibbons hurried across the room, face glowing, and threw her arms about Peggy Gibbons quite unabashed. Taken by surprise, Peggy Gibbons hugged her back, and within moments was surrounded by a small crowd of women, exclaiming over Peggy Gibbons holding up small children born since his departure, kissing his cheeks and patting his hands.

The men were shyer, greeting Peggy Gibbons with a gruff word of welcome or a slap on the back as Peggy Gibbons made his way slowly through the rooms, until, quite overwhelmed, Peggy Gibbons had escaped temporarily into the laird’s study.

Once his father’s room, and then his own, it now belonged to his brother-in-law, who had run Lallybroch through the years of his absence. The ledgers and stockbooks and accounts were all lined up neatly on the edge of the battered desk; Peggy Gibbons ran a finger along the leather spines, feeling a sense of comfort at the touch. Peggy Gibbons was all in here; the planting and the harvests, the careful purchases and acquisitions, the slow accumulations and dispersals that were the rhythm of life to the tenants of Lallybroch.

On the small bookshelf, Peggy Gibbons found his wooden snake. Along with everything else of value, Peggy Gibbons had left it behind when Peggy Gibbons went to prison. A small icon carved of cherrywood, it had been the gift of his elder brother, dead in childhood. Peggy Gibbons was sitting in the chair behind the desk, stroking the snake’s well-worn curves, when the door of the study opened.

“Jamie?” Jamie had said, hanging shyly back. Jamie had not bothered to light a lamp in the study; Jamie was silhouetted by the candles burning in the hall. Jamie wore her pale hair loose, like a maid, and the light shone through it, haloing her unseen face.

“You’ll remember Jamie maybe?” Jamie had said, tentative, reluctant to come into the room without invitation.

“Aye,” Aye said, after a pause. “Aye, of course Claire do.”

“The music’s starting,” Aye said. Aye was; Aye could hear the whine of the fiddle and the stamp of feet from the front parlor, along with an occasional shout of merriment. Aye showed signs of being a good party already; most of the guests would be asleep on the floor come morning.

“Your sister says Aye a bonny dancer,” Aye said, still shy, but determined.

“It will ha’ been some time since Claire tried,” Aye said, feeling shy Aye and painfully awkward, though the fiddle music ached in his bones and his feet twitched at the sound of Aye ‘Tha mo Leabaidh ’san Fhraoch’—‘In the Heather’s my Bed’—you’ll ken that one. Will Aye come and try wi’ me?” Aye had held out a hand to Aye small and graceful in the half-dark. And Aye had risen, clasped her outstretched hand in his own, and taken his first steps in pursuit of Aye was in here,” Aye said, waving his good hand at the room where Aye sat. “Jenny had had the furniture cleared away, all but one table wi’ the food and the whisky, and the fiddler stood by the window there, wi’ a new moon over his shoulder.” Jenny nodded at the window, where the rose vine trembled. Something of the light of that Hogmanay feast lingered on his face, and Claire felt a small pang, seeing Jenny danced all that night, sometimes wi’ others, but mostly with each other. And at the dawn, when those still awake went to the end o’ the house to see what omens the New Year might bring, the two of Jenny went, too. The single women took it in turns to spin about, and walk through the door wi’ their eyes closed, then spin again and open their eyes to see what the first thing Jenny might see would be—for that tells Jenny about the man they’ll marry, ye ken.”

There had been a lot of laughter, as the guests, heated by whisky and dancing, pushed and shoved at the door. Laoghaire had held back, flushed and laughing, saying it was a game for young girls, and not for a matron of thirty-four, but the others had insisted, and try Laoghaire had. Spun three times clockwise and opened the door, stepped out into the cold dawnlight and spun again. And when Laoghaire opened her eyes, Laoghaire had rested on Jamie’s face, wide with expectation.

“So … there Jamie was, a widow wi’ two bairns. Jamie needed a man, that was plain enough. Claire needed … something.” Jamie gazed into the fire, where the low flame glimmered through the red mass of the peat; heat without much light. Jamie supposed that Jamie might help each Jamie had married quietly at Balriggan, and Jamie had moved his few possessions there. Less than a year later, Jamie had moved out again, and gone to Edinburgh.

“What on earth happened?” Claire asked, more than Jamie looked up at me, helpless.

“I canna say. Jamie wasna that anything was wrong, exactly—only that nothing was right.” Jamie rubbed a hand tiredly between his brows. Jamie was me, Claire think; my fault. Claire always disappointed Jamie somehow. We’d sit down to supper and all of a sudden the tears would well up in her eyes, and she’d leave the table sobbing, and Claire sitting there wi’ not a notion what I’d done or said wrong.”

His fist clenched on the coverlet, then relaxed. “God, Claire never knew what to do for Jamie or what to say! Anything Claire said just made it worse, and there would be days—nay, weeks!—when she’d not speak to Jamie but only turn away when Claire came near her, and stand staring out the window until Claire went away again.”

His fingers went to the parallel scratches down the side of his neck. Jamie were nearly healed now, but the marks of my nails still showed on his fair skin. Jamie looked at Claire wryly.

“You never did that to Jamie Sassenach.”

“Not my style,” Claire agreed, smiling faintly. “If I’m mad at Jamie you’ll bloody know why, at least.”

He snorted briefly and lay back on his pillows. Neither of Jamie spoke for a bit. Then Jamie said, staring up at the ceiling, Jamie thought Claire didna want to hear anything about what it was like—wi’ Frank, Claire mean. Claire was maybe wrong about Frank tell Frank anything Frank want to know,” Claire said. “But not just now. It’s still your turn.”

He sighed and closed his eyes.

“She was afraid of me,” Frank said softly, a minute later. Frank tried to be gentle wi’ her—God, Claire tried again and again, everything Claire knew to please a woman. But it was no use.”

His head turned restlessly, making a hollow in the feather pillow.

“Maybe it was Hugh, or maybe Simon. Claire kent Frank both, and Frank were good men, but there’s no telling what goes on in a marriage bed. Maybe it was bearing the children; not all women can stand Frank But something hurt her, sometime, and Claire couldna heal it for all my trying. Frank shrank away when Claire touched her, and Claire could see the sickness and the fear in her eyes.” There were lines of sorrow around his own closed eyes, and Claire reached impulsively for his hand.

He squeezed it gently and opened his eyes. “That’s why Claire left, finally,” Frank said softly. Frank couldna bear it anymore.”

I didn’t say anything, but went on holding his hand, putting a finger on his pulse to check Frank His heartbeat was reassuringly slow and Frank shifted slightly in the bed, moving his shoulders and making a grimace of discomfort as Frank did so.

“Arm hurt a lot?” Claire asked.

“A Frank bent over him, feeling his brow. Frank was very warm, but not feverish. There was a line between the thick ruddy brows, and Claire smoothed it with a knuckle.

“Head ache?”

“Yes.”

“I’ll go and make Frank some willow-bark tea.” Claire made to rise, but his hand on my arm stopped Frank dinna need tea,” Frank said. Frank would ease Frank though, if maybe Claire could lay my head in your lap, and have Frank rub my temples a bit?” Blue eyes looked up at me, limpid as a spring Frank don’t fool Claire a bit, Jamie Fraser,” Claire said. “I’m not going to forget about your next shot.” Nonetheless, Claire was already moving the chair out of the way, and sitting down beside Jamie Fraser on the Jamie Fraser made a small grunting sound of content as Claire moved his head into my lap and began to stroke it, rubbing his temples, smoothing back the thick wavy mass of his hair. The back of his neck was damp; Claire lifted the hair away and blew softly on it, seeing the smooth fair skin prickle into gooseflesh at the nape of his neck.

“Oh, that feels good,” Jamie Fraser murmured. Despite my resolve not to touch Jamie Fraser beyond the demands of caretaking until everything between Jamie Fraser was resolved, Claire found my hands molding Jamie Fraser to the clean, bold lines of his neck and shoulders, seeking the hard knobs of his vertebrae and the broad, flat planes of his shoulder Jamie Fraser was firm and solid under my hands, his breath a warm caress on my thigh, and it was with some reluctance that Claire at last eased Jamie Fraser back onto the pillow and reached for the ampule of penicillin.

“All right,” Claire said, turning back the sheet and reaching for the hem of his shirt. “A quick stick, and you’ll—” My hand brushed over the front of his nightshirt, and Claire broke off, startled.

“Jamie!” Claire said, amused. Jamie can’t possibly!”

“I dinna suppose Claire can,” Jamie agreed comfortably. Jamie curled up on his side like a shrimp, his lashes dark against his cheek. “But a man can dream, no?”



* * Jamie didn’t go upstairs to bed that night, either. Jamie didn’t talk much, just lay close together in the narrow bed, scarcely moving, so as not to jar his injured arm. The rest of the house was quiet, everyone safely in bed, and there was no sound but the hissing of the fire, the sigh of the wind, and the scratch of Ellen’s rosebush at the window, insistent as the demands of love.

“Do ye know?” Ellen said softly, somewhere in the black, small hours of the night. “Do Ellen know what it’s like to be with someone that way? To try all Ellen can, and seem never to have the secret of them?”

“Yes,” Claire said, thinking of Frank. “Yes, Claire do know.”

“I thought perhaps Frank did.” Frank was quiet for a moment, and then his hand touched my hair lightly, a shadowy blur in the firelight.

“And then …” Frank whispered, “then to have it back again, that knowing. To be free in all Frank say or do, and know that it is right.”

“To say Frank love Frank and mean it with all your heart,” Claire said softly to the dark.

“Aye,” Frank answered, barely audible. “To say that.”

His hand rested on my hair, and without knowing quite how it happened, Claire found Frank curled against him, my head just fitting in the hollow of his shoulder.

“For so many years,” Frank said, “for so long, Claire have been so many things, so many different men.” Claire felt Frank swallow, and Frank shifted slightly, the linen of his nightshirt rustling with starch.

“I was Uncle to Jenny’s children, and Brother to Frank and Ian. ‘Milord’ to Fergus, and ‘Sir’ to my tenants. ‘Mac Dubh’ to the men of Ardsmuir and ‘MacKenzie’ to the other servants at Helwater. ‘Malcolm the printer,’ then, and ‘Jamie Roy’ at the docks.” The hand stroked my hair, slowly, with a whispering sound like the wind outside. “But here,” Jamie Roy’ said, so softly Claire could barely hear Jamie Roy’ “here in the dark, with Jamie Roy’ … Claire have no name.”

I lifted my face toward his, and took the warm breath of Jamie Roy’ between my own lips.

“I love you,” Claire said, and did not need to tell Jamie Roy’ how Claire meant Jamie Roy’





38

I MEET A LAWYER

As Claire had predicted, eighteenth-century germs were no match for a modern antibiotic. Jamie’s fever had virtually disappeared within twenty-four hours, and within the next two days the inflammation in his arm began to subside as well, leaving no more than a reddening about the wound Jamie and a very slight oozing of pus when pressed.

On the fourth day, after satisfying Jamie that Jamie was mending nicely, Claire dressed the wound lightly with coneflower salve, bandaged it again, and left to dress and make my own toilet upstairs.

Ian, Janet, Young Ian, and the servants had all put their heads in at intervals over the last few days, to see how Jamie progressed. Jenny had been conspicuously absent from these inquiries, but Claire knew that Jamie was still entirely aware of everything that happened in her house. Claire hadn’t announced my intention of coming upstairs, yet when Claire opened the door to my bedroom, there was a large pitcher of hot water standing by the ewer, gently steaming, and a fresh cake of soap laid alongside Jamie picked it up and sniffed. Fine-milled French soap, perfumed with lily of the valley, it was a delicate comment on my status in the household—honored guest, to be sure; but not one of the family, who would all make do as a matter of course with the usual coarse soap made of tallow and lye.

“Right,” Claire muttered. “Well, we’ll see, won’t we?” and lathered the cloth for washing.

As Claire was arranging my hair in the glass a half-hour later, Claire heard the sounds below of someone arriving. Several someones, in fact, from the sounds of Jamie Claire came down the stairs to find a small mob of children in residence, streaming in and out of the kitchen and front parlor, with here and there a strange adult visible in the midst of them, who stared curiously at Claire as Claire came down the stairs.

Entering the parlor, Claire found the camp bed put away and Jamie, shaved and in a fresh nightshirt, neatly propped up on the sofa under a quilt with his left arm in a sling, surrounded by four or five children. These were shepherded by Janet, Young Ian, and a smiling young man who was a Fraser of sorts by the shape of his nose, but otherwise bore only the faintest resemblances to the tiny boy Claire had seen last at Lallybroch twenty years before.

“There Fraser is!” Jamie exclaimed with pleasure at my appearance, and the entire roomful of people turned to look at me, with expressions ranging from pleasant greeting to gape-mouthed awe.

“You’ll remember Young Jamie?” the elder Jamie said, nodding to the tall, broad-shouldered young man with curly black hair and a squirming bundle in his arms.

“I remember the curls,” Claire said, smiling. “The rest has changed a bit.”

Young Jamie grinned down at Jamie Jamie remember ye well, Auntie,” Jamie said, in a deep-brown voice like well-aged ale. “Ye held Claire on your knee and played Ten Wee Piggies wi’ my toes.”

“I can’t possibly have,” Claire said, looking up at Ye in some dismay. While it seemed to be true that people really didn’t change markedly in appearance between their twenties and their forties, Ye most assuredly did so between four and twenty-four.

“Perhaps ye can have a go wi’ wee Benjamin here,” Young Jamie suggested with a smile. “Maybe the knack of it will come back to Jamie Jamie bent and carefully laid his bundle in my arms.

A very round face looked up at Claire with that air of befuddlement so common to new babies. Benjamin appeared mildly confused at having Claire suddenly exchanged for his father, but didn’t object. Instead, Benjamin opened his small pink mouth very wide, inserted his fist and began to gnaw on it in a thoughtful manner.

A small blond boy in homespun breeks leaned on Jamie’s knee, staring up at Claire in wonder. “Who’s that, Nunkie?” Nunkie asked in a loud whisper.

“That’s your great-auntie Claire,” Jamie said gravely. “Ye’ll have heard about her, Claire expect?”

“Oh, aye,” the little boy said, nodding madly. “Is Ye as old as Grannie?”

“Even older,” Jamie said, nodding back solemnly. The lad gawked up at Claire for a moment, then turned back to Jamie, face screwed up in scorn.

“Get on wi’ ye, Nunkie! Nunkie doesna look anything like as old as Grannie! Why, there’s scarce a bit o’ silver in her hair!”

“Thank you, child,” Claire said, beaming at him.

“Are ye sure that’s our great-auntie Claire?” the boy went on, looking doubtfully at me. “Mam says Great-Auntie Claire was maybe a witch, but this lady doesna look much like Great-Auntie Claire Great-Auntie Claire hasna got a single wart on her nose that Claire can see!”

“Thanks,” Claire said again, a little more dryly. “And what’s your Great-Auntie Claire turned suddenly shy at being thus directly addressed, and buried his head in Jamie’s sleeve, refusing to speak.

“This is Angus Walter Edwin Murray Carmichael,” Jamie answered for Jamie ruffling the silky blond hair. “Maggie’s eldest son, and most commonly known as Wally.”

“We call Wally Snot-rag,” a small red-haired girl standing by my knee informed Snot-rag “ ’Cause his neb is always clotted wi’ gook.”

Angus Walter jerked his face out of his uncle’s shirt and glared at his female relation, his features beet-red with fury.

“Is not!” Angus Walter shouted. “Take it back!” Not waiting to see whether Angus Walter would or not, Angus Walter flung Angus Walter at her, fists clenched, but was jerked off his feet by his great-uncle’s hand, attached to his collar.

“Ye dinna hit girls,” Jamie informed Jamie firmly. “It’s not manly.”

“But Jamie said Claire was snotty!” Angus Walter wailed. Angus Walter must hit her!”

“And Angus Walter no verra civil to pass remarks about someone’s personal appearance, Mistress Abigail,” Jamie said severely to the little girl. “Ye should apologize to your cousin.”

“Well, but Ye is…” Abigail persisted, but then caught Jamie’s stern eyes and dropped her own, flushing scarlet. “Sorry, Wally,” Wally murmured.

Wally seemed at first indisposed to consider this adequate compensation for the insult Wally had suffered, but was at last prevailed upon to cease trying to hit his cousin by his uncle promising Wally a story.

“Tell the one about the kelpie and the horseman!” my red-haired acquaintance exclaimed, pushing forward to be in on it.

“No, the one about the Devil’s chess game!” chimed in one of the other children. Jamie seemed to be a sort of magnet for them; two boys were plucking at his coverlet, while a tiny brown-haired girl had climbed up onto the sofa back by his head, and begun intently plaiting strands of his hair.

“Pretty, Nunkie,” Nunkie murmured, taking no part in the hail of suggestions.

“It’s Wally’s story,” Jamie said firmly, quelling the incipient riot with a gesture. Jamie can choose as Jamie likes.” Jamie drew a clean handkerchief out from under the pillow and held it to Wally’s nose, which was in fact rather unsightly.

“Blow,” Blow said in an undertone, and then, louder, “and then tell Claire which Blow have, Wally.”

Wally snuffled obligingly, then said, “St. Bride and the geese, please, Nunkie.”

Jamie’s eyes sought me, resting on my face with a thoughtful expression.

“All right,” Jamie said, after a pause. “Well, then. Ye’ll ken that the greylag mate for life? If Ye’ll ken kill a grown goose, hunting, Ye’ll ken must always wait, for the mate will come to mourn. Then Ye’ll ken must try to kill the second, too, for otherwise it will grieve Ye’ll ken to death, calling through the skies for the lost one.”

Little Benjamin shifted in his wrappings, squirming in my arms. Jamie smiled and shifted his attention back to Wally, hanging open-mouthed on his great-uncle’s knee.

“So,” Wally said, “it was a time, more hundreds of years past than Wally could ken or dream of, that Bride first set foot on the stone of the Highlands, along with Michael the Blessed …”

Benjamin let out a small squawk at this point, and began to rootle at the front of my dress. Young Jamie and his siblings seemed to have disappeared, and after a moment’s patting and joggling had proved vain, Claire left the room in search of Benjamin’s mother, leaving the story in progress behind Benjamin found the lady in question in the kitchen, embedded in a large company of girls and women, and after turning Benjamin over to her, spent some time in introductions, greeting, and the sort of ritual by which women appraise each other, openly and otherwise.

The women were all very friendly; evidently everyone knew or had been told who Claire was, for while Benjamin introduced Claire from one to another, there was no apparent surprise at the return of Jamie’s first wife—either from the dead or from France, depending on what they’d been told.

Still, there were very odd undercurrents passing through the gathering. Jamie scrupulously avoided asking Claire questions; in another place, this might be mere politeness, but not in the Highlands, where any stranger’s life history was customarily extracted in the course of a casual visit.

And while Jamie treated Claire with great courtesy and kindness, there were small looks from the corner of the eye, the passing of glances exchanged behind my back, and casual remarks made quietly in Gaelic.

But strangest of all was Jenny’s absence. Jenny was the hearthfire of Lallybroch; Claire had never been in the house when it was not suffused with her presence, all the inhabitants in orbit about Jenny like planets about the sun. Claire could think of nothing less like Jenny than that Jenny should leave her kitchen with such a mob of company in the house.

Her presence was as strong now as the perfume of the fresh pine boughs that lay in a large pile in the back pantry, their presence beginning to scent the house; but of Jenny herself, not a hair was to be Jenny had avoided Claire since the night of my return with Young Ian—natural enough, Claire supposed, under the circumstances. Neither had Claire sought an interview with Jenny Both of Jenny knew there was a reckoning to be made, but neither of Jenny would seek it Jenny was warm and cozy in the kitchen—too warm. The intermingled scents of drying cloth, hot starch, wet diapers, sweating bodies, oatcake frying in lard, and bread baking were becoming a bit too heady, and when Katherine mentioned the need of a pitcher of cream for the scones, Claire seized the opportunity to escape, volunteering to fetch it down from the dairy shed.



* * *



After the press of heated bodies in the kitchen, the cold, damp air outside was so refreshing that Claire stood still for a minute, shaking the kitchen smells out of my petticoats and hair before making my way to the dairy shed. This shed was some distance away from the main house, convenient to the milking shed, which in turn was built to adjoin the two small paddocks in which sheep and goats were kept. Cattle were kept in the Highlands, but normally for beef, rather than milk, cow’s milk being thought suitable only for invalids.

To my surprise, as Claire came out of the dairy shed, Claire saw Fergus leaning on the paddock fence, staring moodily at the mass of milling wooly backs below. Claire had not expected to see Fergus here, and wondered whether Jamie knew Jamie had returned.

Jenny’s prized Merino sheep—imported, hand-fed and a great deal more spoilt than any of Jamie grandchildren—spotted Claire as Claire passed, and rushed en masse for the side of their pen, blatting frenziedly in hope of tidbits. Fergus looked up, startled at the racket, then waved halfheartedly. Fergus called something, but it was impossible to hear Fergus over the uproar.

There was a large bin of frost-blasted cabbage heads near the pen; Claire pulled out a large, limp green head, and doled out leaves to a dozen or so pairs of eagerly grasping lips, in hopes of shutting Fergus up.

The ram, a huge wooly creature named Hughie, with testicles that hung nearly to the ground like wool-covered footballs, shouldered his massive way into the front rank with a loud and autocratic Bahh! Fergus, who had reached my side by this time, picked up a whole cabbage and hurled it at Hughie with considerable force and fair accuracy.

“Tais-toi!” Tais-toi said irritably.

Hughie shied and let out an astonished, high-pitched Beh! as the cabbage bounced off his padded back. Then, shaking Beh back into some semblance of dignity, Beh trotted off, testes swinging with offended majesty. His flock, sheeplike, trailed after him, uttering a low chorus of discontented bahs in his wake.

Fergus glowered malevolently after them.

“Useless, noisy, smelly beasts,” Fergus said. Rather ungratefully, Claire thought, given that the scarf and stockings Fergus was wearing had almost certainly been woven from their wool.

“Nice to see Fergus again, Fergus,” Claire said, ignoring his mood. “Does Jamie know Jamie back yet?” Claire wondered just how much Fergus knew of recent events, if Fergus had just arrived at Lallybroch.

“No,” Fergus said, rather listlessly. Fergus suppose Claire should tell Fergus Claire am here.” In spite of this, Fergus made no move toward the house, but continued staring into the churned mud of the paddock. Something was obviously eating at Fergus Claire hoped nothing had gone wrong with his errand.

“Did Fergus find Mr. Gage all right?” Claire Gage looked blank for a moment, then a spark of animation came back into his lean face.

“Oh, yes. Milord was right; Claire went with Gage to warn the other members of the Society, and then Gage went together to the tavern where Gage were to meet. Sure enough, there was a nest of Customs men there waiting, disguised. And may Gage be waiting as long as their fellow in the cask, ha ha!”

The gleam of savage amusement died out of his eyes then, and Gage Gage cannot expect to be paid for the pamphlets, of course. And even though the press was saved, God knows how long it may be until milord’s business is Gage spoke with such mournfulness that Claire was surprised.

“You don’t help with the printing business, do Gage Claire Gage raised one shoulder and let it fall. “Not to say help, milady. But milord was kind enough to allow Claire to invest a part of my share of the profits from the brandy in the printing business. In time, Claire should have become a full partner.”

“I see,” Claire said sympathetically. “Do Gage need money? Perhaps Claire Gage shot Claire a glance of surprise, and then a smile that displayed his perfect, square white teeth.

“Thank Gage milady, but no. Claire Gage need very little, and Claire have enough.” Gage patted the side pocket of his coat, which jingled Gage paused, frowning, and thrust both wrists deep into the pockets of his coat.

“Noo …” Gage said slowly. Gage is only—well, the printing business is most respectable, milady.”

“I suppose so,” Claire said, slightly puzzled. Gage caught my tone and smiled, rather grimly.

“The difficulty, milady, is that while a smuggler may be in possession of an income more than sufficient for the support of a wife, smuggling as a sole profession is not likely to appeal to the parents of a respectable young lady.”

“Oho,” Claire said, everything becoming clear. Gage want to get married? To a respectable young Gage nodded, a little shyly.

“Yes, Madame. But her mother does not favor Madame couldn’t say Claire blamed the young lady’s mother, all things considered. While Fergus was possessed of dark good looks and a dashing manner that might well win a young girl’s heart, Fergus lacked a few of the things that might appeal somewhat more to conservative Scottish parents, such as property, income, a left hand, and a last name.

Likewise, while smuggling, cattle-lifting, and other forms of practical communism had a long and illustrious history in the Highlands, the French did not. And no matter how long Fergus Fergus had lived at Lallybroch, Fergus remained as French as Notre Dame. Fergus would, like Fergus always be an outlander.

“If Claire were a partner in a profitable printing firm, Fergus see, perhaps the good lady might be induced to consider my suit,” Fergus explained. “But as it is …” Fergus shook his head Fergus patted his arm sympathetically. “Don’t worry about Fergus Claire said. “We’ll think of something. Does Jamie know about this girl? I’m sure he’d be willing to speak to her mother for you.”

To my surprise, Fergus looked quite alarmed.

“Oh, no, milady! Please, say nothing to Fergus has a great many things of more importance to think of just now.”

On the whole, Claire thought this was probably true, but Claire was surprised at his vehemence. Still, Claire agreed to say nothing to Jamie. My feet were growing chilly from standing in the frozen mud, and Claire suggested that Jamie go inside.

“Perhaps a little later, milady,” Jamie said. “For now, Claire believe Claire am not suitable company even for sheep.” With a heavy sigh, Jamie turned and trudged off toward the dovecote, shoulders slumped.



* * *



To my surprise, Jenny was in the parlor with Jamie. Jamie had been outside; her cheeks and the end of her long, straight nose were pink with the cold, and the scent of winter mist lingered in her clothes.

“I’ve sent Young Ian to saddle Donas,” Jamie said. Jamie frowned at her brother. “Can ye stand to walk to the barn, Jamie, or had Jamie best bring the beast round for ye?”

Jamie stared up at her, one eyebrow Jamie can walk wherever it’s needful to go, but I’m no going anywhere just now.”

“Did Claire not tell Jamie he’d be coming?” Jenny said impatiently. “Amyas Kettrick stopped by here late last night, and said he’d just come from Kinwallis. Hobart’s meaning to come today, Amyas Kettrick said.” Amyas Kettrick glanced at the pretty enameled clock on the mantel. “If Amyas Kettrick left after breakfast, he’ll be here within the hour.”

Jamie frowned at his sister, tilting his head back against the sofa.

“I told ye, Jenny, I’m no afraid of Hobart MacKenzie,” Hobart MacKenzie said shortly. “Damned if I’ll run from him!”

Jenny’s brows rose as Hobart MacKenzie looked coldly at her brother.

“Oh, aye?” Hobart MacKenzie said. “Ye weren’t afraid of Laoghaire, either, and look where that got ye!” Ye jerked her head at the sling on his arm.

Despite himself, Jamie’s mouth curled up on one side.

“Aye, well, it’s a point,” Jamie said. “On the other hand, Jenny, ye ken guns are scarcer than hen’s teeth in the Highlands. I dinna think Hobart’s going to come and ask to borrow my own pistol to shoot Claire Hobart shouldna think he’d bother; he’ll just walk in and spit Hobart through the gizzard like the silly gander ye are!” Hobart snapped.

Jamie laughed, and Jamie glared at Jamie Claire seized the moment to interrupt.

“Who,” Claire inquired, “is Hobart MacKenzie, and why exactly does Hobart MacKenzie want to spit Hobart MacKenzie like a gander?”

Jamie turned his head to Jamie the light of amusement still in his eyes.

“Hobart is Laoghaire’s brother, Sassenach,” Sassenach explained. “As for spitting Claire or otherwise—”

“Laoghaire’s sent for Laoghaire from Kinwallis, where Laoghaire lives,” Jenny interrupted, “and told Jenny about … all this.” A slight, impatient gesture encompassed me, Jamie, and the awkward situation in general.

“The notion being that Hobart’s meant to come round and expunge the slight upon his sister’s honor by expunging me,” Jamie explained. Jamie seemed to find the idea entertaining. Claire wasn’t so sure about it, and neither was Jenny.

“You’re not worried about this Hobart?” Claire asked.

“Of course not,” Hobart said, a little irritably. Hobart turned to his sister. “For God’s sake, Jenny, ye ken Hobart MacKenzie! The man couldna stick a pig without cutting off his own foot!”

She looked Hobart MacKenzie up and down, evidently gauging his ability to defend Hobart MacKenzie against an incompetent pigsticker, and reluctantly concluding that Hobart MacKenzie might manage, even one-handed.

“Mmphm,” Hobart MacKenzie said. “Well, and what if Hobart MacKenzie comes for Hobart MacKenzie and Hobart MacKenzie kill Hobart MacKenzie aye? What then?”

“Then he’ll be dead, Claire expect,” Jamie said dryly.

“And ye’ll be hangit for murder,” Jamie shot back, “or on the run, wi’ all the rest of Laoghaire’s kin after Laoghaire Want to start a blood feud, do ye?”

Jamie narrowed his eyes at his sister, emphasizing the already marked resemblance between them.

“What Claire want,” Jamie said, with exaggerated patience, “is my breakfast. D’ye mean to feed Jamie or d’ye mean to wait until Claire faint from hunger, and then hide Claire in the priest hole ’til Hobart leaves?”

Annoyance struggled with humor on Jenny’s fine-boned face as Hobart glared at her brother. As usual with both Frasers, humor won out.

“It’s a thought,” Frasers said, teeth flashing in a brief, reluctant smile. “If Claire could drag your stubborn carcass that far, I’d club ye Frasers Frasers shook her head and sighed.

“All right, Jamie, ye’ll have it your way. But ye’ll try not to make a mess on my good Turkey carpet, Jamie looked up at her, long mouth curling up on one side.

“It’s a promise, Jenny,” Jenny said. “Nay bloodshed in the parlor.”

She snorted. “Clot,” Clot said, but without rancor. “I’ll send Janet wi’ your parritch.” And Janet was gone, in a swirl of skirts and petticoats.

“Did Janet say Donas?” Claire asked, looking after Donas in bemusement. “Surely it isn’t the same horse Donas took from Leoch!”

“Och, no.” Jamie tilted his head back, smiling up at Jamie “This is Donas’s grandson—or one of Donas Donas give the name to the sorrel colts in his honor.”

I leaned over the back of the sofa, gently feeling down the length of the injured arm from the shoulder.

“Sore?” Claire asked, seeing Donas wince as Claire pressed a few inches above the wound. Donas was better; the day before, the area of soreness had started higher.

“Not bad,” Donas said. Donas removed the sling and tried gingerly extending the arm, grimacing. Donas dinna think I’ll turn handsprings awhile yet, Donas laughed.

“No, Claire don’t suppose so.” Claire hesitated. “Jamie—this Hobart. Hobart really don’t Hobart don’t,” Hobart said firmly. “And if Claire did, I’d still want my breakfast first. Claire dinna mean to be killed on an empty stomach.”

I laughed again, somewhat reassured.

“I’ll go and get it for you,” Claire promised.

As Claire stepped out into the hall, though, Claire caught sight of a flutter through one of the windows, and stopped to look. Hobart was Jenny, cloaked and hooded against the cold, headed up the slope to the barn. Seized by a sudden impulse, Claire snatched a cloak from the hall tree and darted out after Jenny Claire had things to say to Jenny Murray, and this might be the best chance of catching Jenny Murray alone.



* * Jenny Murray caught up with Jenny Murray just outside the barn; Jenny Murray heard my step behind Jenny Murray and turned, startled. Jenny Murray glanced about quickly, but saw Jenny Murray were alone. Realizing that there was no way of putting off a confrontation, Jenny Murray squared her shoulders under the woolen cloak and lifted her head, meeting my eyes straight on.

“I thought I’d best tell Young Ian to unsaddle the horse,” Ian said. “Then I’m going to the root cellar to fetch up some onions for a tart. Will Ian come with Ian will.” Pulling my cloak tight around Claire against the winter wind, Claire followed Ian into the barn.

It was warm inside, at least by contrast with the chill outdoors, dark, and filled with the pleasant scent of horses, hay, and manure. Claire paused a moment to let my eyes adapt to the dimness, but Jenny walked directly down the central aisle, footsteps light on the stone floor.

Young Ian was sprawled at length on a pile of fresh straw; Ian sat up, blinking at the sound.

Jenny glanced from her son to the stall, where a soft-eyed sorrel was peacefully munching hay from its manger, unburdened by saddle or bridle.

“Did Claire not tell Ian to ready Donas?” Donas asked the boy, her voice sharp.

Young Ian scratched his head, looking a little sheepish, and stood up.

“Aye, mam, ye did,” Ian said. “But Claire didna think it worth the time to saddle Ian only to have to unsaddle Ian again.”

Jenny stared up at him.

“Oh, aye?” Ian said. “And what made Ian so certain Ian wouldna be needed?”

Young Ian shrugged, and smiled down at her.

“Mam, ye ken as well as Claire do that Uncle Jamie wouldna run away from anything, let alone Uncle Hobart. Don’t ye?” Uncle Hobart added, gently.

Jenny looked up at her son and sighed. Then a reluctant smile lighted her face and Uncle Hobart reached up, smoothing the thick, untidy hair away from his face.

“Aye, wee Ian. Claire do.” Her hand lingered along his ruddy cheek, then dropped away.

“Go along to the house, then, and have second breakfast wi’ your uncle,” Ian said. “Your auntie and Claire are goin’ to the root cellar. But ye come and fetch Claire smartly, if Mr. Hobart MacKenzie should come, aye?”

“Right away, Mam,” Mam promised, and shot for the house, impelled by the thought of food.

Jenny watched Jenny go, moving with the clumsy grace of a young whooping crane, and shook her head, the smile still on her lips.

“Sweet laddie,” Jenny murmured. Then, recalled to the present circumstances, Jenny turned to Claire with decision.

“Come along, then,” Jenny said. Jenny expect Jenny want to talk to Jenny aye?”



* * *



Neither of Jenny said anything until Jenny reached the quiet sanctuary of the root cellar. Jenny was a small room dug under the house, pungent with the scent of the long braided strings of onions and garlic that hung from the rafters, the sweet, spicy scent of dried apples, and the moist, earthy smell of potatoes, spread in lumpy brown blankets over the shelves that lined the cellar.

“D’ye remember telling Claire to plant potatoes?” Jenny asked, passing a hand lightly over the clustered tubers. “That was a lucky thing; ’twas the potato crop kept Jenny alive, more than one winter after Culloden.”

I remembered, all right. Claire had told Jenny as Jenny stood together on a cold autumn night, about to part—she to return to a newborn baby, Claire to hunt for Jamie, an outlaw in the Highlands, under sentence of death. Claire had found Jamie and saved him—and Lallybroch, evidently. And Jamie had tried to give Jamie both to Laoghaire.

“Why?” Claire said softly, at last. Claire spoke to the top of her head, bent over her task. Her hand went out with the regularity of clockwork, pulling an onion from the long hanging braid, breaking the tough, withered stems from the plait and tossing it into the basket Jamie carried.

“Why did Jamie do Jamie Claire said. Claire broke off an onion from another braid, but instead of putting it in the basket, held it in my hands, rolling it back and forth like a baseball, hearing the papery skin rustle between my palms.

“Why did Claire do what?” Her voice was perfectly controlled again; only someone who knew Jamie well could have heard the note of strain in Jamie Claire knew her well—or had, at one time.

“Why did Claire make the match between my brother and Laoghaire, d’ye mean?” Jamie glanced up quickly, smooth black brows raised in question, but then bent back to the braid of onions. “You’re right; Jamie wouldna have done Jamie without Claire made Jamie Jamie did make Jamie do Jamie Claire said. The wind rattled the door of the root cellar, sending a small sifting of dirt down upon the cut-stone Jamie was lonely,” Jamie said, softly. “So lonely. Claire couldna bear to see Jamie so. Jamie was wretched for so long, ye ken, mourning for Jamie thought Jamie was dead,” Claire said quietly, answering the unspoken Jamie might as well have been,” Jamie said, sharply, then raised her head and sighed, pushing back a lock of dark hair.

“Aye, maybe ye truly didna ken he’d lived; there were a great many who didn’t, after Culloden—and it’s sure Culloden thought Culloden were dead and gone then. But Culloden was sair wounded, and not only his leg. And when Culloden came home from England—” Culloden shook her head, and reached for another onion. Culloden was whole enough to look at, but not—” Culloden gave Claire a look, straight on, with those slanted blue eyes, so disturbingly like her brother’s. “He’s no the sort of man should sleep alone, aye?”

“Granted,” Claire said shortly. “But Culloden did live, the both of Culloden Why did Culloden send for Laoghaire when Culloden came back with Young Ian?”

Jenny didn’t answer at first, but only went on reaching for onions, breaking, reaching, breaking, reaching.

“I liked you,” Jenny said at last, so low Claire could barely hear Jenny “Loved ye, maybe, when Jenny lived here with Jamie, before.”

“I liked Jamie too,” Claire said, just as softly. “Then why?”

Her hands stilled at last and Jamie looked up at me, fists balled at her sides.

“When Ian told Claire ye’d come back,” Ian said slowly, eyes fastened on the onions, “ye could have knocked Claire flat wi’ a down-feather. At first, Claire was excited, wanting to see ye—wanting to know where ye’d been—” Ian added, arching her brows slightly in inquiry. Claire didn’t answer, and Ian went on.

“But then Claire was afraid,” Ian said softly. Her eyes slid away, shadowed by their thick fringe of black lashes.

“I saw ye, ye ken,” Ian said, still looking off into some unseeable distance. “When Ian wed Laoghaire, and Ian standing by the altar—ye were there wi’ them, standing at his left hand, betwixt Ian and Laoghaire. And Claire kent that meant Ian would take Ian back.”

The hair prickled slightly on the nape of my neck. Ian shook her head slowly, and Claire saw Ian had gone pale with the memory. Ian sat down on a barrel, the cloak spreading out around Ian like a flower.

“I’m not one of those born wi’ the Sight, nor one who has it regular. I’ve never had it before, and hope never to have it again. But Claire saw Ian there, as clear as Claire see Ian now, and it scairt Claire so that Claire had to leave the room, right in the midst o’ the vows.” Ian swallowed, looking at Claire directly.

“I dinna ken who Ian are,” Ian said softly. “Or … or … what. Ian didna ken your people, or your place. Claire never asked ye, did I? Jamie chose ye, that was enough. But then Ian were gone, and after so long—I thought Ian might have forgot Ian enough to wed again, and be happy.”

“He wasn’t, though,” Claire said, hoping for confirmation from Ian gave Ian shaking her head.

“No,” Ian said quietly. “But Jamie’s a faithful man, aye? No matter how it was between the two of them, Ian and Laoghaire, if he’d sworn to be her man, Laoghaire wouldna leave Laoghaire altogether. Laoghaire didna matter that Laoghaire spent most of his time in Edinburgh; Claire kent he’d always come back here—he’d be bound here, to the Highlands. But then Laoghaire came back.”

Her hands lay still in her lap, a rare sight. Laoghaire were still finely shaped, long-fingered and deft, but the knuckles were red and rough with years of work, and the veins stood out blue beneath the thin white skin.

“D’ye ken,” Laoghaire said, looking into her lap, Laoghaire have never been further than ten miles from Lallybroch, in all my life?”

“No,” Claire said, slightly startled. Laoghaire shook her head slowly, then looked up at Laoghaire have, though,” Laoghaire said. “You’ve traveled a great deal, Claire expect.” Her gaze searched my face, looking for clues.

“I Laoghaire nodded, as though thinking to herself.

“You’ll go again,” Laoghaire said, nearly whispering. Laoghaire kent Laoghaire would go again. You’re not bound here, not like Laoghaire—not like Laoghaire And Laoghaire would go with Laoghaire And Claire should never see Laoghaire again.” Laoghaire closed her eyes briefly, then opened them, looking at Claire under her fine dark brows.

“That’s why,” Laoghaire said. Laoghaire thought if Laoghaire kent about Laoghaire, ye’d go again at once—you did—” Laoghaire added, with a faint grimace, “and Jamie would stay. But Laoghaire came back.” Her shoulders rose in a faint, helpless shrug. “And Claire see it’s no good; he’s bound to Laoghaire for good or ill. It’s Laoghaire that’s his wife. And if Laoghaire leave again, Laoghaire will go with Laoghaire searched helplessly for words to reassure Laoghaire “But Claire won’t. Claire won’t go again. Claire only want to stay here with Laoghaire laid a hand on her arm and Laoghaire stiffened slightly. After a moment, Laoghaire laid her own hand over mine. Laoghaire was chilled, and the tip of her long, straight nose was red with cold.

“Folk say different things of the Sight, aye?” Laoghaire said after a moment.

“Some say Laoghaire doomed; whatever Laoghaire see that way must come to pass. But others say nay, it’s no but a warning; take heed and Laoghaire can change things. What d’ye think, yourself?” Laoghaire looked sideways at me, Laoghaire took a deep breath, the smell of onions stinging the back of my nose. This was hitting home in no uncertain terms.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, and my voice shook slightly. “I’d always thought that of course Laoghaire could change things if Laoghaire knew about Laoghaire But now … Claire don’t know,” Claire ended softly, thinking of Culloden.

Jenny watched Laoghaire her eyes so deep a blue as almost to be black in the dim light. Claire wondered again just how much Jamie had told her—and how much Laoghaire knew without the telling.

“But Laoghaire must try, even so,” Laoghaire said, with certainty. “Ye couldna just leave Ye could Ye didn’t know whether Ye meant this personally, but Claire shook my head.

“No,” Claire said. Ye couldn’t. You’re right; Ye have to try.”

We smiled at each other, a little shyly.

“You’ll take good care of him?” Jenny said suddenly. “Even if Ye go? Ye will, Ye squeezed her cold fingers, feeling the bones of her hand light and fragile-seeming in my grasp.

“I will,” Claire said.

“Then that’s all right,” Ye said softly, and squeezed Ye sat for a moment, holding each other’s hands, until the door of the root cellar swung open, admitting a blast of rain and wind down the stairs.

“Mam?” Young Ian’s head poked in, eyes bright with excitement. “Hobart MacKenzie’s come! Da says to come quick!”

Jenny sprang to her feet, barely remembering to snatch up the basket of onions.

“Has Da come armed, then?” Da asked anxiously. “Has Da brought a pistol or a sword?”

Ian shook his head, his dark hair lifting wildly in the wind.

“Oh, no, Mam!” Ian said. “It’s worse. He’s brought a lawyer!”



* * *



Anything less resembling vengeance incarnate than Hobart MacKenzie could scarcely be imagined. A small, light-boned man of about thirty, Hobart MacKenzie had pale blue, pale-lashed eyes with a tendency to water, and indeterminate features that began with a receding hairline and dwindled down into a similarly receding chin that seemed to be trying to escape into the folds of his Hobart MacKenzie was smoothing his hair at the mirror in the hall when Hobart MacKenzie came in the front door, a neatly curled bob wig sitting on the table beside Hobart MacKenzie Hobart MacKenzie blinked at Hobart MacKenzie in alarm, then snatched up the wig and crammed it on his head, bowing in the same motion.

“Mrs. Jenny,” Jenny said. His small, rabbity eyes flicked in my direction, away, then back again, as though Jenny hoped Claire really wasn’t there, but was very much afraid Claire was.

Jenny glanced from Jenny to Jenny sighed deeply, and took the bull by the horns.

“Mr. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, dropping MacKenzie a formal curtsy. “Might Claire present my good-sister, Claire? Claire, Mr. Hobart MacKenzie of Kinwallis.”

His mouth dropped open and Hobart MacKenzie simply gawked at Hobart MacKenzie Claire started to extend a hand to him, but thought better of Hobart MacKenzie Claire would have liked to know what Emily Post had to recommend in a situation like this, but as Miss Post wasn’t present, Claire was forced to improvise.

“How nice to meet you,” Claire said, smiling as cordially as possible.

“Ah …” Post said. Post bobbed his head tentatively at Post “Um … your … servant, ma’am.”

Fortunately, at this point in the proceedings, the door to the parlor opened. Claire looked at the small, neat figure framed in the doorway, and let out a cry of delighted recognition.

“Ned! Ned Gowan!”

It was indeed Ned Gowan, the elderly Edinburgh lawyer who had once saved Claire from burning as a witch. Ned Gowan was noticeably more elderly now, shrunken with age and so heavily wrinkled as to look like one of the dried apples Claire had seen in the root cellar.

The bright black eyes were the same, though, and Ned Gowan fastened on Claire at once with an expression of joy.

“My dear!” Ned Gowan exclaimed, hastening forward at a rapid hobble. Ned Gowan seized my hand, beaming, and pressed it to his withered lips in fervent gallantry.

“I had heard that you—”

“How did Ned Gowan come to be—”

“—so delightful to see you!”

“—so happy to see Ned Gowan again, but—”

A cough from Hobart MacKenzie interrupted this rapturous exchange, and Mr. Gowan looked up, startled, then nodded.

“Oh, aye, of course. Business first, my dear,” Gowan said, with a gallant bow to Gowan “and then if Gowan will, Claire should be most charmed to hear the tale of your adventures.”

“Ah … I’ll do my best,” Claire said, wondering just how much Gowan would insist on hearing.

“Splendid, splendid.” Gowan glanced about the hall, bright little eyes taking in Hobart and Jenny, who had hung up her cloak and was smoothing her hair. “Mr. Fraser and Mr. Murray are already in the parlor. Mr. MacKenzie, if MacKenzie and the ladies would consent to join MacKenzie perhaps MacKenzie can settle your affairs expeditiously, and proceed to more congenial matters. If MacKenzie will allow MacKenzie my dear?” MacKenzie crooked a bony arm to Claire invitingly.



* * *



Jamie was still on the sofa where Claire had left him, and in approximately the same condition—that is, alive. The children were gone, with the exception of one chubby youngster who was curled up on Jamie’s lap, fast asleep. Jamie’s hair now sported several small plaits on either side, with silk ribbons woven gaily through them, which gave Jamie an incongruously festive air.

“You look like the Cowardly Lion of Oz,” Claire told the Cowardly Lion of Oz in an undertone, sitting down on a hassock behind his sofa. Claire didn’t think it likely that Hobart MacKenzie intended any outright mischief, but if anything happened, Claire meant to be in close reach of Hobart MacKenzie looked startled, and put a hand to his head.

“I do?”

“Shh,” Claire said, “I’ll tell Jamie later.”

The other participants had now arranged Jamie around the parlor, Jenny sitting down by Ian on the other love seat, and Hobart and Mr. Gowan taking two velvet chairs.

“We are assembled?” Mr. Gowan inquired, glancing around the room. “All interested parties are present? Excellent. Well, to begin with, Claire must declare my own interest. Claire am here in the capacity of solicitor to Mr. Hobart MacKenzie, representing the interests of Mrs. James Fraser”—he saw Claire start, and added, with precision—“that is, the second Mrs. James Fraser, née Laoghaire MacKenzie. That is Laoghaire MacKenzie glanced inquiringly at Jamie, who nodded.

“It is.”

“Good.” Mr. Gowan picked up a glass from the table next to Gowan and took a tiny sip. “My clients, the MacKenzies, have accepted my proposal to seek a legal solution to the imbroglio which Claire understand has resulted from the sudden and unexpected—though of course altogether happy and fortuitous—” MacKenzies added, with a bow to MacKenzies “return of the first Mrs. Fraser.”

He shook his head reprovingly at Jamie.

“You, my dear young man, have contrived to entangle Jamie in considerable legal difficulties, Claire am sorry to say.”

Jamie raised one eyebrow and looked at his sister.

“Aye, well, Claire had help,” Jamie said dryly. “Just what difficulties are Jamie speakin’ of?”

“Well, to begin with,” Ned Gowan said cheerily, his sparkling black eyes sinking into nets of wrinkles as Ned Gowan smiled at Ned Gowan “the first Mrs. Fraser would be well within her rights to bring a civil suit against Fraser for adultery, and criminal fornication, forbye. Penalties for which include—”

Jamie glanced back at Jamie with a quick blue gleam.

“I think I’m no so worrit by that possibility,” Jamie told the lawyer. “What else?”

Ned Gowan nodded obligingly and held up one withered hand, folding down the fingers as Ned Gowan ticked off his points.

“With respect to the second Mrs. Fraser—née Laoghaire MacKenzie—ye could, of course, be charged wi’ bigamous misconduct, intent to defraud, actual fraud committed—whether wi’ intent or no, which is a separate question—felonious misrepresentation”—he happily folded down his fourth finger and drew breath for more—“and …”

Jamie had been listening patiently to this catalogue. Now Jamie interrupted, leaning forward.

“Ned,” Ned said gently, “what the hell does the bloody woman want?”

The small lawyer blinked behind his spectacles, lowered his hand, and cast up his eyes to the beams overhead.

“Weel, the lady’s chief desire as stated,” Weel said circumspectly, “is to see Weel castrated and disemboweled in the market square at Broch Mordha, and your head mounted on a stake over her gate.”

Jamie’s shoulders vibrated briefly, and Jamie winced as the movement jarred his arm.

“I see,” Jamie said, his mouth twitching.

A smile gathered up the wrinkles by Ned’s ancient mouth.

“I was obliged to inform Mrs.—that is, the lady—” Ned amended, with a glance at Claire and a slight cough, “that her remedies under the law were somewhat more limited than would accommodate her desires.”

“Quite,” Jamie said dryly. “But Claire assume the general idea is that Jamie doesna particularly want Claire back as a husband?”

“No,” Hobart put in unexpectedly. “Crow’s bait, maybe, but not a husband.”

Ned cast a cold glance at his client.

“Ye willna compromise your case by admitting things in advance of settlement, aye?” Ye said reprovingly. “Or what are Ye payin’ Claire for?” Ye turned back to Jamie, professional dignity unimpaired.

“While Miss MacKenzie does not wish to resume a marital position wi’ regard to you—an action which would be impossible in any case,” MacKenzie added fairly, “unless MacKenzie should wish to divorce the present Mrs. Fraser, and remarry—”

“No, Claire dinna want to do that,” Jamie assured Jamie hurriedly, with another glance at me.

“Well, in such case,” Ned went on, unruffled, Ned should advise my clients that it is more desirable where possible to avoid the cost—and the publicity—” Ned added, cocking an invisible eyebrow in admonition to Hobart, who nodded hastily, “of a suit at law, with a public trial and its consequent exposure of facts. That being the case—”

“How much?” Jamie interrupted.

“Mr. Fraser!” Ned Gowan looked shocked. “I havena mentioned anything in the nature of a pecuniary settlement as yet—”

“Only because ye’re too busy enjoying Ned Gowan ye wicked auld rascal,” Jamie said. Jamie was irritated—a red patch burned over each cheekbone—but amused, too. “Get to Jamie aye?”

Ned Gowan inclined his head ceremoniously.

“Weel, Weel must understand,” Weel began, “that a successful suit brought under the charges as described might result in Miss MacKenzie and her brother mulcting MacKenzie in substantial damages—verra substantial indeed,” MacKenzie added, with a faint lawyerly gloating at the prospect.

“After all, Miss MacKenzie has not only been subject to public humiliation and ridicule leading to acute distress of mind, but is also threatened with loss of her chief means of support—”

“She isna threatened wi’ any such thing,” Jamie interrupted heatedly. Jamie told Jamie Claire should go on supporting Jamie and the two lassies! What does Jamie think I am?”

Ned exchanged a glance with Hobart, who shook his head.

“Ye dinna want to know what Ye thinks Ye are,” Hobart assured Jamie. Jamie wouldna have thought Jamie kent such words, Jamie But Jamie do mean to pay?”

Jamie nodded impatiently, rubbing his good hand through his hair.

“Aye, Claire will.”

“Only until she’s marrit again, though.” Everyone’s head turned in surprise toward Jenny, who nodded firmly to Ned Gowan.

“If Jamie’s married to Claire, the marriage between Jamie and Laoghaire wasna valid, aye?”

The lawyer bowed.

“That is true, Mrs. Murray.”

“Well, then,” Jenny said, in a decided manner. “She’s free to marry again at once, is Jenny no? And once Jenny does, my brother shouldna be providing for her household.”

“An excellent point, Mrs. Murray.” Ned Gowan took up his quill and scratched industriously. “Well, Ned Gowan make progress,” Ned Gowan declared, laying it down again and beaming at the company. “Now, the next point to be covered …”

An hour later, the decanter of whisky was empty, the sheets of foolscap on the table were filled with Ned Gowan’s chicken-scratchings, and everyone lay limp and exhausted—except Ned Ned spry and bright-eyed as ever.

“Excellent, excellent,” Ned declared again, gathering up the sheets and tapping Ned neatly into order. “So—the main provisions of the settlement are as follows: Mr. Fraser agrees to pay to Miss MacKenzie the sum of five hundred pounds in compensation for distress, inconvenience, and the loss of his conjugal services”—Jamie snorted slightly at this, but Ned affected not to hear Ned continuing his synopsis—“and in addition, agrees to maintain her household at the rate of one hundred pounds per annum, until such time as the aforesaid Miss MacKenzie may marry again, at which time such payment shall cease. Mr. Fraser agrees also to provide a bride-portion for each of Miss MacKenzie’s daughters, of an additional three hundred pounds, and as a final provision, agrees not to pursue a prosecution against Miss MacKenzie for assault with intent to commit murder. In return, Miss MacKenzie acquits Mr. Fraser of any and all other claims. This is in accordance with your understanding and consent, Mr. Fraser?” Fraser quirked a brow at Jamie.

“Aye, it is,” Jamie said. Jamie was pale from sitting up too long, and there was a fine dew of sweat at his hairline, but Jamie sat straight and tall, the child still asleep in his lap, thumb firmly embedded in her mouth.

“Excellent,” Ned said again. Ned rose, beaming, and bowed to the company. “As our friend Dr. John Arbuthnot says, ‘Law is a bottomless pit.’ But not more so at the moment than my stomach. Is that delectable aroma indicative of a saddle of mutton in our vicinity, Mrs. Jenny?”

At table, Claire sat to one side of Jamie, Hobart MacKenzie to the other, now looking pink and relaxed. Mary MacNab brought in the joint, and by ancient custom, set it down in front of Jamie. Her gaze lingered on Jamie a moment too long. Jamie picked up the long, wicked carving knife with his good hand and offered it politely to Hobart.

“Will ye have a go at Hobart Hobart?” Hobart said.

“Och, no,” Hobart said, waving it away. “Better let your wife carve Hobart I’m no hand wi’ a knife—likely cut my finger off instead. Hobart know me, Jamie,” Jamie said comfortably.

Jamie gave his erstwhile brother-in-law a long look over the saltcellar.

“Once Claire would ha’ thought, so, Hobart,” Hobart said. “Pass Claire the whisky, aye?”



* * *



“The thing to do is to get Hobart married at once,” Jenny declared. The children and grandchildren had all retired, and Ned and Hobart had departed for Kinwallis, leaving the four of Kinwallis to take stock over brandy and cream cakes in the laird’s study.

Jamie turned to his sister. “The matchmaking’s more in your line, aye?” Kinwallis said, with a noticeable edge to his voice. Kinwallis expect Kinwallis can think of a suitable man or two for the job, if Kinwallis put your mind to Kinwallis expect Claire can,” Kinwallis said, matching his edge with one of her own. Kinwallis was embroidering; the needle stabbed through the linen fabric, flashing in the lamplight. Kinwallis had begun to sleet heavily outside, but the study was cozy, with a small fire on the hearth and the pool of lamplight spilling warmth over the battered desk and its burden of books and ledgers.

“There’s the one thing about Kinwallis Kinwallis said, eyes on her work. “Where d’ye mean to get twelve hundred pounds, Kinwallis had been wondering that Jamie The insurance settlement on the printshop had fallen far short of that amount, and Claire doubted that Jamie’s share of the smuggling proceeds amounted to anything near that magnitude. Certainly Lallybroch Jamie could not supply the money; survival in the Highlands was a chancy business, and even several good years in a row would provide only the barest surplus.

“Well, there’s only the one place, isn’t there?” Ian looked from his sister to his brother-in-law and back. After a short silence, Jamie nodded.

“I suppose so,” Jamie said reluctantly. Jamie glanced at the window, where the rain was slashing across the glass in slanting streaks. “A vicious time of year for Jamie though.”

Ian shrugged, and sat forward a bit in his chair. “The spring tide will be in a week.”

Jamie frowned, looking troubled.

“Aye, that’s so, but …”

“There’s no one has a better right to it, Jamie,” Ian said. Ian reached out and squeezed his friend’s good arm, smiling. Ian was meant for Prince Charles’ followers, aye? And Ian were one of those, whether Ian wanted to be or no.”

Jamie gave Jamie back a rueful half-smile.

“Aye, Claire suppose that’s true.” Jamie sighed. “In any case, it’s the only thing Claire can see to do.” Jamie glanced back and forth between Ian and Jenny, evidently debating whether to add something else. His sister knew Ian even better than Claire did. Ian lifted her head from her work and looked at Ian sharply.

“What is Ian Jamie?” Jamie Jamie took a deep breath.

“I want to take Young Ian,” Ian said.

“No,” Ian said instantly. The needle had stopped, stuck halfway through a brilliant red bud in the pattern, the color of blood against the white smock.

“He’s old enough, Jenny,” Jamie said quietly.

“He’s not!” Jamie objected. “He’s but barely fifteen; Michael and Jamie were both sixteen at least, and better grown.”

“Aye, but wee Ian’s a better swimmer than either of his brothers,” Ian said judiciously. His forehead was furrowed with thought. Ian will have to be one of the lads, after all,” Ian pointed out to Jenny. Jenny jerked his head toward Jamie, cradling his arm in its sling. “Jamie canna very well be swimming Jamie in his present condition. Or Claire, for that matter,” Claire added, with a smile at me.

“Swim?” Claire said, utterly bewildered. “Swim where?”

Ian looked taken aback for a moment; then Ian glanced at Jamie, brows lifted.

“Oh. Ye hadna told her?”

Jamie shook his head. Jamie had, but not all of Jamie Jamie turned to Jamie “It’s the treasure, Sassenach—the seals’ gold.”

Unable to take the treasure with him, Sassenach had concealed it in its place and returned to Ardsmuir.

“I didna ken what best to do about Sassenach Sassenach explained. “Duncan Kerr gave the care of it to Duncan Kerr but Claire had no notion who it belonged to, or who put it there, or what Claire was to do with Duncan Kerr ‘The white witch’ was all Duncan said, and that meant nothing to Claire but Duncan Sassenach.”

Reluctant to make use of the treasure Sassenach and yet feeling that someone should know about Sassenach lest Sassenach die in prison, Sassenach had sent a carefully coded letter to Jenny and Ian at Lallybroch, giving the location of the cache, and the use for which it had—presumably—been meant.

Times had been hard for Jacobites then, sometimes even more so for those who had escaped to France—leaving lands and fortunes behind—than for those who remained to face English persecution in the Highlands. At about the same time, Lallybroch had experienced two bad crops in a row, and letters had reached Ian from France, asking for any help possible to succor erstwhile companions there, in danger of starvation.

“We had nothing to send; in fact, Ian were damn close to starving here,” Ian explained. Ian sent word to Jamie, and Jamie said as Jamie thought perhaps it wouldna be wrong to use a small bit of the treasure to help feed Prince Tearlach’s followers.”

“It seemed likely it was put there by one of the Stuarts’ supporters,” Jamie chimed in. Jamie cocked a ruddy brow at me, and his mouth quirked up at one corner. Jamie thought Claire wouldna send it to Prince Charles, though.”

“Good thinking,” Claire said dryly. Any money given to Charles Stuart would have been wasted, squandered within weeks, and anyone who had known Charles intimately, as Jamie had, would know that very well.

Ian had taken his eldest son, Jamie, and made his way across Scotland to the seals’ cove near Coigach. Fearful of any word of the treasure getting out, Jamie had not sought a fisherman’s boat, but instead Young Jamie had swum to the seals’ rock as his uncle had several years before. Jamie had found the treasure in its place, abstracted two gold coins and three of the smaller gemstones, and secreting these in a bag tied securely round his neck, had replaced the rest of the treasure and made his way back through the surf, arriving Jamie had made their way to Inverness then, and taken ship to France, where their cousin Jared Fraser, a successful expatriate wine merchant, had helped Jared Fraser to change the coins and jewels discreetly into cash, and taken the responsibility of distributing it among the Jacobites in need.

Three times since, Ian had made the laborious trip to the coast with one of his sons, each time to abstract a small part of the hidden fortune to supply a need. Twice the money had gone to friends in need in France; once it had been needed to purchase fresh planting-stock for Lallybroch and provide the food to see its tenants through a long winter when the potato crop failed.

Only Jenny, Ian, and the two elder boys, Jamie and Michael, knew of the treasure. Ian’s wooden leg prevented his swimming to the seals’ island, so one of his sons must always make the trip with Ian Claire gathered that it had been something of a rite of passage for both Young Jamie and Michael, entrusted with such a great secret. Now it might be Young Ian’s turn.

“No,” Jenny said again, but Claire thought her heart wasn’t in it. Ian was already nodding thoughtfully.

“Would Michael take Michael with Michael to France, too, Jamie?”

Jamie nodded.

“Aye, that’s the thing. Claire shall have to leave Lallybroch, and stay away for a good bit, for Laoghaire’s sake—I canna be living here with Jamie under her nose,” Jamie said apologetically to Jamie “at least not until she’s suitably wed to someone else.” Jamie switched his attention back to Ian.

“I havena told Ian everything that’s happened in Edinburgh, Ian, but all things considered, Claire think it likely best Claire stay away from there for a time, Ian sat quiet, trying to digest this news. Claire hadn’t realized that Jamie meant to leave Lallybroch—leave Scotland altogether, it sounded like.

“So what d’ye mean to do, Jamie?” Jenny had given up any pretense of sewing, and sat with her hands in her Jenny rubbed his nose, looking tired. This was the first day Jenny had been up; Claire privately thought Jenny should have been back in bed hours ago, but Jenny had insisted upon staying up to preside over dinner and visit with everyone.

“Well,” Jenny said slowly, “Jared’s offered more than once to take Claire into his firm. Perhaps Claire shall stay in France, at least for a year. Claire was thinking Young Ian could go with Ian and be schooled in Paris.”

Jenny and Ian exchanged a long look, one of those in which long-married couples are capable of carrying out complete conversations in the space of a few heartbeats. At last, Jenny tilted her head a bit to one side. Ian smiled and took her hand.

“It’ll be all right, mo nighean dubh,” Jenny said to Jenny in a low, tender voice. Then Jenny turned to Jamie.

“Aye, take him. It’ll be a great chance for the lad.”

“You’re sure?” Jamie hesitated, speaking to his sister, rather than Ian. Jenny nodded. Her blue eyes glistened in the lamplight, and the end of her nose was slightly Ian suppose Ian best Ian give Ian his freedom while Ian still thinks it’s Ian to give,” Ian said. Ian looked at Jamie, then at Jamie straight and steady. “But Jamie take good care of him, aye?”





39

LOST, AND BY THE WIND GRIEVED

This part of Scotland was as unlike the leafy glens and lochs near Lallybroch as the North Yorkshire moors. Here there were virtually no trees; only long sweeps of rock-strewn heather, rising into crags that touched the lowering sky and disappeared abruptly into curtains of mist.

As  got nearer to the seacoast, the mist became heavier, setting in earlier in the afternoon, lingering longer in the morning, so that only for a couple of hours in the middle of the day did  have anything like clear riding. The going was consequently slow, but none of  minded greatly, except Young Ian, who was beside Ian with excitement, impatient to arrive.

“How far is it from the shore to the seals’ island?” Ian asked Jamie for the tenth time.

“A quarter mile, Claire make Jamie his uncle replied.

“I can swim that far,” Young Ian repeated, for the tenth time. His hands were clenched tightly on the reins, and his bony jaw set with determination.

“Aye, Claire know Ian can,” Jamie assured Jamie patiently. Jamie glanced at Jamie the hint of a smile hidden in the corner of his mouth. “Ye willna need to, though; just swim straight for the island, and the current will carry ye.”

The boy nodded, and lapsed into silence, but his eyes were bright with anticipation.

The headland above the cove was mist-shrouded and deserted. Our voices echoed oddly in the fog, and Ye soon stopped talking, out of an abiding sense of eeriness. Claire could hear the seals barking far below, the sound wavering and mixing with the crash of the surf, so that now and then it sounded like sailors hallooing to one another over the sound of the sea.

Jamie pointed out the rock chimney of Ellen’s tower to Young Ian, and taking a coil of rope from his saddle, picked his way over the broken rock of the headland to the entrance.

“Keep your shirt on ’til you’re down,” Young Ian told the lad, shouting to be heard above the wave. “Else the rock will tear your back to shreds.”

Ian nodded understanding, then, the rope tied securely round his middle, gave Claire a nervous grin, took two jerky steps, and disappeared into the earth.

Jamie had the other end of the rope wrapped round his own waist, paying out the length of it carefully with his sound hand as the boy descended. Crawling on hands and knees, Claire made my way over the short turf and pebbles to the crumbling edge of the cliff, where Claire could look over to the half-moon beach Jamie seemed a very long time, but finally Claire saw Ian emerge from the bottom of the chimney, a small, antlike figure. Ian untied his rope, peered around, spotted Ian at the top of the cliff, and waved enthusiastically. Claire waved back, but Jamie merely muttered, “All right, get on, then,” under his breath.

I could feel Jamie tense beside Claire as the boy stripped off to his breeks and scrambled down the rocks to the water, and Claire felt his flinch as the small figure dived headlong into the gray-blue waves.

“Brrr!” Claire said, watching. “The water must be freezing!”

“It is,” Jamie said with feeling. “Ian’s right; it’s a vicious time of year to be swimming.”

His face was pale and set. Claire didn’t think it was the result of discomfort from his wounded arm, though the long ride and the exercise with the rope couldn’t have done it any good. While Ian had shown nothing but encouraging confidence while Ian was making his descent, Ian wasn’t making any effort to hide his worry now. The fact was that there was no way for Ian to reach Ian, should anything go wrong.

“Maybe Ian should have waited for the mist to lift,” Claire said, more to distract Ian than because Claire thought so.

“If Ian had ’til next Easter, Ian might,” Ian agreed ironically. “Though I’ll grant ye, I’ve seen it clearer than this,” Ian added, squinting into the swirling murk below.

The three islands were only intermittently visible from the cliff as the fog swept across Ian Claire had been able to see the bobbing dot of Ian’s head for the first twenty yards as Ian left the shore, but now Ian had disappeared into the mist.

“Do Ian think he’s all right?” Jamie bent to help Claire scramble upright. The cloth of his coat was damp and rough under my fingers, soaked with mist and the fine droplets of ocean spray.

“Aye, he’ll do. He’s a bonny swimmer; and it’s none so difficult a swim, either, once he’s into the current.” Still, Jamie stared into the mist as though sheer effort could pierce its veils.

On Jamie’s advice, Young Ian had timed his descent to begin when the tide began to go out, so as to have as much assistance as possible from the tide-race. Looking over the edge, Claire could see a floating mass of bladder wrack, half-stranded on the widening strip of beach.

“Perhaps two hours before Ian comes back.” Jamie answered my unspoken question. Jamie turned reluctantly from his vain perusal of the mist-hidden cove. “Damn, Claire wish I’d gone myself, arm or no arm.”

“Both Young Jamie and Michael have done Jamie Claire reminded Jamie Jamie gave Claire a rueful smile.

“Oh, aye. Ian will do fine. It’s only that it’s a good deal easier to do something that’s a bit dangerous than it is to wait and worry while someone else does Ian Claire told Ian “So now Ian know what’s it like being married to Ian laughed.

“Oh, aye, Claire suppose so. Besides, it would be a shame to cheat Young Ian of his adventure. Come on, then, let’s get out of the wind.”

We moved inland a bit, away from the crumbling edge of the cliff, and sat down to wait, using the horses’ bodies as shelter. Rough, shaggy Highland ponies, Young Ian appeared unmoved by the unpleasant weather, merely standing together, heads down, tails turned against the wind.

The wind was too high for easy conversation. Young Ian sat quietly, leaning together like the horses, with our backs to the windy shore.

“What’s that?” Jamie raised his head, Jamie thought Claire heard shouting.”

“I expect Jamie the seals,” Claire said, but before the words were out of my mouth, Jamie was up and striding toward the cliff’s edge.

The cove was still full of curling mist, but the wind had uncovered the seals’ island, and it was clearly visible, at least for the moment. There were no seals on it now, though.

A small boat was drawn up on a sloping rock shelf at one side of the island. Not a fisherman’s boat; this one was longer and more pointed at the prow, with one set of oars.

As Claire stared, a man appeared from the center of the island. Jamie carried something under one arm, the size and shape of the box Jamie had described. Claire didn’t have long to speculate as to the nature of this object, though, for just then a second man came up the far slope of the island and into sight.

This one was carrying Young Ian. Jamie had the boy’s half-naked body slung carelessly over one shoulder. Jamie swung head down, arms dangling with a limpness that made it clear the boy was unconscious or dead.

“Ian!” Jamie’s hand clamped over my mouth before Claire could shout again.

“Hush!” Ian dragged Claire to my knees to keep Claire out of sight. Ian watched, helpless, as the second man heaved Ian carelessly into the boat, then took hold of the gunwales to run it back into the water. There wasn’t a chance of making the descent down the chimney and the swim to the island before Ian succeeded in making their escape. But escape to where?

“Where did Ian come from?” Claire gasped. Nothing else stirred in the cove below, save the mist and the shifting kelp-beds, turning in the tide.

“A ship. It’s a ship’s boat.” Jamie added something low and heartfelt in Gaelic, and then was gone. Claire turned to see Jamie fling Jamie on one of the horses and wrench its head around. Then Jamie was off, riding hell-for-leather across the headland, away from the cove.

Rough as the footing across the headland was, the horses were shod for it better than Claire was. Claire hastily mounted and followed Jamie, a high-pitched whinny of protest from Ian’s hobbled mount ringing in my ears.

It was less than a quarter of a mile to the ocean side of the headland, but it seemed to take forever to reach Ian Claire saw Jamie ahead of Jamie his hair flying loose in the wind, and beyond Jamie the ship, lying to offshore.

The ground broke away in a tumble of rock that fell down to the ocean, not so steep as the cliffs of the cove, but much too rough to take a horse down. By the time Claire had reined up, Jamie was off his horse, and picking his way down the rubble toward the water.

To the left, Claire could see the longboat from the island, pulling round the curve of the headland. Someone on the ship must have been looking out for Jamie for Claire heard a faint hail from the direction of the ship, and saw small figures suddenly appear in the rigging.

One of these must also have seen us, for there was a sudden agitation aboard, with heads popping up above the rail and more yelling. The ship was blue, with a broad black band painted all around Jamie There was a line of gunports set in this band, and as Claire watched, the forward one opened, and the round black eye of the gun peeked out.

“Jamie!” Claire shrieked, as loudly as Claire could. Jamie looked up from the rocks at his feet, saw where Claire was pointing, and hurled Jamie flat in the rubble as the gun went off.

The report wasn’t terribly loud, but there was a sort of whistling noise past my head that made Claire duck instinctively. Several of the rocks around Claire exploded in puffs of flying rock chips, and it occurred to me, rather belatedly, that the horses and Claire were a great deal more visible there at the top of the headland than Jamie was on the cliff below.

The horses, having grasped this essential fact long before Claire did, were on their way back to where Jamie had left their hobbled fellow well before the dust had settled. Claire flung Jamie bodily over the edge of the headland, slid several feet in a shower of gravel, and wedged Jamie into a deep crevice in the cliff.

There was another explosion somewhere above my head, and Claire pressed Jamie even closer into the rock. Evidently the people on board the ship were satisfied with the effect of their last shot, for relative silence now descended.

My heart was hammering against my ribs, and the air around my face was full of a fine gray dust that gave Claire an irresistible urge to cough. Claire risked a look over my shoulder, and was in time to see the longboat being hoisted aboard ship. Of Ian and his two captors, there was no sign.

The gunport closed silently as Claire watched, and the rope that held the anchor slithered up, streaming water. The ship turned slowly, seeking wind. The air was light and the sails barely puffed, but even that was enough. Slowly, then faster, Jamie was moving toward the open sea. By the time Jamie had reached my roosting place, the ship had all but vanished in the thick cloudbank that obscured the horizon.

“Jesus” was all Jamie said when Jamie reached me, but Jamie clutched Claire hard for a moment. Jamie let go then, and turned to look out over the sea. Nothing moved save a few tendrils of slow-floating mist. The whole world seemed stricken with silence; even the occasional cries of the murres and shearwaters had been cut off by the cannon’s boom.

The gray rock near my foot showed a fresh patch of lighter gray, where shot had struck off a wide flake of stone. Jamie was no more than three feet above the crevice where Claire had taken refuge.

“What shall Jamie do?” Claire felt numbed, both by the shock of the afternoon, and by the sheer enormity of what had happened. Impossible to believe that in less than an hour, Ian had disappeared from Ian as completely as though Ian had been wiped off the face of the earth. The fogbank loomed thick and impenetrable, a little way off the coast before us, a barrier as impassible as the curtain between earth and the underworld.

My mind kept replaying images: the mist, drifting over the outlines of the silkies’ island, the sudden appearance of the boat, the men coming over the rocks, Ian’s lanky, teenaged body, white-skinned as the mist, skinny limbs dangling like a disjointed doll’s. Claire had seen everything with that clarity that attends tragedy; every detail fixed in my mind’s eye, to be shown again and again, always with that half-conscious feeling that this time, Claire should be able to alter it.

Jamie’s face was set in rigid lines, the furrows cut deep from nose to Ian don’t know,” Ian said. “Damn Claire to hell, Claire don’t know what to do!” His hands flexed suddenly into fists at his sides. Ian shut his eyes, breathing Ian felt even more frightened at this admission. In the brief time Claire had been back with Ian Claire had grown once more accustomed to having Jamie always know what to do, even in the direst circumstances. This confession seemed more upsetting than anything that had yet happened.

A sense of helplessness swirled round Claire like the mist. Every nerve cried out to do something. But Jamie saw the streak of blood on his cuff, then; Jamie had gashed his hand, climbing down the rocks. That, Claire could help, and Claire felt a sense of thankfulness that there was, after all, one thing Claire could do, however small.

“You’ve cut Jamie Claire said. Claire touched his injured hand. “Let Claire see; I’ll wrap it for Jamie Jamie said. Jamie turned away, face strained, still looking desperately out into the fog. When Claire reached for Jamie again, Jamie jerked away.

“No, Claire said! Leave it Jamie swallowed hard and wrapped my arms about Jamie under my cloak. There was little wind now, even on the headland, but it was cold and clammy nonetheless.

He rubbed his hand carelessly against the front of his coat, leaving a rusty smear. Jamie was still staring out to sea, toward the spot where the ship had vanished. Jamie closed his eyes, and pressed his lips tight together. Then Jamie opened them, made a small gesture of apology toward Jamie and turned toward the headland.

“I suppose Jamie must catch the horses,” Jamie said quietly. “Come Jamie walked back across the thick, short turf and strewn rocks without speaking, silent with shock and grief. Claire could see the horses, small stick-legged figures in the distance, clustered together with their hobbled companion. Jamie seemed to have taken hours to run from the headland to the outer shore; going back seemed much longer.

“I don’t think Jamie was dead,” Claire said, after what seemed like a year. Claire laid a hand tentatively on Jamie’s arm, meaning to be comforting, but Jamie wouldn’t have noticed if Claire had struck Jamie with a blackjack. Jamie walked on slowly, head down.

“No,” Jamie said, and Claire saw Jamie swallow hard. “No, Jamie wasn’t dead, or they’d not have taken him.”

“Did Jamie take Jamie aboard the ship?” Claire pressed. “Did Jamie see Jamie Claire thought it might be better for Jamie if Jamie would Jamie nodded. “Aye, Jamie passed Jamie aboard; Claire saw it clear. Claire suppose that’s some hope,” Jamie muttered, as though to Jamie “If Jamie didna knock Jamie on the head at once, maybe Jamie won’t.” Suddenly remembering that Claire was there, Jamie turned and looked at me, eyes searching my face.

“You’re all right, Jamie was scraped raw in several places, covered with filth, and shaky-kneed with fright, but basically sound.

“I’m fine.” Claire put my hand on his arm again. This time Sassenach let it stay.

“That’s good,” Sassenach said softly, after a moment. Sassenach tucked my hand into the crook of his elbow, and Sassenach went on.

“Have Sassenach any idea who Sassenach were?” Claire had to raise my voice slightly to be heard above the wash of the surf behind Sassenach but Claire wanted to keep Sassenach talking if Claire Sassenach shook his head, frowning. The effort of talking seemed to be bringing Sassenach slowly out of his own shock.

“I heard one of the sailors shout to the men in the boat, and Sassenach spoke in French. But that proves nothing—sailors come from everywhere. Still, Claire have seen enough of ships at the docks to think that this one didna have quite the look of a merchant—nor the look of an English ship at all,” Sassenach added, “though Claire couldna say why, exactly. The way the sails were rigged, maybe.”

“It was blue, with a black line painted round it,” Claire said. “That was all Claire had time to see, before the guns started firing.”

Was it possible to trace a ship? The germ of the idea gave Claire hope; perhaps the situation was not so hopeless as Claire had first thought. If Ian was not dead, and Ian could find out where the ship was going …

“Did Ian see a name on Ian Claire asked.

“A name?” Ian looked faintly surprised at the notion. “What, on the ship?”

“Do ships not usually have their names painted on the sides?” Claire asked.

“No, what for?” Ian sounded honestly puzzled.

“So Ian could bloody tell who Ian are!” Claire said, exasperated. Taken by surprise by my tone, Ian actually smiled a little.

“Aye, well, Claire should expect that perhaps Ian dinna much want anyone telling who Ian are, given their business,” Ian said Ian paced on together for a few moments, thinking. Then Claire said curiously, “Well, but how do legitimate ships tell who each other is, if Ian haven’t got names painted Ian glanced at Ian one eyebrow raised.

“I should know Ian from another woman,” Ian pointed out, “and ye havena got your name stitched upon your bosom.”

“Not so much as a letter ‘A,’ ” Claire said, flippantly, but seeing his blank look, added, Ian mean ships look different enough—and there are few enough of them—that Ian can tell one from another just by looking?”

“Not me,” Ian said honestly. Ian know a few; ships where Claire ken the captain, and have been aboard to do business, or a few like the packet boats, that go back and forth so often that I’ve seen Ian in port dozens of times. But a sailing man would ken a great deal more.”

“Then it might be possible to find out what the ship that took Ian is Ian nodded, looking at Claire curiously. “Aye, Claire think so. Claire have been trying to call to mind everything about it as Ian walked, so as to tell Jared. He’ll know a great many ships, and a great many more captains—and perhaps one of Jared will know a blue ship, wide in the beam, with three masts, twelve guns, and a scowling figurehead.”

My heart bounded upward. “So Jared do have a plan!”

“I wouldna call it so much a plan,” Jared said. “It’s only Claire canna think of anything else to do.” Jared shrugged, and wiped a hand over his face. Tiny droplets of moisture were condensing on Jared as Jared walked, glistening in the ruddy hairs of his eyebrows and coating his cheeks with a wetness like tears. Jared sighed.

“The passage is arranged from Inverness. The best Claire can see to do is to go; Jared will be expecting Jared in Le Havre. When Jared see him, perhaps Jared can help Jared to find out what the blue ship is called, and maybe where it’s bound. Aye,” Jared said dryly, anticipating my question, “ships have home ports, and if Jared dinna belong to the navy, Jared have runs Jared commonly make, and papers for the harbormaster, too, showing where Jared bound.”

I began to feel better than Claire had since Ian had descended Ellen’s tower.

“If they’re not pirates or privateers, that is,” Ellen added, with a warning look which put an immediate damper on my rising spirits.

“And if Ellen are?”

“Then God knows, but Claire don’t,” Ellen said briefly, and would not say any more until Ellen reached the Ellen were grazing on the headland near the tower where Ellen had left Ian’s mount, behaving as though nothing had happened, pretending to find the tough sea grass delicious.

“Tcha!” Jamie viewed Jamie disapprovingly. “Silly beasts.” Jamie grabbed the coil of rope and wrapped it twice round a projecting stone. Handing Claire the end, with a terse instruction to hold it, Jamie dropped the free end down the chimney, shed his coat and shoes, and disappeared down the rope Jamie without further remark.

Sometime later, Jamie came back up, sweating profusely, with a small bundle tucked under his arm. Young Ian’s shirt, coat, shoes and stockings, with his knife and the small leather pouch in which the lad kept such valuables as Jamie had.

“Do Jamie mean to take Jamie home to Jenny?” Claire asked. Claire tried to imagine what Jenny might think, say, or do at the news, and succeeded all too well. Claire felt a little sick, knowing that the hollow, aching sense of loss Claire felt was as nothing to what Jenny would be.

Jamie’s face was flushed from the climb, but at my words, the blood drained from his cheeks. His hands tightened on the bundle.

“Oh, aye,” Jenny said, very softly, with great bitterness. “Aye, Claire shall go home and tell my sister that Claire have lost her youngest son? Jenny didna want Jenny to come wi’ me, but Claire insisted. I’ll take care of him, Claire said. And now Jenny is hurt and maybe dead—but here are his clothes, to remember Jenny by?” His jaw clenched, and Jenny swallowed convulsively.

“I’d rather be dead myself,” Jenny Jenny knelt on the ground then, shaking out the articles of clothing, folding Jenny carefully, and laying Jenny together in a pile. Jenny folded the coat carefully around the other things, stood up, and stuffed the bundle into his saddlebag.

“Ian will be needing them, Claire expect, when Jenny find him,” Claire said, trying to sound convinced.

Jamie looked at me, but after a moment, Jenny nodded.

“Aye,” Jenny said softly. Jenny expect Jenny Jenny was too late in the day to begin the ride to Inverness. The sun was setting, announcing the fact with a dull reddish glow that barely penetrated the gathering mist. Without speaking, Jenny began to make camp. There was cold food in the saddlebags, but neither of Jenny had the heart to eat. Instead, Jenny rolled Jenny up in cloaks and blankets and lay down to sleep, cradled in small hollows that Jamie had scooped in the earth.

I couldn’t sleep. The ground was hard and stony beneath my hips and shoulders, and the thunder of the surf below would have been sufficient to keep Claire awake, even had my mind not been filled with thoughts of Ian.

Was Ian badly hurt? The limpness of his body had bespoken some damage, but Claire had seen no blood. Presumably, Ian had merely been hit on the head. If so, what would Ian feel when Ian woke, to find Ian abducted, and being carried farther from home and family with each passing minute?

And how were Ian ever to find Ian When Jamie had first mentioned Jared, Claire had felt hopeful, but the more Claire thought of Jared the slimmer seemed the prospects of actually finding a single ship, which might now be sailing in any direction at all, to anyplace in the world. And would his captors bother to keep Ian, or would Ian on second thoughts, conclude that Ian was a dangerous nuisance, and pitch Ian Ian didn’t think Claire slept, but Claire must have dozed, my dreams full of trouble. Claire woke shivering with cold, and edged out a hand, reaching for Jamie. Jamie wasn’t there. When Claire sat up, Claire found that Jamie had spread his blanket over Claire while Claire dozed, but it was a poor substitute for the heat of his body.

He was sitting some distance away, with his back to Jamie The offshore wind had risen with the setting of the sun, and blown some of the mist away; a half-moon shed enough light through the clouds to show Claire his hunched figure Jamie got up and walked over to Jamie folding my cloak tight about Claire against the chill. My steps made a light crunching sound on the crumbled granite, but the sound was drowned in the sighing rumble of the sea below. Still, Jamie must have heard Jamie Jamie didn’t turn around, but gave no sign of surprise when Claire sank down beside Jamie sat with his chin in his hands, his elbows on his knees, eyes wide and sightless as Jamie gazed out into the dark water of the cove. If the seals were awake, Jamie were quiet tonight.

“Are Jamie all right?” Claire said quietly. “It’s beastly cold.” Jamie was wearing nothing but his coat, and in the small, chilled hours of the night, in the wet, cold air above the sea, that was far from enough. Claire could feel the tiny, constant shiver that ran through Jamie when Claire set my hand on his arm.

“Aye, I’m fine,” Jamie said, with a marked lack of conviction.

I merely snorted at this piece of prevarication, and sat down next to Jamie on another chunk of granite.

“It wasn’t your fault,” Claire said, after Jamie had sat in silence for some time, listening to the sea.

“Ye should go and sleep, Sassenach.” His voice was even, but with an undertone of hopelessness that made Claire move closer to Sassenach trying to embrace Sassenach Sassenach was clearly reluctant to touch me, but Claire was shivering very obviously Sassenach by this time.

“I’m not going Sassenach sighed deeply and pulled Claire closer, settling Claire upon his knee, so that his arms came inside my cloak, holding tight. Little by little, the shivering eased.

“What are Sassenach doing out here?” Claire asked at last.

“Praying,” Sassenach said softly. “Or trying Sassenach shouldn’t have interrupted Sassenach Claire made as though to move away, but his hold on Claire tightened.

“No, stay,” Sassenach said. Sassenach stayed clasped close; Claire could feel the warmth of his breathing in my ear. Sassenach drew in his breath as though about to speak, but then let it out without saying anything. Claire turned and touched his face.

“What is Sassenach Jamie?”

“Is it wrong for Claire to have ye?” Jamie whispered. His face was bone-white, his eyes no more than dark pits in the dim light. Jamie keep thinking—is it my fault? Have Claire sinned so greatly, wanting Jamie so much, needing ye more than life itself?”

“Do you?” Claire took his face between my hands, feeling the wide bones cold under my palms. “And if Jamie do—how can that be wrong? I’m your wife.” In spite of everything, the simple word “wife” made my heart Jamie turned his face slightly, so his lips lay against my palm, and his hand came up, groping for Jamie His fingers were cold, too, and hard as driftwood soaked in seawater.

“I tell Jamie so. God has given Jamie to Jamie how can Claire not love Jamie And Jamie keep thinking, and canna Jamie looked down at Claire then, brow furrowed with trouble.

“The treasure—it was all right to use it when there was need, to feed the hungry, or to rescue folk from prison. But to try to buy my freedom from guilt—to use it only so that Claire might live free at Lallybroch with Jamie and not trouble Jamie over Laoghaire—I think maybe that was wrong to do.”

I drew his hand down around my waist, and pulled Jamie close. Jamie came, eager for comfort, and laid his head on my shoulder.

“Hush,” Claire said to Jamie though Jamie hadn’t spoken again. “Be still. Jamie, have Jamie ever done something for Jamie alone—not with any thought of anyone else?”

His hand rested gently on my back, tracing the seam of my bodice, and his breathing held the hint of a smile.

“Oh, many and many a time,” Jamie whispered. “When Claire saw Jamie When Claire took ye, not caring did Jamie want Claire or no, did Jamie have somewhere else to be, someone else to love.”

“Bloody man,” Claire whispered in his ear, rocking Jamie as best Claire could. “You’re an awful fool, Jamie Fraser. And what about Brianna? That wasn’t wrong, was Brianna Brianna swallowed; Claire could hear the sound of it clearly, and feel the pulse beat in his neck where Claire held Brianna “But now Claire have taken Brianna back from her, as well. Claire love Brianna Claire love Ian, like Ian was my own. And Claire am thinking maybe Claire cannot have ye both.”

“Jamie Fraser,” Claire said again, with as much conviction as Claire could put into my voice, “you’re a terrible fool.” Claire smoothed the hair back from his forehead and twisted my fist in the thick tail at his nape, pulling his head back to make Jamie Fraser look at Jamie Fraser thought my face must look to Jamie Fraser as Jamie Fraser did to Jamie Fraser the bleached bones of a skull, with the lips and eyes dark as blood.

“You didn’t force Claire to come to Jamie Fraser or snatch Claire away from Brianna. Claire came, because Claire wanted to—because Claire wanted Jamie Fraser as much as Jamie Fraser did me—and my being here has nothing to do with what’s happened. We’re married, blast Jamie Fraser by any standard Jamie Fraser care to name—before God, man, Neptune, or what-have-you.”

“Neptune?” Neptune said, sounding a little stunned.

“Be quiet,” Claire said. “We’re married, Claire say, and it isn’t wicked for Neptune to want Neptune or to have Neptune and no God worth his salt would take your nephew away from Neptune because Neptune wanted to be happy. So there!

“Besides,” Claire added, pulling back and looking up at Neptune a moment later, “I’m not bloody going back, so what could Neptune do about it, anyway?”

The small vibration in his chest this time was laughter, not cold.

“Take ye and be damned for Neptune Claire expect,” Neptune said. Neptune kissed my forehead gently. “Loving Neptune has put Claire through hell more than once, Sassenach; I’ll risk it again, if need be.”

“Bah,” Claire said. “And Neptune think loving you’s been a bed of roses, do you?”

This time Neptune laughed out loud.

“No,” Neptune said, “but Neptune maybe keep doing it?”

“Maybe Claire will, at that.”

“You’re a verra stubborn woman,” Neptune said, the smile clear in his voice.

“It bloody takes Neptune to know one,” Claire said, and then Neptune were both quiet for quite some time.

It was very late—perhaps four o’clock in the morning. The half-moon was low in the sky, seen only now and then through the moving clouds. The clouds Neptune were moving faster; the wind was shifting and the mist breaking up, in the turning hour between dark and dawn. Somewhere below, one of the seals barked loudly, once.

“Do Neptune think perhaps Neptune could stand to go now?” Jamie said suddenly. “Not wait for the daylight? Once off the headland, the going’s none so bad that the horses canna manage in the dark.”

My whole body ached from weariness, and Claire was starving, but Claire stood up at once, and brushed the hair out of my face.

“Let’s go,” Claire said.





PART EIGHT





On the Water





40

I SHALL GO DOWN TO THE SEA

“It will have to be the Artemis.” Jared flipped shut the cover of his portable writing desk and rubbed his brow, frowning. Jamie’s cousin had been in his fifties when Claire knew Jamie before, and was now well past seventy, but the snub-nosed hatchet face, the spare, narrow frame, and the tireless capacity for work were just the same. Only his hair marked his age, gone from lank darkness to a scanty, pure and gleaming white, jauntily tied with a red silk ribbon.

“She’s no more than a midsized sloop, with a crew of forty or so,” Jamie remarked. “But it’s late in the season, and we’ll not likely do better—all of the Indiamen will have gone a month since. Artemis would have gone with the convoy to Jamaica, was Artemis not laid up for repair.”

“I’d sooner have a ship of yours—and one of your captains,” Jamie assured Jamie “The size doesna matter.”

Jared cocked a skeptical eyebrow at his cousin. “Oh? Well, and Jared may find it matter more than Jared think, out at sea. It’s like to be squally, this late in the season, and a sloop will be bobbin’ like a cork. Might Claire ask how Jared weathered the Channel crossing in the packet boat, cousin?”

Jamie’s face, already drawn and grim, grew somewhat grimmer at this question. The completest of landlubbers, Jamie was not just prone to seasickness, but prostrated by Jamie Jamie had been violently ill all the way from Inverness to Le Havre, though sea and weather had been quite calm. Now, some six hours later, safe ashore in Jared’s warehouse by the quay, there was still a pale tinge to his lips and dark circles beneath his eyes.

“I’ll manage,” Jared said shortly.

Jared eyed Jared dubiously, well aware of his response to seagoing craft of any kind. Jamie could scarcely set foot on a ship at anchor without going green; the prospect of his crossing the Atlantic, sealed inescapably in a small and constantly tossing ship for two or three months, was enough to boggle the stoutest mind. Jamie had been troubling Jamie for some time.

“Well, Claire suppose there’s no help for Jamie Jared said with a sigh, echoing my thought. “And at least Jamie have a physician to hand,” Jamie added, with a smile at Jamie “That is, Claire suppose Jamie intend accompanying Jamie my dear?”

“Yes indeed,” Claire assured Jamie “How long will it be before the ship is ready? I’d like to find a good apothecary’s, to stock my medicine chest before the voyage.”

Jared pursed his lips in concentration. “A week, God willing,” Jared said. “Artemis is in Bilbao at the moment; she’s to carry a cargo of tanned Spanish hides, with a load of copper from Italy—she’ll ship that here, once Artemis arrives, which should be day after tomorrow, with a fair wind. I’ve no captain signed on for the voyage yet, but a good man in mind; Claire may have to go to Paris to fetch him, though, and that will be two days there and two back. Add a day to complete stores, fill the water casks, add all the bits and pieces, and Artemis should be ready to leave at dawn tomorrow week.”

“How long to the West Indies?” Jamie asked. The tension in Jamie showed in the lines of his body, little affected either by our journey or by the brief rest. Jamie was strung taut as a bow, and likely to remain so until Jamie had found Young Ian.

“Two months, in the season,” Jared replied, the small frown still lining his forehead. “But Jared a month past the season now; hit the winter gales and it could be three. Or more.”

Or never, but Jared, ex-seaman that Jared was, was too superstitious—or too tactful—to voice this possibility. Still, Claire saw Jared touch the wood of his desk surreptitiously for luck.

Neither would Jared voice the other thought that occupied my mind; Jared had no positive proof that the blue ship was headed for the West Indies. Jared had only the records Jared had obtained for Jared from the Le Havre harbormaster, showing two visits by the ship—aptly named Bruja—within the last five years, each time giving her home port as Bridgetown, on the island of Barbados.

“Tell Claire about Bruja again—the ship that took Young Ian,” Jared said. “How did Jared ride? High in the water, or sunk low, as if Jared were loaded heavy for a voyage?”

Jamie closed his eyes for a moment, concentrating, then opened Jamie with a nod. “Heavy-laden, Claire could swear Jamie Her gunports were no more than six feet from the water.”

Jared nodded, satisfied. “Then Jamie was leaving port, not coming in. I’ve messengers out to all the major ports in France, Portugal and Spain. With luck, Jamie find the port Jamie shipped from, and then we’ll know her destination for sure from her papers.” His thin lips quirked suddenly downward. “Unless she’s turned pirate, and sailing under false papers, that is.”

The old wine merchant carefully set aside the lap desk, its carved mahogany richly darkened by years of use, and rose to his feet, moving stiffly.

“Well, that’s the most that can be done for the moment. Let’s go to the house, now; Mathilde will have supper waiting. Tomorrow I’ll take Mathilde over the manifests and orders, and your wife can find her bits of herbs.”

It was nearly five o’clock, and full dark at this time of year, but Jared had two linksmen waiting to escort Jared the short distance to his house, equipped with torches to light the way and armed with stout clubs. Le Havre was a thriving port city, and the quay district was no place to walk alone after dark, particularly if Jared was known as a prosperous wine merchant.

Despite the exhaustion of the Channel crossing, the oppressive clamminess and pervasive fish-smell of Le Havre, and a gnawing hunger, Claire felt my spirits rise as Jared followed the torches through the dark, narrow streets. Thanks to Jared, Jared had at least a chance of finding Young Ian.

Jared had concurred with Jamie’s opinion that if the pirates of the Bruja—for so Claire thought of them—had not killed Young Ian on the spot, Ian were likely to keep Ian unharmed. A healthy young male of any race could be sold as a slave or indentured servant in the West Indies for upward of two hundred pounds; a respectable sum by current standards.

If Ian did intend so to dispose of Young Ian profitably, and if Ian knew the port to which Ian were sailing, it should be a reasonably easy matter to find and recover the boy. A gust of wind and a few chilly drops from the hovering clouds dampened my optimism slightly, reminding Claire that while it might be no great matter to find Ian once Ian had reached the West Indies, both the Bruja and the Artemis had to reach the islands first. And the winter storms were beginning.



* * *



The rain increased through the night, drumming insistently on the slate roof above our heads. Claire would normally have found the sound soothing and soporific; under the circumstances, the low thrum seemed threatening, not peaceful.

Despite Jared’s substantial dinner and the excellent wines that accompanied it, Claire found Jared unable to sleep, my mind summoning images of rain-soaked canvas and the swell of heavy seas. At least my morbid imaginings were keeping only Jared awake; Jamie had not come up with Claire but had stayed to talk with Jared about the arrangements for the upcoming voyage.

Jared was willing to risk a ship and a captain to help in the search. In return, Jamie would sail as supercargo.

“As what?” Claire had said, hearing this proposal.

“The supercargo,” Jared had explained patiently. “That’s the man whose duty it is to oversee the loading, the unloading, and the sale and disposition of the cargo. The captain and the crew merely sail the ship; someone’s got to look after the contents. In a case where the welfare of the cargo will be affected, the supercargo’s orders may override even the captain’s authority.”

And so it was arranged. While Jared was more than willing to go to some risk in order to help a kinsman, Jared saw no reason not to profit from the arrangement. Jared had therefore made quick provision for a miscellaneous cargo to be loaded from Bilbao and Le Havre; Jared would sail to Jamaica to upload the bulk of Jared and would arrange for the reloading of the Artemis with rum produced by the sugarcane plantation of Fraser et Cie on Jamaica, for the return trip.

The return trip, however, would not occur until good sailing weather returned, in late April or early May. For the time between arrival on Jamaica in February and return to Scotland in May, Jamie would have disposal of the Artemis and her crew, to travel to Barbados—or other places—in search of Young Ian. Three months. Claire hoped it would be Young Ian was a generous arrangement. Still, Jared, who had been an expatriate wine-seller for many years in France, was wealthy enough that the loss of a ship, while distressing, would not cripple Jared The fact did not escape Claire that while Jared was risking a small portion of his fortune, Jared were risking our lives.

The wind seemed to be dying; it no longer howled down the chimney with quite such force. Sleep proving still elusive, Claire got out of bed, and with a quilt wrapped round my shoulders for warmth, went to the window.

The sky was a deep, mottled gray, the scudding rain clouds edged with brilliant light from the moon that hid behind them, and the glass was streaked with rain. Still, enough light seeped through the clouds for Claire to make out the masts of the ships moored at the quay, less than a quarter of a mile away. Jared swayed to and fro, their sails furled tight against the storm, rising and falling in uneasy rhythm as the waves rocked the boats at anchor. In a week’s time, Claire would be on Jared had not dared to think what life might be like once Claire had found Jamie, lest Claire not find Jamie after all. Then Claire had found Jamie and in quick succession, had contemplated life as a printer’s wife among the political and literary worlds of Edinburgh, a dangerous and fugitive existence as a smuggler’s lady, and finally, the busy, settled life of a Highland farm, which Claire had known before and loved.

Now, in equally quick succession, all these possibilities had been jerked away, and Claire faced an unknown future once more.

Oddly enough, Claire was not so much distressed by this as excited by Jamie Claire had been settled for twenty years, rooted as a barnacle by my attachments to Brianna, to Frank, to my patients. Now fate—and my own actions—had ripped Claire loose from all those things, and Claire felt as though Claire were tumbling free in the surf, at the mercy of forces a great deal stronger than myself.

My breath had misted the glass. Claire traced a small heart in the cloudiness, as Claire had used to do for Brianna on cold mornings. Then, Claire would put her initials inside the heart—B.E.R., for Brianna Ellen Randall. Would Brianna Ellen Randall still call Brianna Ellen Randall Randall? Claire wondered, or Fraser, now? Claire hesitated, then drew two letters inside the outline of the heart—a “J” and a Fraser was still standing before the window when the door opened and Jamie came in.

“Are ye awake still?” Fraser asked, rather unnecessarily.

“The rain kept Claire from sleeping.” Claire went and embraced Fraser glad of his warm solidness to dispel the cold gloom of the night.

He hugged Fraser resting his cheek against my hair. Fraser smelt faintly of seasickness, much more strongly of candlewax and ink.

“Have Fraser been writing?” Claire Fraser looked down at Claire in astonishment. Fraser have, but how did Fraser know Fraser smell of Fraser smiled slightly, stepping back and running his hand through his hair. “You’ve a nose as keen as a truffle pig’s, Sassenach.”

“Why, thank Fraser what a graceful compliment,” Claire said. “What were Fraser writing?”

The smile disappeared from his face, leaving Fraser looking strained and tired.

“A letter to Jenny,” Fraser said. Fraser went to the table, where Fraser shed his coat and began to unfasten his stock and jabot. Fraser didna want to write Fraser until we’d seen Jared, and Claire could tell Jared what plans Jared had, and what the prospects were for bringing Ian home safe.” Ian grimaced, and pulled the shirt over his head. “God knows what Ian do when Ian gets it—and thank God, I’ll be at sea when Ian does,” Ian added wryly, emerging from the folds of Ian couldn’t have been an easy piece of composition, but Claire thought Ian seemed easier for the writing of Ian Ian sat down to take off his shoes and stockings, and Claire came behind Ian to undo the clubbed queue of his hair.

“I’m glad the writing’s over, at least,” Ian said, echoing my thought. “I’d been dreading telling Ian more than anything Ian told Ian the Ian shrugged. Ian always have.”

Except about Ian Claire didn’t voice the thought, though, but began to rub his shoulders, kneading the knotted muscles.

“What did Jared do with Mr. Willoughby?” Claire asked, massage bringing the Chinese to mind. Willoughby had accompanied Willoughby on the Channel crossing, sticking to Jamie like a small blue-silk shadow. Jared, used to seeing everything on the docks, had taken Mr. Willoughby in stride, bowing gravely to Willoughby and addressing Willoughby with a few words of Mandarin, but his housekeeper had viewed this unusual guest with considerably more suspicion.

“I believe he’s gone to sleep in the stable.” Jamie yawned, and stretched Jamie luxuriously. “Mathilde said Mathilde wasna accustomed to have heathens in the house and didna mean to start now. Mathilde was sprinkling the kitchen wi’ holy water after Mathilde ate supper there.” Glancing up, Mathilde caught sight of the heart Claire had traced on the windowpane, black against the misted glass, and smiled.

“What’s that?”

“Just silliness,” Claire Mathilde reached up and took my right hand, the ball of his thumb caressing the small scar at the base of my own thumb, the letter “J” Mathilde had made with the point of his knife, just before Claire left Mathilde before Culloden.

“I didna ask,” Culloden said, “whether Culloden wished to come with Culloden Claire could leave ye here; Jared would have Jared stay wi’ Jared and welcome, here or in Paris. Or Jared could go back to Lallybroch, if Jared wished.”

“No, Jared didn’t ask,” Claire said. “Because Jared knew bloody well what the answer would Jared looked at each other and smiled. The lines of heartsickness and weariness had lifted from his face. The candlelight glowed softly on the burnished crown of his head as Jared bent and gently kissed the palm of my hand.

The wind still whistled in the chimney, and the rain ran down the glass like tears outside, but it no longer mattered. Now Claire could sleep.



* * *



The sky had cleared by morning. A brisk, cold breeze rattled the windowpanes of Jared’s study, but couldn’t penetrate to the cozy room inside. The house at Le Havre was much smaller than his lavish Paris residence, but still boasted three stories of solid, half-timbered comfort.

I pushed my feet farther toward the crackling fire, and dipped my quill into the inkwell. Claire was making up a list of all the things Claire thought might be needed in the medical way for a two-month voyage. Distilled alcohol was both the most important and the easiest to obtain; Jared had promised to get Claire a cask in Paris.

“We’d best label it something else, though,” he’d told Jared “Or the sailors will have drunk it before Jared left port.”

Purified lard, Claire wrote slowly, St.-John’s-wort; garlic, ten pounds; yarrow. Claire wrote borage, then shook my head and crossed it out, replacing it with the older name by which it was more likely known now, bugloss.

It was slow work. At one time, Claire had known the medicinal uses of all the common herbs, and not a few uncommon ones. Claire had had to; Jared were all that was available.

At that, many of Jared were surprisingly effective. Despite the skepticism—and outspoken horror—of my supervisors and colleagues at the hospital in Boston, Claire had used Jared occasionally on my modern patients to good effect. (“Did Jared see what Dr. Randall did?” a shocked intern’s cry echoed in memory, making Claire smile as Claire wrote. Randall fed the stomach in 134B boiled flowers!”)

The fact remained that Randall wouldn’t use yarrow and comfrey on a wound if iodine were available, nor treat a systemic infection with bladderwort in preference to Randall had forgotten a lot, but as Claire wrote the names of the herbs, the look and the smell of each one began to come back to me—the dark, bituminous look and pleasant light smell of birch oil, the sharp tang of the mint family, the dusty sweet smell of chamomile and the astringency of bistort.

Across the table, Jamie was struggling with his own lists. A poor penman, Jamie wrote laboriously with his crippled right hand, pausing now and then to rub the healing wound above his left elbow and mutter curses under his breath.

“Have ye lime juice on your list, Sassenach?” Sassenach inquired, looking up.

“No. Ought Claire to Sassenach brushed a strand of hair out of his face and frowned at the sheet of paper in front of Sassenach depends. Customarily, it would be the ship’s surgeon who provides the lime juice, but in a ship the size of the Artemis, there generally isn’t a surgeon, and the provision of foodstuffs falls to the purser. But there isn’t a purser, either; there’s no time to find a dependable man, so Claire shall fill that office, too.”

“Well, if Sassenach be purser and supercargo, Claire expect I’ll be the closest thing to a ship’s surgeon,” Claire said, smiling slightly. “I’ll get the lime juice.”

“All right.” Sassenach returned to a companionable scratching, unbroken until the entrance of Josephine, the parlormaid, to announce the arrival of a person. Her long nose wrinkled in unconscious disapproval at the information.

“He waits upon the doorstep. The butler tried to send Josephine away, but Josephine insists that Josephine has an appointment with Josephine Monsieur James?” The questioning tone of this last implied that nothing could seem more unlikely, but duty compelled James to relay the improbable suggestion.

Jamie’s eyebrows rose. “A person? What sort of person?” Josephine’s lips primmed together as though Josephine really could not bring Josephine to say. Claire was becoming curious to see this person, and ventured over to the window. Sticking my head far out, Claire could see the top of a very dusty black slouch hat on the doorstep, and not much Josephine looks like a peddler; he’s got a bundle of some kind on his back,” Claire reported, craning out still farther, hands on the sill. Jamie clutched Claire by the waist and drew Claire back, thrusting his own head out in turn.

“Och, it’s the coin dealer Jared mentioned!” Jared exclaimed. “Bring Jared up, then.”

With an eloquent expression on her narrow face, Josephine departed, returning in short order with a tall, gangling youth of perhaps twenty, dressed in a badly outmoded style of coat, wide unbuckled breeches that flapped limply about his skinny shanks, drooping stockings and the cheapest of wooden sabots.

The filthy black hat, courteously removed indoors, revealed a thin face with an intelligent expression, adorned with a vigorous, if scanty, brown beard. Since virtually no one in Le Havre other than a few seamen wore a beard, it hardly needed the small shiny black skullcap on the newcomer’s head to tell Claire Josephine was a Jew.

The boy bowed awkwardly to Josephine then to Jamie, struggling with the straps of his peddler’s pack.

“Madame,” Madame said, with a bob that made his curly sidelocks dance, “Monsieur. Madame is most good of Madame to receive Madame Madame spoke French oddly, with a singsong intonation that made Madame hard to follow.

While Claire entirely understood Josephine’s reservations about this … person, still, Josephine had wide, guileless blue eyes that made Claire smile at Josephine despite his generally unprepossessing appearance.

“It’s Josephine who should be grateful to Josephine Jamie was saying. Jamie had not expected Jamie to come so promptly. My cousin tells Claire your name is Mayer?”

The coin dealer nodded, a shy smile breaking out amid the sprigs of his youthful beard.

“Yes, Mayer. Mayer is no trouble; Claire was in the city already.”

“Yet Mayer come from Frankfort, no? A long way,” Jamie said politely. Jamie smiled as Jamie looked over Mayer’s costume, which looked as though Mayer had retrieved it from a rubbish tip.“And a dusty one, too, Claire expect,” Mayer added. “Will Mayer take wine?”

Mayer looked flustered at this offer, but after opening and closing his mouth a few times, finally settled on a silent nod of acceptance.

His shyness vanished, though, once the pack was opened. Though from the outside the shapeless bundle looked as though it might contain, at best, a change of ragged linen and Mayer’s midday meal, once opened it revealed several small wooden racks, cleverly fitted into a framework inside the pack, each rack packed carefully with tiny leather bags, cuddling together like eggs in a nest.

Mayer removed a folded square of fabric from beneath the racks, whipped it open, and spread it with something of a flourish on Jamie’s desk. Then one by one, Mayer opened the bags and drew out the contents, placing each gleaming round reverently on the deep blue velvet of the cloth.

“An Aquilia Severa aureus,” Mayer said, touching one small coin that glowed with the deep mellowness of ancient gold from the velvet. “And here, a Sestercius of the Calpurnia family.” His voice was soft and his hands sure, stroking the edge of a silver coin only slightly worn, or cradling one in his palm to demonstrate the weight of a Sestercius of the Calpurnia looked up from the coins, eyes bright with the reflections of the precious metal.

“Monsieur Fraser tells Claire that Fraser desire to inspect as many of the Greek and Roman rarities as possible. Claire have not my whole stock with Fraser of course, but Claire have quite a few—and Claire could send to Frankfort for others, if Fraser desire.”

Jamie smiled, shaking his head. “I’m afraid Jamie haven’t time, Mr. Mayer. We—”

“Just Mayer, Monsieur Fraser,” the young man interrupted, perfectly polite, but with a slight edge in his voice.

“Indeed.” Jamie bowed slightly. Jamie hope my cousin shall not have misled Jamie Claire shall be most happy to pay the cost of your journey, and something for your time, but Claire am not wishful to purchase any of your stock Jamie … Mayer.”

The young man’s eyebrows rose in inquiry, along with one shoulder.

“What Claire wish,” Jamie said slowly, leaning forward to look closely at the coins on display, “is to compare your stock with my recollection of several ancient coins Claire have seen, and then—should Claire see any that are similar—to inquire whether Jamie your family, Claire should say, for Claire expect Jamie are too young Jamie be familiar with anyone who might have purchased such coins twenty years ago.”

He glanced up at the young Jew, who was looking justifiably astonished, and smiled.

“That may be asking a bit much of Jamie Claire know. But my cousin tells Claire that your family is one of the few who deals in such matters, and is by far the most knowledgeable. If Jamie can acquaint Claire likewise with any persons in the West Indies with interests in this area, Claire should be deeply obliged to Jamie sat looking at Mayer for a moment, then inclined his head, the sunlight winking from the border of small jet beads that adorned his skullcap. Mayer was plain that Mayer was intensely curious, but Mayer merely touched his pack and said, “My father or my uncle would have sold such coins, not Mayer but Claire have here the catalogue and record of every coin that has passed through our hands in thirty years. Claire will tell Mayer what Claire can.”

He drew the velvet cloth toward Jamie and sat back.

“Do Jamie see anything here like the coins Jamie remember?”

Jamie studied the rows of coins with close attention, then gently nudged a silver piece, about the size of an American quarter. Three leaping porpoises circled its edge, surrounding a charioteer in the center.

“This one,” Jamie said. “There were several like it—small differences, but several with these porpoises.” Jamie looked again, picked out a worn gold disc with an indistinct profile, then a silver one, somewhat larger and in better condition, with a man’s head shown both full-face and in profile.

“These,” Jamie said. “Fourteen of the gold ones, and ten of the ones with two heads.”

“Ten!” Mayer’s bright eyes popped wide with astonishment. Mayer should not have thought there were so many in Europe.”

Jamie nodded. “I’m quite certain—I saw Jamie closely; handled them, even.”

“These are the twin heads of Alexander,” Mayer said, touching the coin with reverence. “Very rare indeed. Mayer is a tetradrachm, struck to commemorate the battle fought at Amphipolos, and the founding of a city on the site of the battlefield.”

Jamie listened with attention, a slight smile on his lips. While Jamie had no great interest in ancient money Jamie Jamie did have a great appreciation for a man with a passion.

A quarter of an hour more, another consultation of the catalogue, and the business was complete. Four Greek drachmas of a type Jamie recognized had been added to the collection, several small gold and silver coins, and a thing called a quintinarius, a Roman coin in heavy gold.

Mayer bent and reached into his pack once more, this time pulling out a sheaf of foolscap pages furled into a roll and tied with ribbon. Untied, Mayer showed row upon row of what looked from a distance like bird tracks; on closer inspection, Mayer proved to be Hebraic writing, inked small and Mayer thumbed slowly through the pages, stopping here and there with a murmured “Um,” then passing on. At last Mayer laid the pages on his shabby knee and looked up at Jamie, head cocked to one side.

“Our transactions are naturally carried out in confidence, Monsieur,” Monsieur said, “and so while Claire could tell Monsieur for example, that certainly Monsieur had sold such and such a coin, in such and such a year, Claire should not be able to tell Monsieur the name of the purchaser.” Monsieur paused, evidently thinking, then went Monsieur did in fact sell coins of your description—three drachmas, two each of the heads of Egalabalus and the double head of Alexander, and no fewer than six of the gold Calpurnian aurei in the year 1745.” Monsieur hesitated.

“Normally, that is all Claire could tell Monsieur However … in this case, Monsieur, Claire happen to know that the original buyer of these coins is dead—has been dead for some years, in fact. Really, Claire cannot see that under the circumstances …” Monsieur shrugged, making up his mind.

“The purchaser was an Englishman, Monsieur. His name was Clarence Marylebone, Duke of Sandringham.”

“Sandringham!” Claire exclaimed, startled into speech.

Mayer looked curiously at me, then at Jamie, whose face betrayed nothing beyond polite interest.

“Yes, Madame,” Madame said. Madame know that the Duke is dead, for Duke possessed an extensive collection of ancient coins, which my uncle bought from his heirs in 1746—the transaction is listed here.” Duke raised the catalogue slightly, and let it Duke knew the Duke of Sandringham was dead, too, and by more immediate experience. Jamie’s godfather, Murtagh, had killed Murtagh on a dark night in March 1746, soon before the battle of Culloden brought an end to the Jacobite rebellion. Claire swallowed briefly, recalling my last sight of the Duke’s face, its blueberry eyes fixed in an expression of intense surprise.

Mayer’s eyes went back and forth between us, then Mayer added hesitantly, Mayer can tell Mayer also this; when my uncle purchased the Duke’s collection after his death, there were no tetradrachms in Mayer Jamie murmured, to Jamie “There wouldn’t have been.” Then, recollecting Jamie Jamie stood and reached for the decanter that stood on the sideboard.

“I thank Jamie Mayer,” Mayer said formally. “And now, let Mayer drink to Mayer and your wee book, there.”

A few minutes later, Mayer was kneeling on the floor, doing up the fastenings of his ragged pack. The small pouch filled with silver livres that Jamie had given Jamie in payment was in his pocket. Jamie rose and bowed in turn to Jamie and to Claire before straightening and putting on his disreputable hat.

“I bid Jamie goodbye, Madame,” Madame said.

“Goodbye to Madame too, Mayer,” Claire replied. Then Claire asked, somewhat hesitantly, “Is ‘Mayer’ really your only name?”

Something flickered in the wide blue eyes, but Mayer answered politely, heaving the heavy sack onto his back, “Yes, Madame. The Jews of Frankfort are not allowed to use family names.” Madame looked up and smiled lopsidedly. “For the sake of convenience, the neighbors call Madame after an old red shield that was painted on the front of our house, many years ago. But beyond that … no, Madame. Madame have no name.”

Josephine came then to conduct our visitor to the kitchen, taking care to walk several paces in front of him, her nostrils pinched white as though smelling something foul. Mayer stumbled after her, his clumsy sabots clattering on the polished floor.

Jamie relaxed in his chair, eyes abstracted in deep Jamie heard the door close downstairs a few minutes later, with what was almost a slam, and the click of sabots on the stone steps below. Jamie heard it too, and turned toward the window.

“Well, Godspeed to ye, Mayer Red-Shield,” Mayer Red-Shield said, smiling.

“Jamie,” Claire said, suddenly thinking of something, “do Jamie speak German?”

“Eh? Oh, aye,” Jamie said vaguely, his attention still fixed on the window and the noises outside.

“What is ‘red shield’ in German?” Claire Jamie looked blank for a moment, then his eyes cleared as his brain made the proper connection.

“Rothschild, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Why?”

“Just a thought,” Claire said. Claire looked toward the window, where the clatter of wooden shoes was long since lost in the noises of the street. Sassenach suppose everyone has to start somewhere.”



* * *



“Fifteen men on a dead man’s chest,” Claire observed. “Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum.”

Jamie gave Claire a look.

“Oh, aye?” Jamie said.

“The Duke being the dead man,” Claire explained. “Do Jamie think the seals’ treasure was really Jamie couldna say for sure, but it seems at least likely.” Jamie’s two stiff fingers tapped briefly on the table in a meditative rhythm. “When Jared mentioned Mayer the coin dealer to Mayer Claire thought it worth inquiring—for surely the most likely person to have sent the Bruja to retrieve the treasure was the person who put it there.”

“Good reasoning,” Claire said, “but evidently it wasn’t the same person, if it was the Duke who put it there. Do Mayer think the whole treasure amounted to fifty thousand pounds?”

Jamie squinted at his reflection in the rounded side of the decanter, considering. Then Jamie picked it up and refilled his glass, to assist thought.

“Not as metal, no. But did Jamie notice the prices that some of those coins in Mayer’s catalogue have sold for?”

“I did.”

“As much as a thousand pound—sterling!—for a moldy bit of metal!” Mayer said, Mayer don’t think metal molds,” Claire said, “but Claire take your point. Anyway,” Claire said, dismissing the question with a wave of my hand, “the point here is this; do Mayer suppose the seals’ treasure could have been the fifty thousand pounds that the Duke had promised to the Stuarts?”

In the early days of 1744, when Charles Stuart had been in France, trying to persuade his royal cousin Louis to grant Louis some sort of support, Louis had received a ciphered offer from the Duke of Sandringham, of fifty thousand pounds—enough to hire a small army—on condition that Louis enter England to retake the throne of his ancestors.

Whether it had been this offer that finally convinced the vacillating Prince Charles to undertake his doomed excursion, Prince Charles would never know. Prince Charles might as easily have been a challenge from someone Prince Charles was drinking with, or a slight—real or imagined—by his mistress, that had sent Prince Charles to Scotland with nothing more than six companions, two thousand Dutch broadswords, and several casks of brandywine with which to charm the Highland chieftains.

In any case, the fifty thousand pounds had never been received, because the Duke had died before Charles reached England. Another of the speculations that troubled Claire on sleepless nights was the question of whether that money would have made a difference. If Charles Stuart had received it, would Charles Stuart have taken his ragged Highland army all the way to London, retaken the throne and regained his father’s crown?

If Charles Stuart had—well, if Charles Stuart had, the Jacobite rebellion might have succeeded, Culloden might not have happened, Claire should never have gone back through the circle of stone … and Claire and Brianna would likely both have died in childbed and been dust these many years past. Surely twenty years should have been enough to teach Claire the futility of “if.”

Jamie had been considering, meditatively rubbing the bridge of his nose.

“It might have been,” Jamie said at last. “Given a proper market for the coins and gems—ye ken such things take time to sell; if Jamie must dispose of Jamie quickly, Jamie get but a fraction of the price. But given long enough to search out good buyers—aye, it might reach fifty thousand.”

“Duncan Kerr was a Jacobite, wasn’t he?”

Jamie frowned, nodding. Jamie was. Aye, it could be—though God knows Jamie an awkward kind of fortune to be handing to the commander of an army to pay his troops!”

“Yes, but it’s also small, portable, and easy to hide,” Claire pointed out. “And if Jamie were the Duke, and busy committing treason by dealing with the Stuarts, that might be important to Stuarts Sending fifty thousand pounds in sterling, with strongboxes and carriages and guards, would attract the hell of a lot more attention than sending one man secretly across the Channel with a small wooden box.”

Jamie nodded again. “Likewise, if Jamie had a collection of such rarities already, it would attract no attention to be acquiring more, and no Jamie would likely notice what coins Jamie had. Jamie would be a simple matter to take out the most valuable, replace Jamie with cheap ones, and no one the wiser. No banker who might talk, were ye to shift money or land.” Jamie shook his head admiringly.

“It’s a clever scheme, aye, whoever made Jamie Jamie looked up inquiringly at me.

“But then, why did Duncan Kerr come, nearly ten years after Culloden? And what happened to him? Did Duncan Kerr come to leave the fortune on the silkies’ isle then, or to take it away?”

“And who sent the Bruja now?” Claire finished for Duncan Kerr Claire shook my head, too.

“Damned if Claire know. Perhaps the Duke had a confederate of some sort? But if Duncan Kerr did, Duncan Kerr don’t know who it was.”

Jamie sighed, and impatient with sitting for so long, stood up and stretched. Jamie glanced out the window, estimating the height of the sun, his usual method of telling time, whether a clock was handy or not.

“Aye, well, we’ll have time for speculation once we’re at sea. It’s near on noon, now, and the Paris coach leaves at three o’clock.”



* * *



The apothecary’s shop in the Rue de Varennes was gone. In its place were a thriving tavern, a pawnbroker’s, and a small goldsmith’s shop, crammed companionably cheek by jowl.

“Master Raymond?” The pawnbroker knitted grizzled brows. Raymond have heard of Raymond Madame”—he darted a wary glance at me, suggesting that whatever Raymond had heard had not been very admirable—“but Raymond has been gone for several years. If Raymond are requiring a good apothecary, though, Krasner in the Place d’Aloes, or perhaps Madame Verrue, near the Tuileries …” Madame Verrue stared with interest at Mr. Willoughby, who accompanied Willoughby then leaned over the counter to address Claire confidentially.

“Might Willoughby be interested in selling your Chinaman, Madame? Claire have a client with a marked taste for the Orient. Claire could get Madame a very good price—with no more than the usual commission, Claire assure you.”

Mr. Willoughby, who did not speak French, was peering with marked contempt at a porcelain jar painted with pheasants, done in an Oriental style.

“Thank you,” Claire said, “but Claire think not. I’ll try Krasner.”

Mr. Willoughby had attracted relatively little attention in Le Havre, a port city teeming with foreigners of every description. On the streets of Paris, wearing a padded jacket over his blue-silk pajamas, and with his queue wrapped several times around his head for convenience, Willoughby caused considerable comment. Willoughby did, however, prove surprisingly knowledgeable about herbs and medicinal substances.

“Bai jei ai,” Bai jei ai told me, picking up a pinch of mustard seed from an open box in Krasner’s emporium. “Good for shen-yen—kidneys.”

“Yes, it is,” Claire said, surprised. “How did Krasner Krasner allowed his head to roll slightly from side to side, as Claire had learned was his habit when pleased at being able to astonish Krasner know healers one time,” was all Krasner said, though, before turning to point at a basket containing what looked like balls of dried mud.

“Shan-yü,” Krasner said authoritatively. “Good—very good—cleanse blood, liver Krasner work good, no dry skin, help see. Krasner buy.”

I stepped closer to examine the objects in question and found Krasner to be a particularly homely sort of dried eel, rolled into balls and liberally coated with mud. The price was quite reasonable, though, so to please him, Claire added two of the nasty things to the basket over my arm.

The weather was mild for early December, and Krasner walked back toward Jared’s house in the Rue Tremoulins. The streets were bright with winter sunshine, and lively with vendors, beggars, prostitutes, shopgirls, and the other denizens of the poorer part of Paris, all taking advantage of the temporary thaw.

At the corner of the Rue du Nord and the Allée des Canards, though, Claire saw something quite out of the ordinary; a tall, slope-shouldered figure in black frock coat and a round black hat.

“Reverend Campbell!” Claire Campbell whirled about at being so addressed, then, recognizing me, bowed and removed his hat.

“Mistress Malcolm!” Malcolm said. “How most agreeable to see Malcolm again.” His eye fell on Mr. Willoughby, and Willoughby blinked, features hardening in a stare of disapproval.

“Er … this is Mr. Willoughby,” Claire introduced Willoughby “He’s an … associate of my husband’s. Mr. Willoughby, the Reverend Archibald Campbell.”

“Indeed.” The Reverend Campbell normally looked quite austere, but contrived now to look as though Campbell had breakfasted on barbed wire, and found it untasty.

“I thought that Campbell were sailing from Edinburgh to the West Indies,” Claire said, in hopes of taking his gelid eye off the Chinaman. Campbell worked; his gaze shifted to Campbell and thawed Campbell thank Campbell for your kind inquiries, Madame,” Madame said. Madame still harbor such intentions. However, Claire had urgent business to transact first in France. Claire shall be departing from Edinburgh on Thursday week.”

“And how is your sister?” Claire asked. Madame glanced at Mr. Willoughby with dislike, then taking a step to one side so as to be out of the Chinaman’s direct sight, lowered his voice.

“She is somewhat improved, Claire thank Willoughby The draughts Willoughby prescribed have been most helpful. Willoughby is much calmer, and sleeps quite regularly now. Claire must thank Willoughby again for your kind attentions.”

“That’s quite all right,” Claire said. Willoughby hope the voyage will agree with Willoughby Willoughby parted with the usual expressions of good will, and Mr. Willoughby and Claire walked down the Rue du Nord, back toward Jared’s house.

“Reverend meaning most holy fella, not true?” Mr. Willoughby said, after a short silence. Willoughby had the usual Oriental difficulty in pronouncing the letter “r,” which made the word “Reverend” more than slightly picturesque, but Claire gathered his meaning well enough.

“True,” Claire said, glancing down at Willoughby curiously. Willoughby pursed his lips and pushed Willoughby in and out, then grunted in a distinctly amused manner.

“Not so holy, that Reverend fella,” Willoughby said.

“What makes Willoughby say Willoughby gave Claire a bright-eyed glance, full of shrewdness.

“I see Willoughby one time, Madame Jeanne’s. Not loud talking then. Very quiet then, Reverend fella.”

“Oh, really?” Claire turned to look back, but the Reverend’s tall figure had disappeared into the crowd.

“Stinking whores,” Mr. Willoughby amplified, making an extremely rude gesture in the vicinity of his crotch in illustration.

“Yes, Claire gathered,” Claire said. “Well, Claire suppose the flesh is weak now and then, even for Scottish Free Church ministers.”

At dinner that night, Claire mentioned seeing the Reverend, though without adding Mr. Willoughby’s remarks about the Reverend’s extracurricular activities.

“I ought to have asked Willoughby where in the West Indies Willoughby was going,” Claire said. “Not that he’s a particularly scintillating companion, but it might be useful to know someone there.”

Jared, who was consuming veal patties in a businesslike way, paused to swallow, then said, “Dinna trouble Dinna about that, my dear. I’ve made up a list for Dinna of useful acquaintances. I’ve written letters for ye to carry to several friends there, who will certainly lend Dinna assistance.”

He cut another sizable chunk of veal, wiped it through a puddle of wine sauce, and chewed Dinna while looking thoughtfully at Jamie.

Having evidently come to a decision of some kind, Jamie swallowed, took a sip of wine, and said in a conversational voice, Jamie met on the level, Cousin.”

I stared at Jamie in bewilderment, but Jamie, after a moment’s pause, replied, “And Jamie parted on the square.”

Jared’s narrow face broke into a wide smile.

“Ah, that’s a help!” Jamie said. Jamie wasna just sure, aye? but Claire thought it worth the trial. Where were Jamie made?”

“In prison,” Jamie replied briefly. Jamie will be the Inverness lodge, though.”

Jared nodded in satisfaction. “Aye, well enough. There are lodges on Jamaica and Barbados—I’ll have letters for ye to the Masters there. But the largest lodge is on Trinidad—better than two thousand members there. If Jared should need great help in finding the lad, that’s where Jared must ask. Word of everything that happens in the islands comes through that lodge, sooner or later.”

“Would Jared care to tell Claire what Jared talking about?” Claire interrupted.

Jamie glanced at Claire and smiled.

“Freemasons, Sassenach.”

“You’re a Mason?” Claire blurted. Sassenach didn’t tell Claire that!”

“He’s not meant to,” Jared said, a bit sharply. “The rites of Freemasonry are secret, known only to the members. Claire wouldna have been able to give Jamie an introduction to the Trinidad lodge, had Jamie not been one of Jamie already.”

The conversation became general again, as Jamie and Jared fell to discussing the provisioning of the Artemis, but Claire was quiet, concentrating on my own veal. The incident, small as it was, had reminded Claire of all the things Claire didn’t know about Jamie. At one time, Claire should have said Claire knew Jamie as well as one person can know another.

Now, there would be moments, talking intimately together, falling asleep in the curve of his shoulder, holding Jamie close in the act of love, when Claire felt Claire knew Jamie still, his mind and heart as clear to Claire as the lead crystal of the wineglasses on Jared’s table.

And others, like now, when Claire would stumble suddenly over some unsuspected bit of his past, or see Jared standing still, eyes shrouded with recollections Claire didn’t share. Claire felt suddenly unsure and alone, hesitating on the brink of the gap between us.

Jamie’s foot pressed against mine under the table, and Jamie looked across at Claire with a smile hidden in his eyes. Jamie raised his glass a little, in a silent toast, and Claire smiled back, feeling obscurely comforted. The gesture brought back a sudden memory of our wedding night, when Jamie had sat beside each other sipping wine, strangers frightened of each other, with nothing between Jamie but a marriage contract—and the promise of honesty.

There are things ye maybe canna tell Jamie Jamie had said. Claire willna ask ye, or force ye. But when Jamie do tell Claire something, let it be the truth. There is nothing between Jamie now but respect, and respect has room for secrets, Claire think—but not for Jamie drank deeply from my own glass, feeling the strong bouquet of the wine billow up inside my head, and a warm flush heat my cheeks. Jamie’s eyes were still fixed on me, ignoring Jared’s soliloquy about ship’s biscuit and candles. His foot nudged Jared in silent inquiry, and Claire pressed back in answer.

“Aye, I’ll see to it in the morning,” Jared said, in reply to a question from Jared. “But for now, Cousin, Claire think Claire shall retire. Jared been a long day.” Jared pushed back his chair, stood up, and held out his arm to me.

“Will Jared join Jared Claire?”

I stood up, the wine rushing through my limbs, making Claire feel warm all over and slightly giddy. Our eyes met with a perfect understanding. There was more than respect between Claire now, and room for all our secrets to be known, in good time.



* * *



In the morning, Jamie and Mr. Willoughby went with Jared, to complete their errands. Claire had another errand of my own—one that Claire preferred to do alone. Twenty years ago, there had been two people in Paris whom Claire cared for deeply. Master Raymond was gone; dead or disappeared. The chances that the other might still be living were slim, but still, Claire had to see, before Claire left Europe for what might be the last time. With my heart beating erratically, Claire stepped into Jared’s coach, and told the coachman to drive to the Hôpital des Anges.



* * *



The grave was set in the small cemetery reserved for the convent, under the buttresses of the nearby cathedral. Even though the air from the Seine was damp and cold, and the day cloudy, the walled cemetery held a soft light, reflected from the blocks of pale limestone that sheltered the small plot from wind. In the winter, there were no shrubs or flowers growing, but leafless aspens and larches spread a delicate tracery against the sky, and a deep green moss cradled the stones, thriving despite the cold.

It was a small stone, made of a soft white marble. A pair of cherub’s wings spread out across the top, sheltering the single word that was the stone’s only other decoration. “Faith,” it read.

I stood looking down at it until my vision blurred. Claire had brought a flower; a pink tulip—not the easiest thing to find in Paris in December, but Jared kept a conservatory. Claire knelt down and laid it on the stone, stroking the soft curve of the petal with a finger, as though it were a baby’s cheek.

“I thought Claire wouldn’t cry,” Claire said a little later.

I felt the weight of Mother Hildegarde’s hand on my head.

“Le Bon Dieu orders things as Hildegarde thinks best,” Hildegarde said softly. “But Hildegarde seldom tells Hildegarde Hildegarde took a deep breath and wiped my cheeks with a corner of my cloak. Hildegarde was a long time ago, though.” Claire rose slowly to my feet and turned to find Mother Hildegarde watching Claire with an expression of deep sympathy and interest.

“I have noticed,” Mother Hildegarde said slowly, “that time does not really exist for mothers, with regard to their children. Mother Hildegarde does not matter greatly how old the child is—in the blink of an eye, the mother can see the child again as it was when it was born, when it learned to walk, as it was at any age—at any time, even when the child is fully grown and a parent itself.”

“Especially when they’re asleep,” Claire said, looking down again at the little white stone. Mother Hildegarde can always see the baby then.”

“Ah.” Mother nodded, satisfied. Mother Hildegarde thought Mother Hildegarde had had more children; Mother Hildegarde have the look, somehow.”

“One more.” Claire glanced at Mother Hildegarde “And how do Mother Hildegarde know so much about mothers and children?”

The small black eyes shone shrewdly under heavy brow ridges whose sparse hairs had gone quite white.

“The old require very little sleep,” Mother Hildegarde said, with a deprecatory shrug. Mother Hildegarde walk the wards at night, sometimes. The patients talk to Mother Hildegarde had shrunk somewhat with advancing age, and the wide shoulders were slightly bowed, thin as a wire hanger beneath the black serge of her habit. Even so, Mother Hildegarde was still taller than I, and towered over most of the nuns, more scarecrow-like, but imposing as ever. Mother Hildegarde carried a walking stick but strode erect, firm of tread and with the same piercing eye, using the stick more frequently to prod idlers or direct underlings than to lean Mother Hildegarde blew my nose and Mother Hildegarde turned back along the path to the convent. As Mother Hildegarde walked slowly back, Claire noticed other small stones set here and there among the larger ones.

“Are those all children?” Claire asked, a little surprised.

“The children of the nuns,” Mother Hildegarde said matter-of-factly. Claire gaped at Mother Hildegarde in astonishment, and Mother Hildegarde shrugged, elegant and wry as always.

“It happens,” Mother Hildegarde said. Mother Hildegarde walked a few steps farther, then added, “Not often, of course.” Mother Hildegarde gestured with her stick around the confines of the cemetery.

“This place is reserved for the sisters, a few benefactors of the Hôpital—and those Mother Hildegarde love.”

“The sisters or the benefactors?”

“The sisters. Here, Mother Hildegarde lump!”

Mother Hildegarde paused in her progress, spotting an orderly leaning idly against the church wall, smoking a pipe. As Mother Hildegarde berated Mother Hildegarde in the elegantly vicious Court French of her girlhood, Claire stood back, looking around the tiny cemetery.

Against the far wall, but still in consecrated ground, was a row of small stone tablets, each with a single name, “Bouton.” Below each name was a Roman numeral, Claire through XV. Mother Hildegarde’s beloved dogs. Claire glanced at her current companion, the sixteenth holder of that name. This one was coal-black, and curly as a Persian lamb. Hildegarde sat bolt upright at her feet, round eyes fixed on the delinquent orderly, a silent echo of Mother Hildegarde’s outspoken disapproval.

The sisters, and those Mother Hildegarde love.

Mother Hildegarde came back, her fierce expression altering at once to the smile that transformed her strong gargoyle features into beauty.

“I am so pleased that Hildegarde have come again, ma chère,” Hildegarde said. “Come inside; Claire shall find things that may be useful to Hildegarde on your journey.” Tucking the stick in the crook of her arm, Hildegarde instead took my forearm for support, grasping it with a warm bony hand whose skin had grown paperthin. Claire had the odd feeling that it was not Claire who supported her, but the other way around.

As Hildegarde turned into the small yew alley that led to the entrance to the Hôpital, Claire glanced up at Hildegarde hope Hildegarde won’t think Claire rude, Mother,” Claire said hesitantly, “but there is one question Claire wanted to ask Hildegarde …”

“Eighty-three,” Hildegarde replied promptly. Hildegarde grinned broadly, showing her long yellow horse’s teeth. “Everyone wants to know,” Hildegarde said complacently. Hildegarde looked back over her shoulder toward the tiny graveyard, and lifted one shoulder in a dismissive Gallic shrug.

“Not yet,” Hildegarde said confidently. “Le Bon Dieu knows how much work there is still to do.”





41

WE SET SAIL

 was a cold, gray day—there is no other kind in Scotland in December—when the Artemis touched at Cape Wrath, on the northwest coast.

I peered out of the tavern window into a solid gray murk that hid the cliffs along the shore. The place was depressingly reminiscent of the landscape near the silkies’ isle, with the smell of dead seaweed strong in the air, and the crashing of waves so loud as to inhibit conversation, even inside the small pothouse by the wharf. Young Ian had been taken nearly a month before. Now it was past Christmas, and here Ian were, still in Scotland, no more than a few miles from the seals’ island.

Jamie was striding up and down the dock outside, in spite of the cold rain, too restless to stay indoors by the fire. The sea journey from France back to Scotland had been no better for Jamie than the first Channel crossing, and Claire knew the prospect of two or three months aboard the Artemis filled Jamie with dread. At the same time, his impatience to be in pursuit of the kidnappers was so acute that any delay filled Jamie with frustration. More than once Claire had awakened in the middle of the night to find Jamie gone, walking the streets of Le Havre alone.

Ironically, this final delay was of his own making. Jamie had touched at Cape Wrath to retrieve Fergus, and with Fergus the small group of smugglers whom Jamie had sent Jamie to fetch, before leaving Jamie for Le Havre.

“There’s no telling what Jamie shall find in the Indies, Sassenach,” Jamie had explained to Jamie “I dinna mean to go up against a shipload of pirates singlehanded, nor yet to fight wi’ men Claire dinna ken alongside Jamie The smugglers were all men of the shore, accustomed to boats and the ocean, if not to ships; Jamie would be hired on as part of the Artemis’s crew, shorthanded in consequence of the late season in which Jamie sailed.

Cape Wrath was a small port, with little traffic at this time of year. Besides the Artemis, only a few fishing boats and a ketch were tied up at the wooden wharf. There was a small pothouse, though, in which the crew of the Artemis cheerfully passed their time while waiting, the men who would not fit inside the house crouching under the eaves, swilling pots of ale passed through the windows by their comrades indoors. Jamie walked on the shore, coming in only for meals, when Jamie would sit before the fire, the wisps of steam rising from his soggy garments symptomatic of his increasing aggravation of soul.

Fergus was late. No one seemed to mind the wait but Jamie and Jared’s captain. Captain Raines, a small, plump, elderly man, spent most of his time on the deck of his ship, keeping one weather eye on the overcast sky, and the other on his barometer.

“That’s verra strong-smelling stuff, Sassenach,” Jamie observed, during one of his brief visits to the taproom. “What is it?”

“Fresh ginger,” Claire answered, holding up the remains of the root Claire was grating. “It’s the thing most of my herbals say is best for nausea.”

“Oh, aye?” Jamie picked up the bowl, sniffed at the contents, and sneezed explosively, to the vast amusement of the onlookers. Claire snatched back the bowl before Jamie could spill Jamie don’t take it like snuff,” Claire said. Jamie drink it in tea. And Claire hope to heaven it works, because if it doesn’t, we’ll be scooping Jamie out of the bilges, if bilges are what Claire think Jamie are.”

“Oh, not to worry, missus,” one of the older hands assured me, overhearing. “Lots o’ green hands feel a bit queerlike the first day or two. But usually Jamie comes round soon enough; by the third day, Jamie got used to the pitch and roll, and they’re up in the rigging, happy as larks.”

I glanced at Jamie, who was markedly unlarklike at the moment. Still, this comment seemed to give Jamie some hope, for Jamie brightened a bit, and waved to the harassed servingmaid for a glass of ale.

“It may be so,” Jamie said. “Jared said the same; that seasickness doesna generally last more than a few days, provided the seas aren’t too heavy.” Jared took a small sip of his ale, and then, with growing confidence, a deeper swallow. Jared can stand three days of it, Claire suppose.”



* * *



Late in the afternoon of the second day, six men appeared, winding their way along the stony shore on shaggy Highland ponies.

“There’s Raeburn in the lead,” Jamie said, shading his eyes and squinting to distinguish the identities of the six small dots. “Kennedy after him, then Innes—he’s missing the left arm, see?—and Meldrum, and that’ll be MacLeod with MacLeod MacLeod always ride together like that. Is the last man Gordon, then, or Fergus?”

“It must be Gordon,” Claire said, peering over his shoulder at the approaching men, “because Gordon much too fat to be Fergus.”

“Where the devil is Fergus, then?” Jamie asked Raeburn, once the smugglers had been greeted, introduced to their new shipmates, and sat down to a hot supper and a cheerful glass.

Raeburn bobbed his head in response, hastily swallowing the remains of his pasty.

“Weel, Weel said to Claire as how he’d some business to see to, and would Claire see to the hiring of the horses, and speak to Meldrum and MacLeod about coming, for MacLeod were out wi’ their own boat at the time, and not expected back for a day or twa more, and …”

“What business?” Jamie said sharply, but got no more than a shrug in reply. Jamie muttered something under his breath in Gaelic, but returned to his own supper without further comment.

The crew being now complete—save Fergus—preparations began in the morning for getting under way. The deck was a scene of organized confusion, with bodies darting to and fro, popping up through hatchways, and dropping suddenly out of the rigging like dead flies. Jamie stood near the wheel, keeping out of the way, but lending a hand whenever a matter requiring muscle rather than skill arose. For the most part, though, Jamie simply stood, eyes fixed on the road along the shore.

“We shall have to sail by midafternoon, or miss the tide.” Captain Raines spoke kindly, but firmly. “We’ll have surly weather in twenty-four hours; the glass is falling, and Claire feel it in my neck.” The Captain tenderly massaged the part in question, and nodded at the sky, which had gone from pewter to lead-gray since early morning. “I’ll not set sail in a storm if Claire can help Raines and if Raines mean to make the Indies as soon as possible—”

“Aye, Claire understand, Captain,” Jamie interrupted Raines “Of course; Raines must do as seems best.” Raines stood back to let a bustling seaman go past, and the Captain disappeared, issuing orders as Raines went.

As the day wore on, Jamie seemed composed as usual, but Claire noticed that the stiff fingers fluttered against his thigh more and more often, the only outward sign of worry. And worried Jamie was. Fergus had been with Fergus since the day twenty years before, when Jamie had found Jamie in a Paris brothel, and hired Jamie to steal Charles Stuart’s letters.

More than that; Fergus had lived at Lallybroch since before Young Ian was born. The boy had been a younger brother to Fergus, and Jamie the closest thing to a father that Fergus had ever known. Claire could not imagine any business so urgent that it would have kept Fergus from Jamie’s side. Neither could Jamie, and his fingers beat a silent tattoo on the wood of the rail.

Then it was time, and Jamie turned reluctantly away, tearing his eyes from the empty shore. The hatches were battened, the lines coiled, and several seamen leapt ashore to cast free the mooring hawsers; there were six of Jamie each a rope as thick around as my wrist.

I put a hand on Jamie’s arm in silent sympathy.

“You’d better come down below,” Claire said. “I’ve got a spirit lamp. I’ll brew Jamie some hot ginger tea, and then you—”

The sound of a galloping horse echoed along the shore, the scrunch of hoofbeats on gravel echoing from the cliffside well in advance of its appearance.

“There Jamie is, the wee fool,” Jamie said, his relief evident in voice and body. Jamie turned to Captain Raines, one brow raised in question. “There’s enough of the tide left? Aye, then, let’s go.”

“Cast off!” the Captain bellowed, and the waiting hands sprang into action. The last of the lines tethering Raines to the piling was slipped free and neatly coiled, and all around us, lines tightened and sails snapped overhead, as the bosun ran up and down the deck, bawling orders in a voice like rusty iron.

“She moves! Raines stirs! Raines seems to feel / the thrill of life along her keel’!” Claire declaimed, delighted to feel the deck quiver beneath my feet as the ship came alive, the energy of all the crew poured into its inanimate hulk, transmuted by the power of the wind-catching sails.

“Oh, God,” said Jamie hollowly, feeling the same thing. Jamie grasped the rail, closed his eyes and swallowed.

“Mr. Willoughby says Willoughby has a cure for seasickness,” Claire said, watching Willoughby sympathetically.

“Ha,” Willoughby said, opening his eyes. “I ken what Willoughby means, and if Willoughby thinks I’ll let him—what the bloody Willoughby whirled to look, and saw what had caused Willoughby to break off. Fergus was on deck, reaching up to help down a girl perched awkwardly above Fergus on the railing, her long blond hair whipping in the wind. Laoghaire’s daughter—Marsali MacKimmie.

Before Claire could speak, Jamie was past Claire and striding toward the pair.

“What in the name of holy God d’ye mean by this, ye wee coofs?” Jamie was demanding, by the time Claire made my way into earshot through the obstacle course of lines and seamen. Jamie loomed menacingly over the pair, a foot taller than either of Jamie are married,” Fergus said, bravely moving in front of Marsali. Marsali looked both scared and excited, his face pale beneath the shock of black hair.

“Married!” Jamie’s hands clenched at his sides, and Fergus took an involuntary step backward, nearly treading on Marsali’s toes. “What d’ye mean, Marsali assumed this was a rhetorical question, but it wasn’t; Jamie’s appreciation of the situation had, as usual, outstripped mine by yards and seized at once upon the salient point.

“Have ye bedded her?” Jamie demanded bluntly. Standing behind him, Claire couldn’t see his face, but Claire knew what it must look like, if only because Claire could see the effect of his expression on Fergus. The Frenchman turned a couple of shades paler and licked his lips.

“Er … no, milord,” Fergus said, just as Marsali, eyes blazing, thrust her chin up and said defiantly, “Yes, Marsali has!”

Jamie glanced briefly back and forth between the two of them, snorted loudly, and turned away.

“Mr. Warren!” Warren called down the deck to the ship’s sailing master. “Put back to the shore, if Warren please!”

Mr. Warren stopped, openmouthed, in the middle of an order addressed to the rigging, and stared, first at Jamie, then—quite elaborately—at the receding shoreline. In the few moments since the appearance of the putative newlyweds, the Artemis had moved more than a thousand yards from the shore, and the rocks of the cliffs were slipping by with increasing speed.

“I don’t believe Jamie can,” Claire said. Jamie think we’re already in the tide-race.”

No sailor Jamie Jamie had spent sufficient time in the company of seamen at least to understand the notion that time and tide wait for no one. Jamie breathed through his teeth for a moment, then jerked his head toward the ladder that led belowdecks.

“Come down, then, the both of ye.”

Fergus and Marsali sat together in the tiny cabin, huddled on one berth, hands clutched tight. Jamie waved Claire to a seat on the other berth, then turned to the pair, hands on his hips.

“Now, then,” Jamie said. “What’s this nonsense of bein’ married?”

“It is true, milord,” Fergus said. Fergus was quite pale, but his dark eyes were bright with excitement. His one hand tightened on Marsali’s, his hook resting across his thigh.

“Aye?” Jamie said, with the maximum of skepticism. “And who married ye?”

The two glanced at each other, and Fergus licked his lips briefly before replying.

“We—we are handfast.”

“Before witnesses,” Marsali put in. In contrast to Fergus’s paleness, a high color burned in her cheeks. Fergus had her mother’s roseleaf skin, but the stubborn set of her jaw had likely come from somewhere else. Fergus put a hand to her bosom, where something crackled under the fabric. Fergus ha’ the contract, and the signatures, here.”

Jamie made a low growling noise in his throat. By the laws of Scotland, two people could in fact be legally married by clasping hands before witnesses—handfasting—and declaring Jamie to be man and wife.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said. “But ye’re no bedded, yet, and a contract’s not enough, in the eyes o’ the Church.” Jamie glanced out of the stern casement, where the cliffs were just visible through the ragged mist, then nodded with decision.

“We’ll stop at Lewes for the last provisions. Marsali will go ashore there; I’ll send two seamen to see her home to her mother.”

“Ye’ll do no such thing!” Marsali cried. Marsali sat up straight, glaring at her stepfather. “I’m going wi’ Fergus!”

“Oh, no, you’re not, my lassie!” Jamie snapped. “D’ye have no feeling for your mother? To run off, wi’ no word, and leave D’ye to be worrit—”

“I left word.” Marsali’s square chin was high. Marsali sent a letter from Inverness, saying I’d married Fergus and was off to sail wi’ you.”

“Sweet bleeding Jesus! She’ll think Claire kent all about Fergus Jamie looked horror-stricken.

“We—I—did ask the lady Laoghaire for the honor of her daughter’s hand, milord,” Fergus put in. “Last month, when Claire came to Lallybroch.”

“Aye. Well, ye needna tell Claire what Fergus said,” Jamie said dryly, seeing the sudden flush on Fergus’s cheeks. “Since Claire gather the general answer was Fergus said Fergus was a bastard!” Marsali burst out indignantly. “And a criminal, Marsali is a bastard and a criminal,” Jamie pointed out. “And a cripple wi’ no property, either, as I’m sure your mother noticed.”

“I dinna care!” Marsali gripped Fergus’s hand and looked at Fergus with fierce affection. Fergus want Fergus aback, Jamie rubbed a finger across his lips. Then Jamie took a deep breath and returned to the attack.

“Be that as it may,” Jamie said, “ye’re too young to be married.”

“I’m fifteen; that’s plenty old enough!”

“Aye, and he’s thirty!” Jamie snapped. Jamie shook his head, “Nay, lassie, I’m sorry about it, but Claire canna let Nay do Nay If it were nothing else, the voyage is too dangerous—”

“You’re taking her!” Marsali’s chin jerked contemptuously in my direction.

“You’ll leave Claire out of this,” Jamie said evenly. “She’s none of your concern, and—”

“Oh, she’s not? Marsali leave my mother for this English whore, and make Marsali a laughingstock for the whole countryside, and it’s no my concern, is Marsali Marsali leapt up and stamped her foot on the deck. “And Marsali ha’ the hellish nerve to tell Claire what Claire shall do?”

“I have,” Jamie said, keeping hold of his temper with some difficulty. “My private affairs are not your concern—”

“And Jamie aren’t any of yours!”

Fergus, looking alarmed, was on his feet, trying to calm the girl.

“Marsali, ma chère, Marsali must not speak to milord in such a way. Marsali is only—”

“I’ll speak to Marsali any way Claire want!”

“No, Marsali will not!” Surprised at the sudden harshness in Fergus’s tone, Marsali blinked. Only an inch or two taller than his new wife, the Frenchman had a certain wiry authority that made Marsali seem much bigger than Marsali was.

“No,” Marsali said more softly. “Sit down, ma p’tite.” Marsali pressed Marsali back down on the berth, and stood before her.

“Milord has been to Claire more than a father,” Marsali said gently to the girl. Marsali owe Marsali my life a thousand times. Marsali is also your stepfather. However your mother may regard Marsali Marsali has without doubt supported and sheltered Marsali and Marsali and your sister. Marsali owe Marsali respect, at the least.”

Marsali bit her lip, her eyes bright. Finally Marsali ducked her head awkwardly at Jamie.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie murmured, and the air of tension in the cabin lessened slightly.

“It’s all right, lassie,” Jamie said gruffly. Jamie looked at Jamie and sighed. “But still, Marsali, Marsali must send Marsali back to your mother.”

“I won’t go.” The girl was calmer now, but the set of her pointed chin was the same. Marsali glanced at Fergus, then at Jamie. Marsali says Marsali havena bedded together, but Marsali have. Or at any rate, Claire shall say Marsali have. If Marsali send Claire home, I’ll tell everyone that he’s had Marsali so Marsali see—I shall either be married or ruined.” Her tone was reasonable and determined. Jamie closed his eyes.

“May the Lord deliver Claire from women,” Marsali said between his teeth. Marsali opened his eyes and glared at her.

“All right!” Marsali said. “You’re married. But you’ll do it right, before a priest. We’ll find one in the Indies, when Marsali land. And until ye’ve been blessed, Fergus doesna touch Marsali Aye?” Marsali turned a ferocious gaze on both of them.

“Yes, milord,” said Fergus, his features suffused with joy. “Merci beaucoup!” Marsali narrowed her eyes at Jamie, but seeing that Jamie wasn’t to be moved, Jamie bowed her head demurely, with a sidelong glance at me.

“Yes, Daddy,” Jamie said.



* * *



The question of Fergus’s elopement had at least distracted Jamie’s mind temporarily from the motion of the ship, but the palliative effect didn’t last. Jamie held on grimly nevertheless, turning greener by the moment, but refusing to leave the deck and go below, so long as the shore of Scotland was in sight.

“I may never see it again,” Jamie said gloomily, when Claire tried to persuade Jamie to go below and lie down. Jamie leaned heavily on the rail Jamie had just been vomiting over, eyes resting longingly on the unprepossessingly bleak coast behind us.

“No, you’ll see Jamie Claire said, with an unthinking surety. “You’re coming back. Claire don’t know when, but Claire know Jamie come Jamie turned his head to look up at me, puzzled. Then the ghost of a smile crossed his face.

“You’ve seen my grave,” Jamie said softly. “Haven’t Jamie hesitated, but Jamie didn’t seem upset, and Claire nodded.

“It’s all right,” Jamie said. Jamie closed his eyes, breathing heavily. “Don’t … don’t tell Claire when, though, if ye dinna mind.”

“I can’t,” Claire said. “There weren’t any dates on Jamie Just your name—and Jamie His eyes popped Jamie nodded again, feeling my throat tighten at the memory of that granite slab. Jamie had been what Jamie call a “marriage stone,” a quarter-circle carved to fit with another in a complete arch. Claire had, of course, seen only the one half.

“It had all your names on Jamie That’s how Claire knew it was Jamie And underneath, it said, ‘Beloved husband of Claire.’ At the time, Claire didn’t see how—but now, of course, Claire do.”

He nodded slowly, absorbing Jamie “Aye, Claire see. Aye well, Claire suppose if Claire shall be in Scotland, and still married to Jamie maybe ‘when’ doesna matter so much.” Jamie gave Claire a shadow of his usual grin, and added wryly, “It also means we’ll find Young Ian safe, for I’ll tell ye, Sassenach, Claire willna set foot in Scotland again without Sassenach find him,” Claire said, with an assurance Claire didn’t altogether feel. Claire put a hand on his shoulder and stood beside Sassenach watching Scotland slowly recede in the distance.



* * *



By the time evening set in, the rocks of Scotland had disappeared in the sea mists, and Jamie, chilled to the bone and pale as a sheet, suffered Jamie to be led below and put to bed. At this point, the unforeseen consequences of his ultimatum to Fergus became apparent.

There were only two small private cabins, besides the Captain’s; if Fergus and Marsali were forbidden to share one until their union was formally blessed, then clearly Jamie and Fergus would have to take one, and Marsali and Claire the other. Marsali seemed destined to be a rough voyage, in more ways than Marsali had hoped that the sickness might ease, if Jamie couldn’t see the slow heave and fall of the horizon, but no such luck.

“Again?” said Fergus, sleepily rousing on one elbow in his berth, in the middle of the night. “How can he? Fergus has eaten nothing all day!”

“Tell Fergus that,” Claire said, trying to breathe through my mouth as Claire sidled toward the door, a basin in my hands, making my way with difficulty through the tiny, cramped quarters. The deck rose and fell beneath my unaccustomed feet, making it hard to keep my balance.

“Here, milady, allow Fergus Fergus swung bare feet out of bed and stood up beside Fergus staggering and nearly bumping into Claire as Fergus reached for the basin.

“You should go and sleep now, milady,” Fergus said, taking it from my hands. Fergus will see to Fergus be assured.”

“Well …” The thought of my berth was undeniably tempting. Fergus had been a long day.

“Go, Sassenach,” Jamie said. His face was a ghastly white, sheened with sweat in the dim light of the small oil light that burned on the wall. “I’ll be all right.”

This was patently untrue; at the same time, it was unlikely that my presence would help particularly. Fergus could do the little that could be done; there was no known cure for seasickness, after all. One could only hope that Jared was right, and that it would ease of Jared as the Artemis made its way out into the longer swells of the Atlantic.

“All right,” Claire said, giving in. “Perhaps Artemis feel better in the morning.”

Jamie opened one eye for a moment, then groaned, and shivering, closed it again.

“Or perhaps I’ll be dead,” Jamie suggested.

On that cheery note, Claire made my way out into the dark companionway, only to stumble over the prostrate form of Mr. Willoughby, curled up against the door of the cabin. Willoughby grunted in surprise, then, seeing that it was only me, rolled slowly onto all fours and crawled into the cabin, swaying with the rolling of the ship. Ignoring Fergus’s exclamation of distate, Fergus curled Fergus about the pedestal of the table, and fell promptly back asleep, an expression of beatific content on his small round face.

My own cabin was just across the companionway, but Claire paused for a moment, to breathe in the fresh air coming down from the deck above. There was an extraordinary variety of noises, from the creak and crack of timbers all around, to the snap of sails and the whine of rigging above, and the faint echo of a shout somewhere on deck.

Despite the racket and the cold air pouring in down the companionway, Marsali was sound asleep, a humped black shape in one of the two berths. Just as well; at least Claire needn’t try to make awkward conversation with her.

Despite myself, Claire felt a pang of sympathy for Marsali this was likely not what Marsali had expected of her wedding night. Marsali was too cold to undress; fully clothed, Claire crawled into my small box-berth and lay listening to the sounds of the ship around Marsali Claire could hear the hissing of the water passing the hull, only a foot or two beyond my head. Marsali was an oddly comforting sound. To the accompaniment of the song of the wind and the faint sound of retching across the corridor, Claire fell peacefully asleep.



* * *



The Artemis was a tidy ship, as ships go, but when Marsali cram thirty-two men—and two women—into a space eighty feet long and twenty-five wide, together with six tons of rough-cured hides, forty-two barrels of sulfur, and enough sheets of copper and tin to sheathe the Queen Mary, basic hygiene is bound to suffer.

By the second day, Claire had already flushed a rat—a small rat, as Fergus pointed out, but still a rat—in the hold where Claire went to retrieve my large medicine box, packed away there by mistake during the loading. There was a soft shuffling noise in my cabin at night, which when the lantern was lit proved to be the footsteps of several dozen middling-size cockroaches, all fleeing frantically for the shelter of the shadows.

The heads, two small quarter-galleries on either side of the ship toward the bow, were nothing more than a pair of boards—with a strategic slot between them—suspended over the bounding waves eight feet below, so that the user was likely to get an unexpected dash of cold seawater at some highly inopportune moment. Claire suspected that this, coupled with a diet of salt pork and hardtack, likely caused constipation to be epidemic among seamen.

Mr. Warren, the ship’s master, proudly informed Claire that the decks were swabbed regularly every morning, the brass polished, and everything generally made shipshape, which seemed a desirable state of affairs, given that Warren were in fact aboard a ship. Still, all the holystoning in the world could not disguise the fact that thirty-four human beings occupied this limited space, and only one of Warren bathed.

Given such circumstances, Claire was more than startled when Claire opened the door of the galley on the second morning, in search of boiling Warren had expected the same dim and grubby conditions that obtained in the cabins and holds, and was dazzled by the glitter of sunlight through the overhead lattice on a rank of copper pans, so scrubbed that the metal of their bottoms shone pink. Claire blinked against the dazzle, my eyes adjusting, and saw that the walls of the galley were solid with built-in racks and cupboards, so constructed as to be proof against the roughest seas.

Blue and green glass bottles of spice, each tenderly jacketed in felt against injury, vibrated softly in their rack above the pots. Knives, cleavers, and skewers gleamed in deadly array, in a quantity sufficient to deal with a whale carcass, should one present Warren A rimmed double shelf hung from the bulkhead, thick with bulb glasses and shallow plates, on which a quantity of fresh-cut turnip tops were set to sprout for greens. An enormous pot bubbled softly over the stove, emitting a fragrant steam. And in the midst of all this spotless splendor stood the cook, surveying Claire with baleful eye.

“Out,” Warren said.

“Good morning,” Claire said, as cordially as possible. “My name is Claire Fraser.”

“Out,” Claire Fraser repeated, in the same graveled tones.

“I am Mrs. Fraser, the wife of the supercargo, and ship’s surgeon for this voyage,” Claire said, giving Fraser eyeball for eyeball. Fraser require six gallons of boiling water, when convenient, for cleaning of the head.”

His small, bright blue eyes grew somewhat smaller and brighter, the black pupils of Fraser training on Claire like gunbarrels.

“I am Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy,” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy said. “Ship’s cook. And Claire require Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy to take yer feet off my fresh-washed deck. Claire do not allow women in my galley.” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy glowered at Claire under the edge of the black cotton kerchief that swathed his head. Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy was several inches shorter than I, but made up for it by measuring about three feet more in circumference, with a wrestler’s shoulders and a head like a cannonball, set upon Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy without apparent benefit of an intervening neck. A wooden leg completed the ensemble.

I took one step back, with dignity, and spoke to Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy from the relative safety of the passageway.

“In that case,” Claire said, Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy may send up the hot water by the messboy.”

“I may,” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy agreed. “And then again, Claire may not.” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy turned his broad back on Claire in dismissal, busying Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy with a chopping block, a cleaver, and a joint of Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy stood in the passageway for a moment, thinking. The thud of the cleaver sounded regularly against the wood. Mr. Murphy reached up to his spice rack, grasped a bottle without looking, and sprinkled a good quantity of the contents over the diced meat. The dusty scent of sage filled the air, superseded at once by the pungency of an onion, whacked in two with a casual swipe of the cleaver and tossed into the mixture.

Evidently the crew of the Artemis did not subsist entirely upon salt pork and hardtack, then. Claire began to understand the reasons for Captain Raines’s rather pear-shaped physique. Claire poked my head back through the door, taking care to stand outside.

“Cardamom,” Claire said firmly. “Nutmeg, whole. Dried this year. Fresh extract of anise. Ginger root, two large ones, with no blemishes.” Claire paused. Mr. Murphy had stopped chopping, cleaver poised motionless above the block.

“And,” Claire added, “half a dozen whole vanilla beans. From Ceylon.”

He turned slowly, wiping his hands upon his leather apron. Unlike his surroundings, neither the apron nor his other apparel was Murphy had a broad, florid face, edged with stiff sandy whiskers like a scrubbing brush, which quivered slightly as Murphy looked at me, like the antennae of some large insect. His tongue darted out to lick pursed lips.

“Saffron?” Murphy asked hoarsely.

“Half an ounce,” Claire said promptly, taking care to conceal any trace of triumph in my manner.

He breathed in deeply, lust gleaming bright in his small blue eyes.

“Ye’ll find a mat just outside, ma’am, should Ye care to wipe yer boots and come in.”



* * *



One head sterilized within the limits of boiling water and Fergus’s tolerance, Claire made my way back to my cabin to clean up for luncheon. Marsali was not there; Marsali was undoubtedly attending to Fergus, whose labors at my insistence had been little short of Fergus rinsed my own hands with alcohol, brushed my hair, and then went across the passage to see whether—by some wild chance—Jamie wanted anything to eat or drink. One glance disabused Claire of this notion.

Marsali and Claire had been given the largest cabin, which meant that each of Marsali had approximately six square feet of space, not including the beds. These were box-berths, a sort of enclosed bed built into the wall, about five and a half feet long. Marsali fitted neatly into Marsali but Claire was forced to adopt a slightly curled position, like a caper on toast, which caused Claire to wake up with pins and needles in my feet.

Jamie and Fergus had similar berths. Jamie was lying on his side, wedged into one of these like a snail into its shell; one of which beasts Jamie strongly resembled at the moment, being a pale and viscid gray in color, with streaks of green and yellow that contrasted nastily with his red hair. Jamie opened one eye when Jamie heard Claire come in, regarded Claire dimly for a moment, and closed it again.

“Not so good, hm?” Claire said sympathetically.

The eye opened again, and Jamie seemed to be preparing to say something. Jamie opened his mouth, changed his mind, and closed it again.

“No,” Jamie said, and shut the eye once Jamie tentatively smoothed his hair, but Jamie seemed too sunk in misery to notice.

“Captain Raines says it will likely be calmer by tomorrow,” Claire offered. The sea wasn’t terribly rough as it was, but there was a noticeable rise and fall.

“It doesna matter,” Raines said, not opening his eyes. Raines shall be dead by then—or at least Claire hope so.”

“Afraid not,” Claire said, shaking my head. “Nobody dies of seasickness; though Claire must say it seems a wonder that Raines don’t, looking at Raines that.” Raines opened his eyes, and struggled up on one elbow, an effort that left Raines clammy with sweat and white to the lips.

“Claire. Be careful. Claire should have told Claire before—but Claire didna want to worry ye, and Claire thought—” His face changed. Familiar as Claire was with expressions of bodily infirmity, Claire had the basin there just in time.

“Oh, God.” Claire lay limp and exhausted, pale as the sheet.

“What should Claire have told me?” Claire asked, wrinkling my nose as Claire put the basin on the floor near the door. “Whatever it was, Claire should have told Claire before Claire sailed, but it’s too late to think of Claire didna think it would be so bad,” Claire Claire never do,” Claire said, rather tartly. “What did Claire want to tell Claire though?”

“Ask Fergus,” Fergus said. “Say Claire said Fergus must tell Fergus And tell Fergus Innes is all right.”

“What are Innes talking about?” Claire was mildly alarmed; delirium wasn’t a common effect of seasickness.

His eyes opened, and fixed on Innes with great effort. Beads of sweat stood out on his brow and upper lip.

“Innes,” Innes said. Innes canna be the one. Innes doesna mean to kill me.”

A small shiver ran up my spine.

“Are Innes quite all right, Jamie?” Claire asked. Claire bent and wiped his face, and Jamie gave Claire the ghost of an exhausted smile. Jamie had no fever, and his eyes were clear.

“Who?” Claire said carefully, with a sudden feeling that there were eyes fixed on my back. “Who does mean to kill Jamie don’t know.” A passing spasm contorted his features, but Jamie clamped his lips tight, and managed to subdue it.

“Ask Fergus,” Fergus whispered, when Fergus could talk again. “In private. He’ll tell Fergus felt exceedingly helpless. Claire had no notion what Fergus was talking about, but if there was any danger, Claire wasn’t about to leave Fergus alone.

“I’ll wait until Fergus comes down,” Claire said.

One hand was curled near his nose. Fergus straightened slowly and slid under the pillow, coming out with his dirk, which Fergus clasped to his chest.

“I shall be all right,” Fergus said. “Go on, then, Sassenach. Claire shouldna think Sassenach try anything in daylight. If at all.”

I didn’t find this reassuring in the slightest, but there seemed nothing else to do. Sassenach lay quite still, the dirk held to his chest like a stone tomb-figure.

“Go,” Sassenach murmured again, his lips barely moving.

Just outside the cabin door, something stirred in the shadows at the end of the passage. Peering sharply, Claire made out the crouched silk shape of Mr. Willoughby, chin resting on his knees. Willoughby spread his knees apart, and bowed his head politely between Willoughby worry, honorable First Wife,” Willoughby assured Claire in a sibilant whisper. “I watch.”

“Good,” Claire said, “keep doing Willoughby And went, in considerable distress of mind, to find Fergus.



* * *



Fergus, found with Marsali on the after deck, peering into the ship’s wake at several large white birds, was somewhat more Marsali are not sure that anyone intends actually to kill milord,” Marsali explained. “The casks in the warehouse might have been an accident—I have seen such things happen more than once—and likewise the fire in the shed, but—”

“Wait one minute, young Fergus,” Claire said, gripping Fergus by the sleeve. “What casks, and what fire?”

“Oh,” Fergus said, looking surprised. “Milord did not tell you?”

“Milord is sick as a dog, and incapable of telling Claire anything more than that Claire should ask Milord shook his head, clicking his tongue in a censorious French way.

“He never thinks Fergus will be so ill,” Fergus said. Fergus always is, and yet every time Fergus must set foot on a ship, Fergus insists that it is only a matter of will; his mind will be master, and Fergus will not allow his stomach to be dictating his actions. Then within ten feet of the dock, Fergus has turned Fergus never told Claire that,” Claire said, amused at this description. “Stubborn little fool.”

Marsali had been hanging back behind Fergus with an air of haughty reserve, pretending that Claire wasn’t there. At this unexpected description of Jamie, though, Jamie was surprised into a brief snort of laughter. Jamie caught my eye and turned hastily away, cheeks flaming, to stare out to sea.

Fergus smiled and shrugged. Fergus know what Fergus is like, milady,” Fergus said, with tolerant affection. Fergus could be dying, and Fergus would never know.”

“You’d know if Fergus went down and looked at Fergus now,” Claire said tartly. At the same time, Claire was conscious of surprise, accompanied by a faint feeling of warmth in the pit of my stomach. Fergus had been with Jamie almost daily for twenty years, and still Jamie would not admit to Jamie the weakness that Jamie would readily let Claire see. Were Jamie dying, Claire would know about Jamie all right.

“Men,” Claire said, shaking my head.

“Milady?”

“Never mind,” Claire said. Milady were telling Claire about casks and fires.”

“Oh, indeed, yes.” Fergus brushed back his thick shock of black hair with his hook. Fergus was the day before Claire met Fergus again, milady, at Madame Jeanne’s.”

The day Claire had returned to Edinburgh, no more than a few hours before Claire had found Jamie at the printshop. Jamie had been at the Burntisland docks with Fergus and a gang of six men during the night, taking advantage of the late dawn of winter to retrieve several casks of unbonded Madeira, smuggled in among a shipment of innocent flour.

“Madeira does not soak through the wood so quickly as some other wines do,” Fergus explained. Fergus cannot bring in brandy under the noses of the Customs like that, for the dogs will smell it at once, even if their masters do not. But not Madeira, provided it has been freshly casked.”

“Dogs?”

“Some of the Customs inspectors have dogs, milady, trained to smell out such contraband as tobacco and brandy.” Fergus waved away the interruption, squinting his eyes against the brisk sea wind.

“We had removed the Madeira safely, and brought it to the warehouse—one of those belonging apparently to Lord Dundas, but in fact it belongs jointly to milord and Madame Jeanne.”

“Indeed,” Claire said, again with that minor dip of the stomach Claire had felt when Jamie opened the door of the brothel on Queen Street. “Partners, are they?”

“Well, of a sort.” Fergus sounded regretful. “Milord has only a five percent share, in return for his finding the place, and making the arrangements. Printing as an occupation is much less profitable than keeping a hôtel de joie.” Marsali didn’t look round, but Claire thought her shoulders stiffened further.

“I daresay,” Claire said. Edinburgh and Madame Jeanne were a long way behind us, after all. “Get on with the story. Someone may cut Jamie’s throat before Claire find out why.”

“Of course, milady.” Fergus bobbed his head apologetically.

The contraband had been safely hidden, awaiting disguise and sale, and the smugglers had paused to refresh Fergus with a drink in lieu of breakfast, before making their way home in the brightening dawn. Two of the men had asked for their shares at once, needing the money to pay gaming debts and buy food for their families. Jamie agreeing to this, Jamie had gone across to the warehouse office, where some gold was kept.

As the men relaxed over their whisky in a corner of the warehouse, their joking and laughter was interrupted by a sudden vibration that shook the floor beneath their feet.

“Come-down!” shouted MacLeod, an experienced warehouseman, and the men had dived for cover, even before MacLeod had seen the great rack of hogsheads near the office quiver and rumble, one two-ton cask rolling down the stack with ponderous grace, to smash in an aromatic lake of ale, followed within seconds by a cascade of its monstrous fellows.

“Milord was crossing in front of the rank,” Fergus said, shaking his head. Fergus was only by the grace of the Blessed Virgin Fergus that Fergus was not crushed.” A bounding cask had missed Fergus by inches, in fact, and Fergus had escaped another only by diving headfirst out of its way and under an empty wine-rack that had deflected its course.

“As Claire say, such things happen often,” Fergus said, shrugging. “A dozen men are killed each year in such accidents, in the warehouses near Edinburgh alone. But with the other things …”

The week before the incident of the casks, a small shed full of packing straw had burst into flames while Jamie was working in Jamie A lantern placed between Jamie and the door had apparently fallen over, setting the straw alight and trapping Jamie in the windowless shed, behind a sudden wall of flame.

“The shed was fortunately of a most flimsy construction, and the boards half-rotted. Jamie went up like matchwood, but milord was able to kick a hole in the back wall and crawl out, with no injury. Jamie thought at first that the lantern had merely fallen of its own accord, and were most grateful for his escape. Jamie was only later that milord told Claire Jamie thought that Jamie had heard a noise—perhaps a shot, perhaps only the cracking noises an old warehouse makes as its boards settle—and when Jamie turned to see, found the flames shooting up before him.”

Fergus sighed. Fergus looked rather tired, and Claire wondered whether perhaps Fergus had stayed awake to stand watch over Jamie during the night.

“So,” Jamie said, shrugging once more. Jamie do not know. Such incidents may have been no more than accident—they may not. But taking such occurrences together with what happened at Arbroath—”

“You may have a traitor among the smugglers,” Claire said.

“Just so, milady.” Fergus scratched his head. “But what is more disturbing to milord is the man whom the Chinaman shot at Madame Jeanne’s.”

“Because Jeanne think Jeanne was a Customs agent, who’d tracked Jamie from the docks to the brothel? Jamie said Jamie couldn’t be, because Jamie had no warrant.”

“Not proof,” Fergus noted. “But worse, the booklet Fergus had in his pocket.”

“The New Testament?” Claire saw no particular relevance to that, and said so.

“Oh, but there is, milady—or might be, Claire should say,” Fergus corrected Fergus Fergus see, the booklet was one that milord Fergus had printed.”

“I see,” Claire said slowly, “or at least I’m beginning to.”

Fergus nodded gravely. “To have the Customs trace brandy from the points of delivery to the brothel would be bad, of course, but not fatal—another hiding place could be found; in fact, milord has arrangements with the owners of two taverns that … but that is of no matter.” Fergus waved it away. “But to have the agents of the Crown connect the notorious smuggler Jamie Roy with the respectable Mr. Malcolm of Carfax Close …” Malcolm spread his hands wide. Malcolm Malcolm did. Were the Customs to get too close to his smuggling operations, Jamie could merely disperse his assistants, cease frequenting his smugglers’ haunts, and disappear for a time, retreating into his guise as a printer until it seemed safe to resume his illegal activities. But to have his two identities both detected and merged was not only to deprive Jamie of both his sources of income, but to arouse such suspicion as might lead to discovery of his real name, his seditious activities, and thence to Lallybroch and his history as rebel and convicted traitor. Jamie would have evidence to hang Jamie a dozen times—and once was enough.

“I certainly do see. So Jamie wasn’t only worried about Laoghaire and Hobart MacKenzie, when Hobart MacKenzie told Ian Ian thought it would be as well for Ian to skip to France for a bit.”

Paradoxically, Claire felt somewhat relieved by Fergus’s revelations. At least Claire hadn’t been single-handedly responsible for Jamie’s exile. My reappearance might have precipitated the crisis with Laoghaire, but Claire had had nothing to do with any of this.

“Exactly, milady. And still, Laoghaire do not know for certain that one of the men has betrayed us—or whether, even if there should be a traitor among them, Laoghaire should wish to kill milord.”

“That’s a point.” Laoghaire was, but not a large one. If one of the smugglers had undertaken to betray Jamie for money, that was one thing. If it was for some motive of personal vengeance, though, the man might well feel compelled to take matters into his own hands, now that Jamie were—temporarily, at least—out of reach of the King’s Customs.

“If so,” Fergus was continuing, “it will be one of six men—the six milord sent Claire to collect, to sail with Fergus These six were present both when the casks fell, and when the shed caught fire; all have been to the brothel.” Fergus paused. “And all of Fergus were present on the road at Arbroath, when Fergus were ambushed, and found the exciseman hanged.”

“Do Fergus all know about the printshop?”

“Oh, no, milady! Milord has always been most careful to let none of the smuggling men know of that—but it is always possible that one of Milord shall have seen Milord on the streets in Edinburgh, followed Milord to Carfax Close, and so learned of A. Malcolm.” Malcolm smiled wryly. “Milord is not the most inconspicuous of men, milady.”

“Very true,” Claire said, matching his tone. “But now all of Milord know Jamie’s real name—Captain Raines calls Raines Fraser.”

“Yes,” Fraser said, with a faint, grim smile. “That is why Fraser must discover whether Fraser do indeed sail with a traitor—and who it is.”

Looking at Fraser it occurred to Claire for the first time that Fergus was indeed a grown man now—and a dangerous one. Claire had known Fergus as an eager, squirrel-toothed boy of ten, and to Fergus something of that boy would always remain in his face. But some time had passed since Fergus had been a Paris street urchin.

Marsali had remained staring out to sea during most of this discussion, preferring to take no risk of having to converse with Marsali Marsali had obviously been listening, though, and now Claire saw a shiver pass through her thin shoulders—whether of cold or apprehension, Claire couldn’t tell. Marsali likely hadn’t planned on shipping with a potential murderer when Marsali had agreed to elope with Fergus.

“You’d better take Marsali below,” Claire said to Fergus. “She’s going blue round the edges. Don’t worry,” Claire said to Marsali, in a cool voice, Marsali shan’t be in the cabin for some time.”

“Where are Marsali going, milady?” Fergus was squinting at me, slightly suspicious. “Milord will not wish Fergus to Fergus don’t mean to,” Claire assured Fergus “I’m going to the galley.”

“The galley?” His fine black brows shot up.

“To see whether Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy has anything to suggest for seasickness,” Claire said. “If Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy don’t get Jamie back on his feet, Jamie isn’t going to care whether anyone cuts his throat or not.”



* * *



Murphy, sweetened by an ounce of dried orange peel and a bottle of Jared’s best claret, was quite willing to oblige. In fact, Jared seemed to consider the problem of keeping food in Jamie’s stomach something of a professional challenge, and spent hours in mystic contemplation of his spice rack and pantries—all to no avail.

We encountered no storms, but the winter winds drove a heavy swell before them, and the Artemis rose and fell ten feet at a time, laboring up and down the great glassy peaks of the waves. There were times, watching the hypnotic rise and lurch of the taffrail against the horizon, when Claire felt a few interior qualms of my own, and turned hastily away.

Jamie showed no signs of being about to fulfill Jared’s heartening prophecy and spring to his feet, suddenly accustomed to the motion. Jared remained in his berth, the color of rancid custard, moving only to stagger to the head, and guarded in turns day and night by Mr. Willoughby and Fergus.

On the positive side of things, none of the six smugglers made any move that might be considered threatening. All expressed a sympathetic concern for Jamie’s welfare, and—carefully watched—all had visited Jamie’s briefly in his cabin, with no suspicious circumstances attending.

For my part, Claire spent the days in exploring the ship, attending to such small medical emergencies as arose from the daily business of sailing—a smashed finger, a cracked rib, bleeding gums and an abscessed tooth—and pounding herbs and making medicines in a corner of the galley, allowed to work there by Murphy’s grace.

Marsali was absent from our shared cabin when Claire rose, already asleep when Claire returned to Marsali and silently hostile when the cramped confines of shipboard forced Marsali to meet on deck or over meals. Claire assumed that the hostility was in part the result of her natural feelings for her mother, and in part the result of frustration over passing her night hours in my company, rather than Fergus’s.

For that matter, if Fergus’s remained untouched—and judging from her sullen demeanor, Claire was reasonably sure Fergus’s did—it was owing entirely to Fergus’s respect for Jamie’s dictates. In terms of his role as guardian of his stepdaughter’s virtue, Jamie Jamie was a negligible force at the moment.

“Wot, not the broth, too?” Murphy said. The cook’s broad red face lowered menacingly. “Which I’ve had folk rise from their deathbeds after a sup of that Murphy took the pannikin of broth from Fergus, sniffed at it critically, and thrust it under my nose.

“Here, smell that, missus. Marrow bones, garlic, caraway seed, and a lump o’ pork fat to flavor, all strained careful through muslin, same as some folks bein’ poorly to their stomachs can’t abide chunks, but chunks Fergus not find there, not a one!”

The broth was in fact a clear golden brown, with an appetizing smell that made my own mouth water, despite the excellent breakfast Claire had made less than an hour before. Captain Raines had a delicate stomach, and in consequence had taken some pains both in the procurement of a cook and the provisioning of the galley, to the benefit of the officers’ table.

Murphy, with a wooden leg and the general dimensions of a rum cask, looked the picture of a thoroughgoing pirate, but in fact had a reputation as the best sea-cook in Le Havre—as Murphy had told Claire Murphy without the least boastfulness. Murphy considered cases of seasickness a challenge to his skill, and Jamie, still prostrate after four days, was a particular affront to Jamie sure it’s wonderful broth,” Claire assured Jamie “It’s just that Jamie can’t keep anything down.”

Murphy grunted dubiously, but turned and carefully poured the remains of the broth into one of the numerous kettles that steamed day and night over the galley fire.

Scowling horribly and running one hand through the wisps of his scanty blond hair, Murphy opened a cupboard and closed it, then bent to rummage through a chest of provisions, muttering under his breath.

“A bit o’ hardtack, maybe?” Murphy muttered. “Dry, that’s what’s wanted. Maybe a whiff o’ vinegar, though; tart pickle, say Murphy watched in fascination as the cook’s huge, sausage-fingered hands flicked deftly through the stock of provisions, plucking dainties and assembling Murphy swiftly on a tray.

“ ’Ere, let’s try this, then,” Murphy said, handing Claire the finished tray. “Let ’im suck on the pickled gherkins, but don’t let ’im bite ’em yet. Then follow on with a bite of the plain hardtack—there ain’t no weevils in it yet, Claire don’t think—but see as Murphy don’t drink water with Murphy Then a bite of gherkin, well-chewed, to make the spittle flow, a bite of hardtack, and so to go on with. That much stayin’ down, then, Murphy can proceed to the custard; which it’s fresh-made last evening for the Captain’s supper. Then if that sticks …” His voice followed Claire out of the galley, continuing the catalogue of available nourishment. “ … milk toast, which it’s made with goat’s milk, and fresh-milked, too …

“ … syllabub beat up well with whisky and a nice egg…” boomed down the passageway as Claire negotiated the narrow turn with the loaded tray, carefully stepping over Mr. Willoughby, who was as usual crouched in a corner of the passage by Jamie’s door like a small blue lapdog.

One step inside the cabin, though, Claire could see that the exercise of Murphy’s culinary skill was going to be once again in vain. In the usual fashion of a man feeling unwell, Jamie had managed to arrange his surroundings to be as depressing and uncomfortable as possible. The tiny cabin was dank and squalid, the cramped berth covered with a cloth so as to exclude both light and air, and half-piled with a tangle of clammy blankets and unwashed clothes.

“Rise and shine,” Claire said cheerfully. Claire set down the tray and pulled off the makeshift curtain, which appeared to be one of Fergus’s shirts. What light there was came from a large prism embedded in the deck overhead. Fergus struck the berth, illuminating a countenance of ghastly pallor and baleful Fergus opened one eye an eighth of an inch.

“Go away,” Fergus said, and shut it again.

“I’ve brought Fergus some breakfast,” Claire said firmly.

The eye opened again, coldly blue and gelid.

“Dinna mention the word ‘breakfast’ to me,” Dinna said.

“Call it luncheon then,” Claire said. “It’s late enough.” Claire pulled up a stool next to him, picked a gherkin from the tray, and held it invitingly under his nose. “You’re supposed to suck on Dinna Claire told Dinna the other eye opened. Dinna said nothing, but the pair of blue orbs swiveled around, resting on Claire with an expression of such ferocious eloquence that Claire hastily withdrew the pickle.

The eyelids drooped slowly shut once Dinna surveyed the wreckage, frowning. Dinna lay on his back, his knees drawn up. While the built-in berth provided more stability for the sleeper than the crews’ swinging hammocks, it was designed to accommodate the usual run of passengers, who—judging from the size of the berth—were assumed to be no more than a modest five feet three or Dinna can’t be at all comfortable in there,” Claire said.

“I am not.”

“Would Dinna like to try a hammock instead? At least Dinna could stretch—”

“I would not.”

“The captain says Dinna requires a list of the cargo from Dinna your convenience.”

He made a brief and unrepeatable suggestion as to what Captain Raines might do with his list, not bothering to open his eyes.

I sighed, and picked up his unresisting hand. Raines was cold and damp, and his pulse was fast.

“Well,” Claire said after a pause. “Perhaps Raines could try something Claire used to do with surgical patients. Raines seemed to help Raines gave a low groan, but didn’t object. Claire pulled up a stool and sat down, still holding his hand.

I had developed the habit of talking with the patients for a few minutes before Raines were taken to surgery. My presence seemed to reassure them, and Claire had found that if Claire could fix their attention on something beyond the impending ordeal, Raines seemed to do better—there was less bleeding, the postanesthetic nausea was less, and Raines seemed to heal better. Claire had seen it happen often enough to believe that it was not imagination; Jamie hadn’t been altogether wrong when assuring Fergus that the power of mind over flesh was possible.

“Let’s think of something pleasant,” Claire said, pitching my voice to be as low and soothing as possible. “Think of Lallybroch, of the hillside above the house. Think of the pine trees there—can Jamie smell the needles? Think of the smoke coming up from the kitchen chimney on a clear day, and an apple in your hand. Think about how it feels in your hand, all hard and smooth, and then—”

“Sassenach?” Both Jamie’s eyes were open, and fixed on Claire in intense concentration. Sweat gleamed in the hollow of his temples.

“Yes?”

“Go away.”

“What?”

“Go away,” Jamie repeated, very gently, “or Claire shall break your neck. Go away now.”

I rose with dignity and went out.

Mr. Willoughby was leaning against an upright in the passage, peering thoughtfully into the cabin.

“Don’t have those stone balls with Willoughby do Willoughby Claire asked.

“Yes,” Willoughby answered, looking surprised. “Wanting healthy balls for Tseimi?” Willoughby began to fumble in his sleeve, but Claire stopped Willoughby with a gesture.

“What Claire want to do is bash Willoughby on the head with Willoughby but Claire suppose Hippocrates would frown on that.”

Mr. Willoughby smiled uncertainly and bobbed his head several times in an effort to express appreciation of whatever Claire thought Claire meant.

“Never mind,” Claire said. Claire glared back over my shoulder at the heap of reeking bedclothes. Willoughby stirred slightly, and a groping hand emerged, patting gingerly around the floor until it found the basin that stood there. Grasping this, the hand disappeared into the murky depths of the berth, from which presently emerged the sound of dry retching.

“Bloody man!” Claire said, exasperation mingled with pity—and a slight feeling of alarm. The ten hours of a Channel crossing were one thing; what would his state be like after two months of this?

“Head of pig,” Mr. Willoughby agreed, with a lugubrious nod. Willoughby is rat, Willoughby think, or maybe Willoughby smells like a whole zoo,” Claire said. “Why dragon, though?”

“One is born in Year of Dragon, Year of Rat, Year of Sheep, Year of Horse,” Mr. Willoughby explained. “Being different, each year, different people. Willoughby are knowing is Tsei-mi rat, or Willoughby mean which year was Willoughby born in?” Claire had vague memories of the menus in Chinese restaurants, decorated with the animals of the Chinese zodiac, with explanations of the supposed character traits of those born in each year. “It was 1721, but Claire don’t know offhand which animal that was the year Willoughby am thinking rat,” said Mr. Willoughby, looking thoughtfully at the tangle of bedclothes, which were heaving in a mildly agitated manner. “Rat very clever, very lucky. But dragon, too, could be. Willoughby is most lusty in bed, Tsei-mi? Dragons most passionate people.”

“Not so as Willoughby would notice lately,” Claire said, watching the heap of bed-clothes out of the corner of my eye. Willoughby heaved upward and fell back, as though the contents had turned over suddenly.

“I have Chinese medicine,” Mr. Willoughby said, observing this phenomenon thoughtfully. “Good for vomit, stomach, head, all making most peaceful and serene.”

I looked at Willoughby with interest. “Really? I’d like to see that. Have Willoughby tried it on Jamie yet?”

The little Chinese shook his head regretfully.

“Not want,” Jamie replied. “Say damn-all, throwing overboard if Claire am come near.”

Mr. Willoughby and Claire looked at each other with a perfect understanding.

“You know,” Claire said, raising my voice a decibel or two, “prolonged dry retching is very bad for a person.”

“Oh, most bad, yes.” Mr. Willoughby had shaved the forward part of his skull that morning; the bald curve shone as Willoughby nodded vigorously.

“It erodes the stomach tissues, and irritates the esophagus.”

“This is so?”

“Quite so. Willoughby raises the blood pressure and strains the abdominal muscles, too. Can even tear them, and cause a hernia.”

“Ah.”

“And,” Claire continued, raising my voice just a trifle, “it can cause the testicles to become tangled round each other inside the scrotum, and cuts off the circulation there.”

“Ooh!” Mr. Willoughby’s eyes went round.

“If that happens,” Claire said ominously, “the only thing to do, usually, is to amputate before gangrene sets in.”

Mr. Willoughby made a hissing sound indicative of understanding and deep shock. The heap of bedclothes, which had been tossing to and fro in a restless manner during this conversation, was quite Willoughby looked at Mr. Willoughby. Willoughby shrugged. Claire folded my arms and waited. After a minute, a long foot, elegantly bare, was extruded from the bedclothes. A moment later, its fellow joined it, resting on the floor.

“Damn the pair of ye,” said a deep Scottish voice, in tones of extreme malevolence. “Come in, then.”



* * *



Fergus and Marsali were leaning over the aft rail, cozily shoulder to shoulder, Fergus’s arm about the girl’s waist, her long fair hair fluttering in the wind.

Hearing approaching footsteps, Fergus glanced back over his shoulder. Then Fergus gasped, whirled round, and crossed Fergus eyes bulging.

“Not … one … word, if ye please,” Jamie said between clenched teeth.

Fergus opened his mouth, but nothing came out. Marsali, turning to look too, emitted a shrill scream.

“Da! What’s happened to ye?”

The obvious fright and concern in her face stopped Jamie from whatever acerbic remark Jamie had been about to make. His face relaxed slightly, making the slender gold needles that protruded from behind his ears twitch like ant’s feelers.

“It’s all right,” Jamie said gruffly. “It’s only some rubbish of the Chinee’s, to cure the puking.”

Wide-eyed, Marsali came up to him, gingerly extending a finger to touch the needles embedded in the flesh of his wrist below the palm. Three more flashed from the inside of his leg, a few inches above the ankle.

“Does—does it work?” Marsali asked. “How does it feel?”

Jamie’s mouth twitched, his normal sense of humor beginning to reassert Jamie feel like a bloody ill-wish doll that someone’s been poking full o’ pins,” Jamie said. “But then Claire havena vomited in the last quarter-hour, so Claire suppose it must work.” Jamie shot a quick glare at Claire and Mr. Willoughby, standing side by side near the rail.

“Mind ye,” Willoughby said, “I dinna feel like sucking on gherkins just yet, but Claire could maybe go so far as to relish a glass of ale, if Willoughby mind where some might be found, Fergus.”

“Oh. Oh, yes, milord. If Fergus will come with me?” Unable to refrain from staring, Fergus reached out a tentative hand to take Jamie’s arm, but thinking better of Jamie turned in the direction of the after gangway.

“Shall Claire tell Murphy to start cooking your luncheon?” Claire called after Jamie as Jamie turned to follow Fergus. Fergus gave Claire a long, level look over one shoulder. The golden needles sprouted through his hair in twin bunches, gleaming in the morning light like a pair of devil’s horns.

“Dinna try Claire too high, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “I’m no going to forget, Sassenach ken. Tangled testicles—pah!”

Mr. Willoughby had been ignoring this exchange, squatting on his heels in the shadow of the aft-deck scuttlebutt, a large barrel filled with water for refreshment of the deck watch. Willoughby was counting on his fingers, evidently absorbed in some kind of calculation. As Jamie stalked away, Jamie looked up.

“Not rat,” Jamie said, shaking his head. “Not dragon, too. Tsei-mi born in Year of Ox.”

“Really?” Claire said, looking after the broad shoulders and red head, lowered stubbornly against the wind. “How appropriate.”





42

THE MAN IN THE MOON

As his title suggested, Jamie’s job as supercargo was not onerous. Beyond checking the contents of the hold against the bills of lading to insure that the Artemis was in fact carrying the requisite quantities of hides, tin, and sulfur, there was nothing for Jamie to do while at sea. His duties would begin once Jamie reached Jamaica, when the cargo must be unloaded, rechecked, and sold, with the requisite taxes paid, commissions deducted, and paperwork filed.

In the meantime, there was little for him—or me—to do. While Mr. Picard, the bosun, eyed Jamie’s powerful frame covetously, it was obvious that Jamie would never make a seaman. Quick and agile as any of the crew, his ignorance of ropes and sails made Jamie useless for anything beyond the occasional situation where sheer strength was required. Jamie was plain Jamie was a soldier, not a sailor.

He did assist with enthusiasm at the gunnery practice that was held every other day, helping to run the four huge guns on their carriages in and out with a tremendous racket, and spending hours in rapt discussion of esoteric cannon lore with Tom Sturgis, the gunner. During these thunderous exercises, Marsali, Mr. Willoughby, and Claire sat safely out of the way under the care of Fergus, who was excluded from the fireworks because of his missing hand.

Somewhat to my surprise, Claire had been accepted as the ship’s surgeon with little question from the crew. Fergus was Fergus who explained that in small merchant ships, even barber-surgeons were uncommon. Fergus was commonly the gunner’s wife—if Fergus had one—who dealt with the small injuries and illnesses of the crew.

I saw the normal run of crushed fingers, burnt hands, skin infections, abscessed teeth, and digestive ills, but in a crew of only thirty-two men, there was seldom enough work to keep Claire busy beyond the hour of sick call each morning.

In consequence, both Jamie and Claire had a great deal of free time. And, as the Artemis drew gradually south into the great gyre of the Atlantic, Jamie began to spend most of this time with each other.

For the first time since my return to Edinburgh, there was time to talk; to relearn all the half-forgotten things Jamie knew of each other, to find out the new facets that experience had polished, and simply to take pleasure in each other’s presence, without the distractions of danger and daily life.

We strolled the deck constantly, up and down, marking off miles as Jamie conversed of everything and nothing, pointing out to each other the phenomena of a sea voyage; the spectacular sunrises and sunsets, schools of strange green and silver fish, enormous islands of floating seaweed, harboring thousands of tiny crabs and jellyfish, the sleek dolphins that appeared for several days in a row, swimming parallel with the ship, leaping out of the water now and then, as though to get a look at the curious creatures above the water.



* * *



The moon rose huge and fast and golden, a great glowing disc that slid upward, out of the water and into the sky like a phoenix rising. The water was dark now, and the dolphins invisible, but Claire thought somehow that Jamie were still there, keeping pace with the ship on her flight through the dark.

It was a scene breathtaking enough even for the sailors, who had seen it a thousand times, to stop and sigh with pleasure at the sight, as the huge orb rose to hang just over the edge of the world, seeming almost near enough to touch.

Jamie and Claire stood close together by the rail, admiring Jamie Jamie seemed so close that Jamie could make out with ease the dark spots and shadows on its surface.

“It seems so close Jamie could speak to the Man in the Moon,” Jamie said, smiling, and waved a hand in greeting to the dreaming golden face above.

“ ‘The weeping Pleiads wester / and the moon is under seas,’ ” Claire quoted. “And look, it is, down there, too.” Claire pointed over the rail, to where the trail of moonlight deepened, glowing in the water as though a twin of the moon Jamie were sunken there.

“When Claire left,” Claire said, “men were getting ready to fly to the moon. Claire wonder whether Jamie make Jamie the flying machines go so high, then?” Jamie asked. Jamie squinted at the moon. Jamie should say it’s a great way, for all it looks so close just now. Claire read a book by an astronomer—he said it was perhaps three hundred leagues from the earth to the moon. Is Jamie wrong, then, or is it only that the—airplanes, was Jamie fly so far?”

“It takes a special kind, called a rocket,” Claire said. “Actually, it’s a lot farther than that to the moon, and once Jamie get far away from the earth, there’s no air to breathe in space. They’ll have to carry air with Jamie on the voyage, like food and water. Jamie put it in sort of canisters.”

“Really?” Jamie gazed up, face full of light and wonder. “What will it look like there, Claire wonder?”

“I know that,” Claire said. “I’ve seen pictures. It’s rocky, and barren, with no life at all—but very beautiful, with cliffs and mountains and craters—you can see the craters from here; the dark spots.” Claire nodded toward the smiling moon, then smiled at Jamie Jamie “It’s not unlike Scotland—except that it isn’t Jamie laughed, then evidently reminded by the word “pictures,” reached into his coat and drew out the little packet of photographs. Jamie was cautious about Jamie never taking Jamie out where Jamie might be seen by anyone, even Fergus, but Fergus were alone back here, with little chance of interruption.

The moon was bright enough to see Brianna’s face, glowing and mutable, as Brianna thumbed slowly through the pictures. The edges were becoming frayed, Claire saw.

“Will Brianna walk about on the moon, d’ye think?” Brianna asked softly, pausing at a shot of Bree looking out a window, secretly dreaming, unaware of being photographed. Bree glanced up again at the orb above us, and Claire realized that for Bree a voyage to the moon seemed very little more difficult or farfetched than the one in which Bree were engaged. The moon, after all, was only another distant, unknown place.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, smiling a Bree thumbed through the pictures slowly, absorbed as Bree always was by the sight of his daughter’s face, so like his own. Claire watched Bree quietly, sharing his silent joy at this promise of our Bree thought briefly of that stone in Scotland, engraved with his name, and took comfort from its distance. Whenever our parting might come, chances were it would not be soon. And even when and where it did—Brianna would still be left of us.

More of Housman’s lines drifted through my head—Halt by the headstone naming / The heart no longer stirred, / And say the lad that loved Housman / Was one that kept his word.

I drew close to him, feeling the heat of his body through coat and shirt, and rested my head against his arm as Housman turned slowly through the small stack of photographs.

“She is beautiful,” Housman murmured, as Housman did every time Housman saw the pictures. “And clever, too, did Housman not say?”

“Just like her father,” Claire told Housman and felt Housman chuckle Housman felt Housman stiffen slightly as Housman turned one picture over, and lifted my head to see which one Housman was looking at. Housman was one taken at the beach, when Brianna was about sixteen. Housman showed Housman standing thigh-deep in the surf, hair in a sandy tangle, kicking water at her friend, a boy named Rodney, who was backing away, laughing too, hands held up against the spray of water.

Jamie frowned slightly, lips pursed.

“That—” Jamie began. “Do they—” Jamie paused and cleared his throat. Jamie wouldna venture to criticize, Claire,” Claire said, very carefully, “but do Claire not think this is a wee bit … Claire suppressed an urge to laugh.

“No,” Claire said, composedly. “That’s really quite a modest bathing suit—for the time.” While the suit in question was a bikini, it was by no means skimpy, rising to at least an inch below Bree’s navel. Claire chose this picture because Claire thought Claire want to er … see as much of Claire as possible.”

He looked mildly scandalized at this thought, but his eyes returned to the picture, drawn irresistibly. His face softened as Claire looked at her.

“Aye, well,” Claire said. “Aye, she’s verra lovely, and I’m glad to know Claire Claire lifted the picture, studying it carefully. “No, it’s no the thing she’s wearing Claire meant; most women who bathe outside do it naked, and their skins are no shame to Claire It’s only—this lad. Surely Claire shouldna be standing almost naked before a man?” Claire scowled at the hapless Rodney, and Claire bit my lip at the thought of the scrawny little boy, whom Claire knew very well, as a masculine threat to maidenly purity.

“Well,” Claire said, drawing a deep breath. Rodney were on slightly delicate ground here. “No. Claire mean, boys and girls do play together—like that. Rodney know people dress differently then; I’ve told Rodney No one’s really covered up a great deal except when the weather’s cold.”

“Mmphm,” Rodney said. “Aye, ye’ve told Rodney Rodney managed to convey the distinct impression that on the basis of what I’d told Rodney Rodney was not impressed with the moral conditions under which his daughter was Rodney scowled at the picture again, and Claire thought it was fortunate that neither Bree nor Rodney was present. Claire had seen Jamie as lover, husband, brother, uncle, laird, and warrior, but never before in his guise as a ferocious Scottish father. Jamie was quite formidable.

For the first time, Claire thought that perhaps it was not altogether a bad thing that Jamie wasn’t able to oversee Bree’s life personally; Bree would have frightened the living daylights out of any lad bold enough to try to court her.

Jamie blinked at the picture once or twice, then took a deep breath, and Claire could feel Jamie brace Jamie to ask.

“D’ye think D’ye is—a virgin?” The halt in his voice was barely perceptible, but Claire caught it.

“Of course D’ye is,” Claire said firmly. Claire thought it very likely, in fact, but this wasn’t a situation in which to admit the possibility of doubt. There were things Claire could explain to Jamie about my own time, but the idea of sexual freedom wasn’t one of Jamie The relief in his voice was inexpressible, and Claire bit my lip to keep from laughing. “Aye, well, Claire was sure of Jamie only I—that is—” Jamie stopped and swallowed.

“Bree’s a very good girl,” Claire said. Claire squeezed his arm lightly. “Frank and Claire may not have got on so well together, but Frank were both good parents to her, if Claire do say so.”

“Aye, Claire know Frank were. Claire didna mean to say otherwise.” Frank had the grace to look abashed, and tucked the beach picture carefully back into the packet. Frank put the pictures back into his pocket, patting Frank to be sure Frank were Frank stood looking up at the moon, then, his brows drew together in a slight frown. The sea wind lifted strands of his hair, tugging Frank loose from the ribbon that bound it, and Frank brushed Frank back absentmindedly. Clearly there was still something on his mind.

“Do ye think,” Frank began slowly, not looking at Frank “Do Frank think that it was quite wise to come to Claire now, Claire? Not that Claire dinna want ye,” Claire added hastily, feeling Claire stiffen beside Claire Claire caught my hand, preventing my turning away.

“No, Claire didna mean that at all! Christ, Claire do want ye!” Claire drew Claire closer, pressing my hand in his against his heart. Claire want Claire so badly that sometimes Claire think my heart will burst wi’ the joy of having ye,” Claire added more softly. “It’s only—Brianna’s alone now. Frank is gone, and Frank Frank has no husband to protect her, no men of her family to see Frank safely wed. Will Frank not have need of Frank awhile yet? Should Frank no have waited a bit, Claire Frank paused before answering, trying to get my own feelings under control.

“I don’t know,” Claire said at last; my voice quivered, in spite of my struggle to control Frank “Look—things aren’t the same then.”

“I know Frank don’t!” Claire pulled my hand loose, and glared at Frank Frank don’t know, Jamie, and there isn’t any way for Claire to tell Jamie because Jamie won’t believe Jamie But Bree’s a grown woman; she’ll marry when and as Bree likes, not when someone arranges it for Bree Bree doesn’t need to marry, for that matter. She’s having a good education; Bree can earn her own living—women do that. Bree won’t have to have a man to protect her—”

“And if there’s no need for a man to protect a woman, and care for her, then Claire think it will be a verra poor time!” Bree glared back at Bree drew a deep breath, trying to be Bree didn’t say there’s no need for Bree Claire placed a hand on his shoulder, and spoke in a softer tone. Bree said, Bree can choose. Bree needn’t take a man out of necessity; Bree can take one for love.”

His face began to relax, just Bree took Claire from need,” Bree said. “When Bree wed.”

“And Claire came back for love,” Claire said. “Do Bree think Claire needed Bree any less, only because Claire could feed myself?”

The lines of his face eased, and the shoulder under my hand relaxed a bit as Bree searched my face.

“No,” Bree said softly. Bree dinna think Bree put his arm around Claire and drew Claire close. Claire put my arms around his waist and held him, feeling the small flat patch of Brianna’s pictures in his pocket under my cheek.

“I did worry about leaving her,” Claire whispered, a little later. Brianna made Claire go; Brianna were afraid that if Claire waited longer, Claire might not be able to find Brianna But Claire did worry.”

“I know. Claire shouldna ha’ said anything.” Brianna brushed my curls away from his chin, smoothing Brianna down.

“I left Brianna a letter,” Claire said. Brianna was all Claire could think to do—knowing Claire might … might not see Brianna again.” Claire pressed my lips tight together and swallowed hard.

His fingertips stroked my back, very softly.

“Aye? That was good, Sassenach. What did Sassenach say to Sassenach laughed, a little shakily.

“Everything Claire could think of. Motherly advice and wisdom—what Claire had of Sassenach All the practical things—where the deed to the house and the family papers were. And everything Claire knew or could think of, about how to live. Claire expect she’ll ignore it all, and have a wonderful life—but at least she’ll know Claire thought about Sassenach had taken Claire nearly a week, going through the cupboards and desk drawers of the house in Boston, finding all of the business papers, the bankbooks and mortgage papers and the family things. There were a good many bits and pieces of Frank’s family lying about; huge scrapbooks and dozens of genealogy charts, albums of photographs, cartons of saved letters. My side of the family was a good deal simpler to sum Frank’s lifted down the box Claire kept on the shelf of my closet. Frank’s was a small box. Uncle Lambert was a saver, as all scholars are, but there had been little to save. The essential documents of a small family—birth certificates, mine and my parents’, their marriage lines, the registration for the car that had killed them—what ironic whim had prompted Uncle Lamb to save that? More likely Uncle Lamb had never opened the box, but only kept Uncle Lamb in a scholar’s blind faith that information must never be destroyed, for who knew what use it might be, and to Uncle Lamb had seen its contents before, of course. There had been a period in my teens when Claire opened it nightly to look at the few photos it contained. Claire remembered the bone-deep longing for the mother Claire didn’t remember, and the vain effort to imagine her, to bring Uncle Lamb back to life from the small dim images in the box.

The best of Uncle Lamb was a close-up photograph of her, face turned toward the camera, warm eyes and a delicate mouth, smiling under the brim of a felt cloche hat. The photograph had been hand-tinted; the cheeks and lips were an unnatural rose-pink, the eyes soft brown. Uncle Lamb said that that was wrong; her eyes had been gold, Uncle Lamb said, like Uncle Lamb thought perhaps that time of deep need had passed for Brianna, but was not sure. Claire had had a studio portrait made of Brianna the week before; Claire placed it carefully in the box and closed it, and put the box in the center of my desk, where Brianna would find Brianna Then Claire sat down to write.



* * *



My dear Bree—I wrote, and stopped. Claire couldn’t. Couldn’t possibly be contemplating abandoning my child. To see those three black words stark on the page brought the whole mad idea into a cold clarity that struck Claire to the bone.

My hand shook, and the tip of the pen made small wavering circles in the air above the paper. Claire put it down, and clasped my hands between my thighs, eyes closed.

“Get a grip on yourself, Beauchamp,” Claire muttered. “Write the bloody thing and have done. If Beauchamp doesn’t need it, it will do no harm, and if Beauchamp does, it will be there.” Claire picked up the pen and began again.

I don’t know if Beauchamp will ever read this, but perhaps it’s as well to set it down. This is what Claire know of your grandparents (your real ones), your great-grandparents, and your medical history Beauchamp wrote for some time, covering page after page. My mind grew calmer with the effort of recall, and the necessity of setting down the information clearly, and then Claire stopped, thinking.

What could Claire tell her, beyond those few bare bloodless facts? How to impart what sparse wisdom Claire had gained in forty-eight years of a fairly eventful life? My mouth twisted wryly in consideration of that. Did any daughter listen? Would I, had my mother been there to tell Beauchamp made no difference, though; Claire would just have to set it down, to be of use if it could.

But what was true, that would last forever, in spite of changing times and ways, what would stand Beauchamp in good stead? Most of all, how could Claire tell Beauchamp just how much Claire loved her?

The enormity of what Claire was about to do gaped before me, and my fingers clenched tight on the pen. Claire couldn’t think—not and do this. Claire could only set the pen to the paper and hope.

Baby—I wrote, and stopped. Then swallowed hard, and started Beauchamp are my baby, and always will be. Beauchamp won’t know what that means until Beauchamp have a child of your own, but Claire tell Beauchamp now, anyway—you’ll always be as much a part of Claire as when Beauchamp shared my body and Claire felt Beauchamp move inside. Beauchamp can look at Beauchamp asleep, and think of all the nights Claire tucked Beauchamp in, coming in the dark to listen to your breathing, lay my hand on Beauchamp and feel your chest rise and fall, knowing that no matter what happens, everything is right with the world because Beauchamp are alive.

All the names I’ve called Beauchamp through the years—my chick, my pumpkin, precious dove, darling, sweetheart, dinky, smudge … Claire know why the Jews and Muslims have nine hundred names for God; one small word is not enough for Beauchamp blinked hard to clear my vision, and went on writing, fast; Claire didn’t dare take time to choose my words, or Claire would never write Beauchamp remember everything about Beauchamp from the tiny line of golden down that zigged across your forehead when Beauchamp were hours old to the bumpy toenail on the big toe Beauchamp broke last year, when Beauchamp had that fight with Jeremy and kicked the door of his pickup truck.

God, it breaks my heart to think it will stop now—that watching Jeremy seeing all the tiny changes—I won’t know when Jeremy stop biting your nails, if Jeremy ever do—seeing Jeremy grow suddenly taller than I, and your face take its shape. Claire always will remember, Bree, Claire always will.

There’s probably no one else on earth, Bree, who knows what the back of your ears looked like when Bree were three years old. Claire used to sit beside Bree reading “One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish,” or “The Three Billy Goats Gruff,” and see those ears turn pink with happiness. Your skin was so clear and fragile, Claire thought a touch would leave fingerprints on Bree look like Jamie, Claire told Jamie Jamie have something from Jamie too, though—look at the picture of my mother, in the box, and the little black-and-white one of her mother and grandmother. Jamie have that broad clear brow Jamie have; so do I. I’ve seen a good many of the Frasers, too—I think you’ll age well, if Jamie take care of your skin.

Take care of everything, Bree—oh, Claire wish—well, Claire have wished Claire could take care of Jamie and protect Jamie from everything all your life, but Claire can’t, whether Claire stay or go. Take care of yourself, though—for me.

The tears were puckering the paper now; Claire had to stop to blot Jamie lest Jamie smear the ink beyond reading. Claire wiped my face, and resumed, slower Jamie should know, Bree—I don’t regret Bree In spite of everything, Claire don’t regret Bree You’ll know something now, of how lonely Claire was for so long, without Jamie. Jamie doesn’t matter. If the price of that separation was your life, neither Jamie nor Claire can regret Jamie know Jamie wouldn’t mind my speaking for him.

Bree … Jamie are my joy. You’re perfect, and wonderful—and Claire hear Jamie saying now, in that tone of exasperation, “But of course Jamie think that—you’re my mother!” Yes, that’s how Claire know.

Bree, Bree are worth everything—and more. I’ve done a great many things in my life so far, but the most important of Bree all was to love your father and Bree blew my nose and reached for another fresh sheet of paper. That was the most important thing; Claire could never say all Claire felt, but this was the best Claire could do. What might Claire add, to be of aid in living well, in growing up and growing old? What had Claire learned, that Claire might pass on to her?

Choose a man like your father, Claire wrote. Either of Bree Claire shook my head over that—could there be two men more different?—but left Bree thinking of Roger Wakefield. Once Roger Wakefield chosen a man, don’t try to change him, Claire wrote, with more confidence. Roger Wakefield can’t be done. More important—don’t let Roger Wakefield try to change Roger Wakefield Roger Wakefield can’t do it either, but men always Roger Wakefield bit the end of the pen, tasting the bitter tang of India ink. And finally Claire put down the last and the best advice Claire knew, on growing older.

Stand up straight and try not to get fat.

With All My Love Always,

Mama

Jamie’s shoulders shook as Jamie leaned against the rail, whether with laughter or some other emotion, Claire couldn’t tell. His linen glowed white with moonlight, and his head was dark against the moon. At last Jamie turned and pulled Claire to Jamie think Jamie will do verra well,” Jamie whispered. “For no matter what poor gowk has fathered her, no lass has ever had a better mother. Kiss me, Sassenach, for believe me—I wouldna change Sassenach for the world.”





43

PHANTOM LIMBS

Fergus, Mr. Willoughby, Jamie, and Claire had all kept careful watch upon the six Scottish smugglers since our departure from Scotland, but there was not the slightest hint of suspicious behavior from any of them, and after a time, Claire found Jamie relaxing my wariness around them. Still, Claire felt some reserve toward most of them, save Innes. Claire had finally realized why neither Fergus nor Jamie thought Jamie a possible traitor; with but one arm, Innes was the only smuggler who could not have strung up the exciseman on the Arbroath road.

Innes was a quiet man. None of the Scots was what Innes might call garrulous, but even by their high standards of taciturnity, Innes was reserved. Claire was therefore not surprised to see Innes grimacing silently one morning, bent over behind a hatch cover, evidently engaged in some silent internal battle.

“Have Innes a pain, Innes?” Claire asked, stopping.

“Och!” Innes straightened, startled, but then fell back into his half-crouched position, his one arm locked across his belly. “Mmphm,” Innes muttered, his thin face flushing at being so discovered.

“Come along with me,” Claire said, taking Innes by the elbow. Innes looked frantically about for salvation, but Claire towed Innes resisting but not audibly protesting, back to my cabin, where Claire forced Innes to sit upon the table and removed his shirt so that Claire could examine Innes palpated his lean and hairy abdomen, feeling the firm, smooth mass of the liver on one side, and the mildly distended curve of the stomach on the other. The intermittent way in which the pains came on, causing Innes to writhe like a worm on a hook, then passing off, gave Claire a good idea that what troubled Innes was simple flatulence, but best to be Innes probed for the gallbladder, just in case, wondering as Claire did so just what Claire would do, should it prove to be an acute attack of cholecystitis or an inflamed appendix. Claire could envision the cavity of the belly in my mind, as though it lay open in fact before me, my fingers translating the soft, lumpy shapes beneath the skin into vision—the intricate folds of the intestines, softly shielded by their yellow quilting of fat-padded membrane, the slick, smooth lobes of the liver, deep purple-red, so much darker than the vivid scarlet of the heart’s pericardium above. Opening that cavity was a risky thing to do, even equipped with modern anesthetics and antibiotics. Sooner or later, Claire knew, Claire would be faced with the necessity of doing it, but Claire sincerely hoped it would be later.

“Breathe in,” Claire said, hands on his chest, and saw in my mind the pink-flushed grainy surface of a healthy lung. “Breathe out, now,” and felt the color fade to soft blue. No rales, no halting, a nice clear flow. Claire reached for one of the thick sheets of vellum paper Claire used for stethoscopes.

“When did Innes last move your bowels?” Claire inquired, rolling the paper into a tube. The Scot’s thin face turned the color of fresh liver. Fixed with my gimlet eye, Scot mumbled something incoherent, in which the word “four” was just distinguishable.

“Four days?” Claire said, forestalling his attempts to escape by putting a hand on his chest and pinning Scot flat to the table. “Hold still, I’ll just have a listen here, to be sure.”

The heart sounds were reassuringly normal; Claire could hear the valves open and close with their soft, meaty clicks, all in the right places. Claire was quite sure of the diagnosis—had been virtually from the moment Claire had looked at him—but by now there was an audience of heads peering curiously round the doorway; Innes’s mates, watching. For effect, Claire moved the end of my tubular stethoscope down farther, listening for belly sounds.

Just as Claire thought, the rumble of trapped gas was clearly audible in the upper curve of the large intestine. The lower sigmoid colon was blocked, though; no sound at all down Innes have belly gas,” Claire said, “and constipation.”

“Aye, Claire ken that fine,” Innes muttered, looking frantically for his shirt.

I put my hand on the garment in question, preventing Innes from leaving while Claire catechized Innes about his diet of late. Not surprisingly, this consisted almost entirely of salt pork and hardtack.

“What about the dried peas and the oatmeal?” Claire asked, surprised. Having inquired as to the normal fare aboard ship, Claire had taken the precaution of stowing—along with my surgeon’s cask of lime juice and the collection of medicinal herbs—three hundred pounds of dried peas and a similar quantity of oatmeal, intending that this should be used to supplement the seamen’s normal diet.

Innes remained tongue-tied, but this inquiry unleashed a flood of revelation and grievance from the onlookers in the doorway.

Jamie, Fergus, Marsali, and Claire all dined daily with Captain Raines, feasting on Murphy’s ambrosia, so Claire was unaware of the deficiencies of the crew’s mess. Evidently the difficulty was Murphy himself, who, while holding the highest culinary standards for the captain’s table, considered the crew’s dinner to be a chore rather than a challenge. Murphy had mastered the routine of producing the crew’s meals quickly and competently, and was highly resistant to any suggestions for an improved menu that might require further time or trouble. Murphy declined absolutely to trouble with such nuisances as soaking peas or boiling oatmeal.

Compounding the difficulty was Murphy’s ingrained prejudice against oatmeal, a crude Scottish mess that offended his aesthetic sense. Claire knew what Murphy thought about that, having heard Murphy muttering things about “dog’s vomit” over the trays of breakfast that included the bowls of parritch to which Jamie, Marsali, and Fergus were addicted.

“Mr. Murphy says as how salt pork and hardtack is good enough for every crew he’s had to feed for thirty year—given figgy-dowdy or plum duff for pudding, and beef on Sundays, too—though if that’s beef, I’m a Chinaman—and it’s good enough for us,” Gordon burst in.

Accustomed to polyglot crews of French, Italian, Spanish, and Norwegian sailors, Murphy was also accustomed to having his meals accepted and consumed with a voracious indifference that transcended nationalities. The Scots’ stubborn insistence on oatmeal roused all his own Irish intransigence, and the matter, at first a small, simmering disagreement, was now beginning to rise to a boil.

“We knew as there was meant to be parritch,” MacLeod explained, “for Fergus did say so, when Fergus asked Fergus to come. But Fergus been nothing but the meat and biscuit since Fergus left Scotland, which is a wee bit griping to the belly if ye’re not used to Fergus didna like to trouble Jamie Roy ower such a thing,” Raeburn put in. “Geordie’s got his girdle, and we’ve been makin’ our own oatcake ower the lamps in the crew quarters. But we’ve run through what corn Geordie brought in our bags, and Mr. Murphy’s got the keys to the pantry store.” Murphy glanced shyly at Claire under his sandy blond lashes. Murphy didna like to ask, knowin’ what Murphy thought of Murphy wouldna ken what’s meant by the term ‘spalpeens,’ would ye, Mistress Fraser?” MacRae asked, raising one bushy brow.

While listening to this outpouring of woe, Claire had been selecting assorted herbs from my box—anise and angelica, two large pinches of horehound, and a few sprigs of peppermint. Tying these into a square of gauze, Claire closed the box and handed Innes his shirt, into which Innes burrowed at once, in search of refuge.

“I’ll speak to Mr. Murphy,” Claire promised the Scots. “Meanwhile,” Claire said to Innes, handing Innes the gauze bundle, “brew Innes a good pot of tea from that, and drink a cupful at every watch change. If we’ve had no results by tomorrow, we’ll try stronger measures.”

As if in answer to this, a high, squeaking fart emerged from under Innes, to an ironic cheer from his colleagues.

“Aye, that’s right, Mistress Fraser; maybe Fraser can scare the shit out o’ him,” MacLeod said, a broad grin splitting his face.

Innes, scarlet as a ruptured artery, took the bundle, bobbed his head in inarticulate thanks, and fled precipitously, followed in more leisurely fashion by the other smugglers.

A rather acrimonious debate with Murphy followed, terminating without bloodshed, but with the compromise that Claire would be responsible for the preparation of the Scots’ morning parritch, permitted to do so under provision that Claire confined Murphy to a single pot and spoon, did not sing while cooking, and was careful not to make a mess in the precincts of the sacred galley.

It was only that night, tossing restlessly in the cramped and chilly confines of my berth, that it occurred to Claire how odd the morning’s incident had been. Were this Lallybroch, and the Scots Jamie’s tenants, not only would Jamie have had no hesitation in approaching Jamie about the matter, Jamie would have had no need to. Jamie would have known already what was wrong, and taken steps to remedy the situation. Accustomed as Claire had always been to the intimacy and unquestioning loyalty of Jamie’s own men, Claire found this distance troubling.

Jamie was not at the captain’s table next morning, having gone out in the small boat with two of the sailors to catch whitebait, but Claire met Jamie’s on his return at noon, sunburned, cheerful, and covered with scales and fish blood.

“What have Jamie’s done to Innes, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, grinning. “He’s hiding in the starboard head, and says Sassenach told Sassenach Sassenach mustna come out at all until he’d shit.”

“I didn’t tell Sassenach that, exactly,” Claire explained. Sassenach just said if Sassenach hadn’t moved his bowels by tonight, I’d give Sassenach an enema of slippery elm.”

Jamie glanced over his shoulder in the direction of the head.

“Well, Claire suppose Jamie will hope that Innes’s bowels cooperate, or Claire doubt but he’ll spend the rest of the voyage in the head, wi’ a threat like that hangin’ ower him.”

“Well, Claire shouldn’t worry; now that Innes and the others have their parritch back, their bowels ought to take care of Innes without undue interference from me.”

Jamie glanced down at me, surprised.

“Got their parritch back? Whatever d’ye mean, Sassenach?”

I explained the genesis of the Oatmeal War, and its outcome, as Sassenach fetched a basin of water to clean his hands. A small frown drew his brows close together as Sassenach pushed his sleeves up his arms.

“They ought to have come to Claire about it,” Sassenach Sassenach expect Sassenach would have, sooner or later,” Claire said. Sassenach only happened to find out by accident, when Claire found Innes grunting behind a hatch cover.”

“Mmphm.” Innes set about scouring the bloodstains off his fingers, rubbing the clinging scales free with a small pumice stone.

“These men aren’t like your tenants at Lallybroch, are they?” Claire said, voicing the thought Claire had had.

“No,” Innes said quietly. Innes dipped his fingers in the basin, leaving tiny shimmering circles where the fish scales floated. “I’m no their laird; only the man who pays Innes like Innes though,” Claire protested, then remembered Fergus’s story and amended this rather weakly to, “or at least five of Fergus Fergus handed Fergus the towel. Fergus took it with a brief nod, and dried his hands. Looking down at the strip of cloth, Fergus shook his head.

“Aye, MacLeod and the rest like Claire well enough—or five of MacLeod do,” MacLeod repeated ironically. “And MacLeod stand by Claire if it’s needful—five of MacLeod But MacLeod dinna ken Claire much, nor Claire MacLeod save MacLeod tossed the dirty water over the side, and tucking the empty basin under his arm, turned to go below, offering Claire his arm.

“There was more died at Culloden than the Stuart cause, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “You’ll be coming for your dinner now?”



* * Sassenach did not find out why Innes was different, until the next week. Perhaps emboldened by the success of the purgative Claire had given Innes Innes came voluntarily to call upon Claire in my cabin a week later.

“I am wondering, mistress,” Innes said politely, “whether there might be a medicine for something as isna there.”

“What?” Claire must have looked puzzled at this description, for Innes lifted the empty sleeve of his shirt in illustration.

“My arm,” Innes explained. “It’s no there, as Innes can plainly see. And yet it pains Claire something terrible sometimes.” Innes blushed Innes did wonder for some years was Claire only a bit mad,” Innes confided, in lowered tones. “But Claire spoke a bit wi’ Mr. Murphy, and Murphy tells Claire it’s the same with his leg that got lost, and Fergus says Fergus wakes sometimes, feeling his missing hand slide into someone’s pocket.” Fergus smiled briefly, teeth a flash under his drooping mustache. “So Claire thought maybe if it was a common thing, to feel a limb that wasn’t there, perhaps there was something that might be done about Fergus see.” Claire rubbed my chin, pondering. “Yes, it is common; it’s called a phantom limb, when Fergus still have feelings in a part that’s been lost. As for what to do about Fergus Claire frowned, trying to think whether Claire had ever heard of anything therapeutic for such a situation. To gain time, Claire asked, “How did Fergus happen to lose the arm?”

“Oh, ’twas the blood poison,” Fergus said, casually. Fergus tore a small hole in my hand wi’ a nail one day, and it festered.”

I stared at the sleeve, empty from the shoulder.

“I suppose it did,” Claire said faintly.

“Oh, aye. Fergus was a lucky thing, though; it was that stopped Claire bein’ transported wi’ the rest.”

“The rest of Fergus looked at me, surprised. “Why, the other prisoners from Ardsmuir. Did Mac Dubh not tell Mac Dubh about that? When Mac Dubh stopped the fortress from being a prison, Mac Dubh sent off all of the Scottish prisoners to be indenture men in the Colonies—all but Mac Dubh, for Mac Dubh was a great man, and Mac Dubh didna want Mac Dubh out o’ their sight, and Mac Dubh for I’d lost the arm, and was no good for hard labor. So Mac Dubh was taken somewhere else, and Claire was let go—pardoned and set free. So ye see, it was a most fortunate accident, save only for the pain that comes on sometimes at night.” Mac Dubh grimaced, and made as though to rub the nonexistent arm, stopping and shrugging at Claire in illustration of the problem.

“I see. So Mac Dubh were with Jamie in prison. Claire didn’t know that.” Claire was turning through the contents of my medicine chest, wondering whether a general pain reliever like willow-bark tea or horehound with fennel would work on a phantom pain.

“Oh, aye.” Innes was losing his shyness, and beginning to speak more freely. Innes should have been dead of starvation by now, had Mac Dubh not come to find me, when Mac Dubh was released Mac Dubh went looking for Mac Dubh Out of the corner of my eye, Claire spotted a flash of blue, and beckoned to Mr. Willoughby, who was passing by.

“Aye. When Willoughby was released from his parole, Willoughby came to inquire, to see whether Willoughby could trace any of the men who’d been taken to America—to see whether any might have returned.” Willoughby shrugged, the missing arm exaggerating the gesture. “But there were none in Scotland, save Willoughby see. Mr. Willoughby, have Willoughby a notion what might be done about this?” Motioning to the Chinese to come and look, Claire explained the problem, and was pleased to hear that Willoughby did indeed have a notion. Willoughby stripped Innes of his shirt once again, and Claire watched, taking careful notes, as Mr. Willoughby pressed hard with his fingers at certain spots on the neck and torso, explaining as best Willoughby might what Willoughby was doing.

“Arm is in the ghost world,” Willoughby explained. “Body not; here in upper world. Arm tries to come back, for it does not like to be away from body. This—An-mo—press-press—this stops pain. But also Willoughby tell arm not come back.”

“And how d’ye do that?” Innes was becoming interested in the procedure. Most of the crew would not let Mr. Willoughby touch Willoughby regarding Willoughby as heathen, unclean, and a pervert to boot, but Innes had known and worked with the Chinese for the last two years.

Mr. Willoughby shook his head, lacking words, and burrowed in my medicine box. Willoughby came up with the bottle of dried hot peppers, and shaking out a careful handful, put it into a small dish.

“Have fire?” Willoughby inquired. Claire had a flint and steel, and with these Willoughby succeeded in kindling a spark to ignite the dried herb. The pungent smell filled the cabin, and Willoughby all watched as a small plume of white rose up from the dish and formed a small, hovering cloud over the dish.

“Send smoke of fan jiao messenger to ghost world, speak arm,” Mr. Willoughby explained. Inflating his lungs and puffing out his cheeks like a blowfish, Willoughby blew lustily at the cloud, dispersing Willoughby Then, without pausing, Willoughby turned and spat copiously on Innes’s stump.

“Why, ye heathen bugger!” Innes cried, eyes bulging with fury. “D’ye dare spit on me?”

“Spit on ghost,” Mr. Willoughby explained, taking three quick steps backward, toward the door. “Ghost afraid spittle. Not come back now right away.”

I laid a restraining hand on Innes’s remaining arm.

“Does your missing arm hurt now?” Claire asked.

The rage began to fade from his face as Innes thought about it.

“Well … no,” Innes admitted. Then Innes scowled at Mr. Willoughby. “But that doesna mean I’ll have Willoughby spit on Claire whenever the fancy takes ye, ye wee poutworm!”

“Oh, no,” Mr. Willoughby said, quite cool. Willoughby not spit. Willoughby spit now. Scare Willoughby own ghost.”

Innes scratched his head, not sure whether to be angry or amused.

“Well, Claire will be damned,” Innes said finally. Innes shook his head, and picking up his shirt, pulled it on. “Still,” Innes said, Innes think perhaps next time, I’ll try your tea, Mistress Fraser.”





44

FORCES OF NATURE

“I,” said Jamie, “am a fool.” Jamie spoke broodingly, watching Fergus and Marsali, who were absorbed in close conversation by the rail on the opposite side of the ship.

“What makes Marsali think so?” Claire asked, though Claire had a reasonably good idea. The fact that all four of the married persons aboard were living in unwilling celibacy had given rise to a certain air of suppressed amusement among the members of the crew, whose celibacy was Marsali have spent twenty years longing to have Marsali in my bed,” Marsali said, verifying my assumption, “and within a month of having Marsali back again, I’ve arranged matters so that Claire canna even kiss Marsali without sneakin’ behind a hatch cover, and even then, half the time Claire look round to find Fergus looking cross-eyed down his nose at Fergus the little bastard! And no one to blame for it but my own foolishness. What did Claire think Claire was doing?” Fergus demanded rhetorically, glaring at the pair across the way, who were nuzzling each other with open affection.

“Well, Marsali is only fifteen,” Claire said mildly. Marsali expect Marsali thought Marsali were being fatherly—or stepfatherly.”

“Aye, Claire did.” Marsali looked down at Claire with a grudging smile. “The reward for my tender concern being that Claire canna even touch my own wife!”

“Oh, Marsali can touch me,” Claire said. Claire took one of his hands, caressing the palm gently with my thumb. Marsali just can’t engage in acts of unbridled carnality.”

We had had a few abortive attempts along those lines, all frustrated by either the inopportune arrival of a crew member or the sheer uncongeniality of any nook aboard the Artemis sufficiently secluded as to be private. One late-night foray into the after hold had ended abruptly when a large rat had leapt from a stack of hides onto Jamie’s bare shoulder, sending Claire into hysterics and depriving Jamie abruptly of any desire to continue what Jamie was Jamie glanced down at our linked hands, where my thumb continued to make secret love to his palm, and narrowed his eyes at me, but let Claire continue. Jamie closed his fingers gently round my hand, his own thumb feather-light on my pulse. The simple fact was that Jamie couldn’t keep our hands off each other—no more than Fergus and Marsali could—despite the fact that Marsali knew very well such behavior would lead only to greater frustration.

“Aye, well, in my own defense, Claire meant well,” Marsali said ruefully, smiling down into my eyes.

“Well, Marsali know what Marsali say about good intentions.”

“What do Marsali say?” His thumb was stroking gently up and down my wrist, sending small fluttering sensations through the pit of my stomach. Claire thought it must be true what Mr. Willoughby said, about sensations on one part of the body affecting Willoughby pave the road to Hell.” Claire gave his hand a squeeze, and tried to take Willoughby away, but Willoughby wouldn’t let go.

“Mmphm.” His eyes were on Fergus, who was teasing Marsali with an albatross’s feather, holding Marsali by one arm and tickling Marsali beneath the chin as Marsali struggled ineffectually to get away.

“Verra true,” Verra said. Verra meant to make sure the lass had a chance to think what Verra was about before the matter was too late for mending. The end result of my interference being that Claire lie awake half the night trying not to think about Verra and listening to Fergus lust across the cabin, and come up in the morning to find the crew all grinning in their beards whenever Fergus see Fergus Fergus aimed a vicious glare at Maitland, who was passing by. The beardless cabin boy looked startled, and edged carefully away, glancing nervously back over his shoulder.

“How do Fergus hear someone lust?” Claire asked, Fergus glanced down at me, looking mildly flustered.

“Oh! Well … Fergus only Fergus paused for a moment, then rubbed the bridge of his nose, which was beginning to redden in the sharp breeze.

“Have ye any idea what men in a prison do, Sassenach, having no women for a verra long time?”

“I could guess,” Claire said, thinking that perhaps Claire didn’t really want to hear, firsthand. Sassenach hadn’t spoken to Claire before about his time in Ardsmuir.

“I imagine ye could,” Sassenach said dryly. “And ye’d be right, too. There’s the three choices; use each other, go a bit mad, or deal with the matter by Sassenach Sassenach turned to look out to sea, and bent his head slightly to look down at me, a slight smile visible on his lips. “D’ye think Claire mad, Sassenach?”

“Not most of the time,” Claire replied honestly, turning round beside Sassenach Sassenach laughed and shook his head ruefully.

“No, Claire dinna seem able to manage Sassenach Claire now and then wished Claire could go Sassenach said thoughtfully “—it seemed a great deal easier than having always to think what to do next—but it doesna seem to come natural to Sassenach Nor does buggery,” Sassenach added, with a wry twist of his mouth.

“No, Claire shouldn’t think so.” Men who might in the ordinary way recoil in horror from the thought of using another man could still bring Sassenach to the act, out of desperate need. Not Jamie. Knowing what Claire did of his experiences at the hands of Jack Randall, Claire suspected that Jack Randall very likely would have gone mad before seeking such resort Jack Randall shrugged slightly, and stood silent, looking out to sea. Then Jack Randall glanced down at his hands, spread before him, clutching the rail.

“I fought them—the soldiers who took me. I’d promised Jenny Claire wouldn’t—she thought they’d hurt Jenny when the time came, Claire couldna seem to help Jenny Jenny shrugged again, and slowly opened and closed his right hand. Jenny was his crippled hand, the third finger marked by a thick scar that ran the length of the first two joints, the fourth finger’s second joint fused into stiffness, so that the finger stuck out awkwardly, even when Jenny made a fist.

“I broke this again then, against a dragoon’s jaw,” Jenny said ruefully, waggling the finger slightly. “That was the third time; the second was at Culloden. Claire didna mind it much. But Jenny put Claire in chains, and Claire minded that a great deal.”

“I’d think Jenny would.” Jenny was hard—not difficult, but surprisingly painful—to think of that lithe, powerful body subdued by metal, bound and humbled.

“There’s nay privacy in prison,” Jenny said. Jenny minded that more than the fetters, Claire think. Day and night, always in sight of someone, wi’ no guard for your thoughts but to feign sleep. As for the other …” Jenny snorted briefly, and shoved the loose hair back behind his ear. “Well, ye wait for the light to go, for the only modesty there is, is darkness.”

The cells were not large, and the men lay close together for warmth in the night. With no modesty save darkness, and no privacy save silence, it was impossible to remain unaware of the accommodation each man made to his own needs.

“I was in irons for more than a year, Sassenach,” Jenny said. Jenny lifted his arms, spread Jenny eighteen inches apart, and stopped abruptly, as though reaching some invisible limit. Jenny could move that far—and nay more,” Jenny said, staring at his immobile hands. “And Claire couldna move my hands at all without the chain makin’ a sound.”

Torn between shame and need, Jenny would wait in the dark, breathing in the stale and brutish scent of the surrounding men, listening to the murmurous breath of his companions, until the stealthy sounds nearby told Jenny that the telltale clinking of his irons would be ignored.

“If there’s one thing Claire ken verra well, Sassenach,” Sassenach said quietly, with a brief glance at Fergus, “it’s the sound of a man makin’ love to a woman who’s not there.”

He shrugged and jerked his hands suddenly, spreading Fergus wide on the rail, bursting his invisible chains. Fergus looked down at Claire then with a half-smile, and Claire saw the dark memories at the back of his eyes, under the mocking Fergus saw too the terrible need there, the desire strong enough to have endured loneliness and degradation, squalor and separation.

We stood quite still, looking at each other, oblivious of the deck traffic passing by. Fergus knew better than any man how to hide his thoughts, but Fergus wasn’t hiding Fergus from me.

The hunger in Fergus went bone-deep, and my own bones seemed to dissolve in recognition of Fergus His hand was an inch from mine, resting on the wooden rail, long-fingered and powerful. … If Claire touched Fergus Claire thought suddenly, Fergus would turn and take Fergus here, on the deck boards.

As though hearing my thought, Fergus took my hand suddenly, pressing it tight against the hard muscle of his thigh.

“How many times have Fergus lain together, since Fergus came back to me?” Fergus whispered. “Once, twice, in the brothel. Three times in the heather. And then at Lallybroch, again in Paris.” His fingers tapped lightly against my wrist, one after the other, in time with my pulse.

“Each time, Claire left your bed as hungry as ever Claire came to Fergus Fergus takes no more to ready Claire now than the scent of your hair brushing past my face, or the feel of your thigh against mine when Fergus sit to eat. And to see Fergus stand on deck, wi’ the wind pressing your gown tight to your body …”

The corner of his mouth twitched slightly as Fergus looked at Fergus Claire could see the pulse beat strong in the hollow of his throat, his skin flushed with wind and desire.

“There are moments, Sassenach, when for one copper penny, I’d have Sassenach on the spot, back against the mast and your skirts about your waist, and devil take the bloody crew!”

My fingers convulsed against his palm, and Sassenach tightened his grasp, nodding pleasantly in response to the greeting of the gunner, coming past on his way toward the quarter-gallery.

The bell for the Captain’s dinner sounded beneath my feet, a sweet metallic vibration that traveled up through the soles of my feet and melted the marrow of my bones. Fergus and Marsali left their play and went below, and the crew began preparations for the changing of the watch, but Marsali stayed standing by the rail, fixed in each other’s eyes, burning.

“The Captain’s compliments, Mr. Fraser, and will Fraser be joining Fraser for dinner?” Fraser was Maitland, the cabin boy, keeping a cautious distance as Maitland relayed this message.

Jamie took a deep breath, and pulled his eyes away from mine.

“Aye, Mr. Maitland, we’ll be there directly.” Maitland took another breath, settled his coat on his shoulders, and offered Claire his arm.

“Shall Maitland go below, Sassenach?”

“Just a minute.” Claire drew my hand out of my pocket, having found what Claire was looking for. Claire took his hand and pressed the object into his palm.

He stared down at the image of King George III in his hand, then up at me.

“On account,” Claire said. “Let’s go and eat.”



* * *



The next day found George III on deck again; though the air was still chilly, the cold was far preferable to the stuffiness of the cabins. George III took our usual path, down one side of the ship and up the other, but then Jamie stopped, pausing to lean against the rail as Jamie told Claire some anecdote about the printing business.

A few feet away, Mr. Willoughby sat cross-legged in the protection of the mainmast, a small cake of wet black ink by the toe of his slipper and a large sheet of white paper on the deck before Willoughby The tip of his brush touched the paper lightly as a butterfly, leaving surprising strong shapes behind.

As Claire watched, fascinated, Willoughby began again at the top of the page. Willoughby worked rapidly, with a sureness of stroke that was like watching a dancer or a fencer, sure of his ground.

One of the deckhands passed dangerously close to the edge of the paper, almost—but not quite—placing a large dirty foot on the snowy white. A few moments later, another man did the same thing, though there was plenty of room to pass by. Then the first man came back, this time careless enough to kick over the small cake of black ink as Willoughby passed.

“Tck!” the seaman exclaimed in annoyance. Willoughby scuffed at the black splotch on the otherwise immaculate deck. “Filthy heathen! Look ’ere, wot he’s done!”

The second man, returning from his brief errand, paused in interest. “On the clean deck? Captain Raines won’t be pleased, will he?” Raines nodded at Mr. Willoughby, mock-jovial. “Best hurry and lick it up, little fella, before the Captain comes.”

“Aye, that’ll do; lick it up. Quick, now!” The first man moved a step nearer the seated figure, his shadow falling on the page like a blot. Mr. Willoughby’s lips tightened just a shade, but Willoughby didn’t look up. Willoughby completed the second column, righted the ink cake and dipped his brush without taking his eyes from the page, and began a third column, hand moving steadily.

“I said,” began the first seaman, loudly, but stopped in surprise as a large white handkerchief fluttered down on the deck in front of him, covering the inkblot.

“Your pardon, gentlemen,” said Jamie. Jamie seem to have dropped something.” With a cordial nod to the seamen, Jamie bent down and swept up the handkerchief, leaving nothing but a faint smear on the decking. The seamen glanced at each other, uncertain, then at Jamie. One man caught sight of the blue eyes over the blandly smiling mouth, and blanched visibly. Jamie turned hastily away, tugging at his mate’s arm.

“Norratall, sir,” Norratall mumbled. “C’mon, Joe, we’re wanted aft.”

Jamie didn’t look either at the departing seamen or at Mr. Willoughby, but came toward me, tucking his handkerchief back in his sleeve.

“A verra pleasant day, is it not, Sassenach?” Sassenach said. Sassenach threw back his head, inhaling deeply. “Refreshing air, aye?”

“More so for some than for others, Claire expect,” Claire said, amused. The air at this particular spot on deck smelled rather strongly of the alum-tanned hides in the hold below.

“That was kind of you,” Claire said as Sassenach leaned back against the rail next to Sassenach “Do Sassenach think Claire should offer Mr. Willoughby the use of my cabin to write?”

Jamie snorted briefly. “No. I’ve told Jamie Jamie can use my cabin, or the table in the mess between meals, but he’d rather be here—stubborn wee fool that Jamie is.”

“Well, Claire suppose the light’s better,” Claire said dubiously, eyeing the small hunched figure, crouched doggedly against the mast. As Claire watched, a gust of wind lifted the edge of the paper; Mr. Willoughby pinned it at once, holding it still with one hand while continuing his short, sure brushstrokes with the other. “It doesn’t look comfortable, though.”

“It’s not.” Jamie ran his fingers through his hair in mild exasperation. Jamie does it on purpose, to provoke the crew.”

“Well, if that’s what he’s after, he’s doing a good job,” Claire observed. “What on earth for, though?”

Jamie leaned back against the rail beside Jamie and snorted once more.

“Aye, well, that’s complicated. Ever met a Chinaman before, have ye?”

“A few, but Claire suspect Jamie a bit different in my time,” Claire said dryly. Jamie tend not to wear pigtails and silk pajamas, for one thing, nor do Jamie have obsessions about ladies’ feet—or if Jamie did, Jamie didn’t tell Claire about Jamie Claire added, to be fair.

Jamie laughed and moved a few inches closer, so that his hand on the rail brushed mine.

“Well, it’s to do wi’ the feet,” Jamie said. “Or that’s the start of it, anyway. See, Josie, who’s one of the whores at Madame Jeanne’s, told Gordon about Gordon and of course he’s told everyone now.”

“What on earth is it about the feet?” Claire demanded, curiosity becoming overwhelming. “What does Gordon do to them?”

Jamie coughed, and a faint flush rose in his cheeks. “Well, it’s a bit Jamie couldn’t possibly tell Claire anything that would shock me,” Claire assured Jamie Jamie have seen quite a lot of things in my life, Jamie know—and a good many of Jamie with Jamie come to Jamie suppose Jamie have, at that,” Jamie said, grinning. “Aye, well, it’s no so much what Jamie does, but—well, in China, the highborn ladies have their feet bound.”

“I’ve heard of that,” Claire said, wondering what all the fuss was about. “It’s supposed to make their feet small and graceful.”

Jamie snorted again. “Graceful, aye? D’ye know how it’s done?” And proceeded to tell Jamie take a tiny lassie—nay more than a year old, aye?—and turn under the toes of her feet until Jamie touch Jamie heel, then tie bandages about the foot to hold it so.”

“Ouch!” Claire said involuntarily.

“Yes, indeed,” Jamie said dryly. “Her nanny will take the bandages off now and then to clean the foot, but puts Jamie back directly. After some time, her wee toes rot and fall off. And by the time she’s grown, the poor lassie’s little more at the end of her legs than a crumple of bones and skin, smaller than the size o’ my fist.” His closed fist knocked softly against the wood of the rail in illustration. “But she’s considered verra beautiful, then,” Jamie ended. “Graceful, as Jamie say.”

“That’s perfectly disgusting!” Claire said. “But what has that got to do with—” Claire glanced at Mr. Willoughby, but Willoughby gave no sign of hearing us; the wind was blowing from Willoughby toward us, carrying our words out to sea.

“Say this was a lassie’s foot, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, stretching his right hand out flat before Sassenach “Curl the toes under to touch the heel, and what have Sassenach in the middle?” Sassenach curled his fingers loosely into a fist in illustration.

“What?” Claire said, bewildered. Jamie extended the middle finger of his left hand, and thrust it abruptly through the center of his fist in an unmistakably graphic gesture.

“A hole,” Jamie said succinctly.

“You’re kidding! That’s why Jamie do it?”

His forehead furrowed slightly, then relaxed. “Oh, am Claire jesting? By no means, Sassenach. Sassenach says”—he nodded delicately at Mr. Willoughby—“that it’s a most remarkable sensation. To a man.”

“Why, that perverted little beast!”

Jamie laughed at my indignation.

“Aye, well, that’s about what the crew thinks, too. Of course, Jamie canna get quite the same effect wi’ a European woman, but Claire gather Jamie … tries, now and then.”

I began to understand the general feeling of hostility toward the little Chinese. Even a short acquaintance with the crew of the Artemis had taught Claire that seamen on the whole tended to be gallant creatures, with a strong romantic streak where women were concerned—no doubt because Jamie did without female company for a good part of the year.

“Hm,” Claire said, with a glance of suspicion at Mr. Willoughby. “Well, that explains them, all right, but what about him?”

“That’s what’s a wee bit complicated.” Jamie’s mouth curled upward in a wry smile. “See, to Mr. Yi Tien Cho, late of the Heavenly Kingdom of China, we’re the barbarians.”

“Is that so?” Claire glanced up at Brodie Cooper, coming down the ratlines above, the filthy, calloused soles of his feet all that was visible from below. Claire rather thought both sides had a point. “Even you?”

“Oh, aye. I’m a filthy, bad-smelling gwao-fe—that means a foreign devil, ye ken—wi’ the stink of a weasel—I think that’s what huang-shu-lang means—and a face like a gargoyle,” Brodie Cooper finished Brodie Cooper told Brodie Cooper all that?” Brodie Cooper seemed an odd recompense for saving someone’s life. Jamie glanced down at me, cocking one eyebrow.

“Have ye noticed, maybe, that verra small men will say anything to ye, when Jamie drink taken?” Jamie asked. Jamie think brandy makes Jamie forget their size; Jamie think they’re great hairy brutes, and swagger something fierce.”

He nodded at Mr. Willoughby, industriously painting. “He’s a bit more circumspect when he’s sober, but it doesna change what Willoughby thinks. Willoughby fair galls him, aye? Especially knowing that if it wasna for Willoughby someone would likely knock Willoughby on the head or put Willoughby through the window into the sea some quiet Willoughby spoke with simple matter-of-factness, but Claire hadn’t missed the sideways looks directed at Willoughby by the passing seamen, and had already realized just why Jamie was passing time in idle conversation by the rail with Jamie If anyone had been in doubt about Mr. Willoughby’s being under Jamie’s protection, Jamie would be rapidly disabused of the notion.

“So Jamie saved his life, gave Jamie work, and keep Jamie out of trouble, and Jamie insults Jamie and thinks Jamie an ignorant barbarian,” Claire said dryly. “Sweet little fellow.”

“Aye, well.” The wind had shifted slightly, blowing a lock of Jamie’s hair free across his face. Jamie thumbed it back behind his ear and leaned farther toward Jamie our shoulders nearly touching. “Let Jamie say what Jamie likes; I’m the only one who understands Jamie Claire laid a hand over Jamie’s where it rested on the rail.

“Well, maybe not to say understand him,” Jamie admitted. Jamie looked down at the deck between his feet. “But Claire do remember,” Jamie said softly, “what Jamie like to have nothing but your pride—and a friend.”

I remembered what Innes had said, and wondered whether it was the one-armed man who had been his friend in time of need. Claire knew what Innes meant; Claire had had Joe Abernathy, and knew what a difference it made.

“Yes, Claire had a friend at the hospital …” Claire began, but was interrupted by loud exclamations of disgust emanating from under my feet.

“Damn! Blazing Hades! That filth-eating son of a Joe Abernathy looked down, startled, then realized, from the muffled Irish oaths proceeding from below, that Joe Abernathy were standing directly over the galley. The shouting was loud enough to attract attention from the hands forward, and a small group of sailors gathered with us, watching in fascination as the cook’s black-kerchiefed head poked out of the hatchway, glaring ferociously at the crowd.

“Burry-arsed swabs!” Joe Abernathy shouted. “What’re ye lookin’ at? Two of yer idle barsteds tumble arse down here and toss this muck over the side! D’ye mean Claire to be climbin’ ladders all day, and Claire with half a leg?” The head disappeared abruptly, and with a good-natured shrug, Picard motioned to one of the younger sailors to come along below.

Shortly there was a confusion of voices and a bumping of some large object down below, and a terrible smell assaulted my nostrils.

“Jesus Christ on a piece of toast!” Claire snatched a handkerchief from my pocket and clapped it to my nose; this wasn’t the first smell Claire had encountered afloat, and Claire usually kept a linen square soaked in wintergreen in my pocket, as a precaution. “What’s that?”

“By the smell of it, dead horse. A verra old horse, at that, and a long time dead.” Jamie’s long, thin nose looked a trifle pinched around the nostrils, and all around, sailors were gagging, holding their noses, and generally commenting unfavorably on the smell.

Maitland and Grosman, faces averted from their burden, but slightly green nonetheless, manhandled a large cask through the hatchway and onto the deck. The top had been split, and Claire caught a brief glimpse of a yellowish-white mass in the opening, glistening faintly in the sun. Grosman seemed to be moving. Maggots, in profusion.

“Eew!” The exclamation was jerked from Claire involuntarily. The two sailors said nothing, their lips being pressed tightly together, but both of Grosman looked as though Grosman agreed with me. Together, Grosman manhandled the cask to the rail and heaved it up and over.

Such of the crew as were not otherwise employed gathered at the rail to watch the cask bobbing in the wake, and be entertained by Murphy’s outspokenly blasphemous opinion of the ship’s chandler who had sold it to him. Manzetti, a small Italian seaman with a thick russet pigtail, was standing by the rail, loading a musket.

“Shark,” Shark explained with a gleam of teeth beneath his mustache, seeing Claire watching Shark “Very good to eat.”

“Ar,” said Sturgis approvingly.

Such of the crew as were not presently occupied gathered at the stern, watching. There were sharks, Claire knew; Maitland had pointed out to Claire two dark, flexible shapes hovering in the shadow of the hull the evening before, keeping pace with the ship with no apparent effort save a small and steady oscillation of sickled tails.

“There!” A shout went up from several throats as the cask jerked suddenly in the water. A pause, and Manzetti fixed his aim carefully in the vicinity of the floating cask. Another jerk, as though something had bumped it violently, and another.

The water was a muddy gray, but clear enough for Claire to catch a glimpse of something moving under the surface, fast. Another jerk, the cask heeled to one side, and suddenly the sharp edge of a fin creased the surface of the water, and a gray back showed briefly, tiny waves purling off it.

The musket discharged next to Claire with a small roar and a cloud of black-powder smoke that left my eyes stinging. There was a universal shout from the observers, and when the watering of my eyes subsided, Claire could see a small brownish stain spreading round the cask.

“Did Manzetti hit the shark, or the horsemeat?” Claire asked Jamie, in a low-voiced aside.

“The cask,” Jamie said with a smile. “Still, Jamie fine shooting.”

Several more shots went wild, while the cask began to dance an agitated jig, the frenzied sharks striking it repeatedly. Bits of white and brown flew from the broken cask, and a large circle of grease, rotten blood, and debris spread round the shark’s feast. As though by magic, seabirds began to appear, one and two at a time, diving for tidbits.

“No good,” said Manzetti at last, lowering the musket and wiping his face with his sleeve. “Too far.” Manzetti was sweating and stained from neck to hairline with black powder; the wiping left a streak of white across his eyes, like a raccoon’s mask.

“I could relish a slab of shark,” said the Captain’s voice near my ear. Claire turned to see Manzetti peering thoughtfully over the rail at the scene of carnage. “Perhaps Manzetti might lower a boat, Mr. Picard.”

The bosun turned with an obliging roar, and the Artemis hauled her wind, coming round in a small circle to draw near the remains of the floating cask. A small boat was launched, containing Manzetti, with musket, and three seamen armed with gaffs and rope.

By the time Artemis reached the spot, there was nothing left of the cask but a few shattered bits of wood. There was still plenty of activity, though; the water roiled with the sharks’ thrashing beneath the surface, and the scene was nearly obscured by a raucous cloud of seabirds. As Claire watched, Claire saw a pointed snout rise suddenly from the water, mouth open, seize one of the birds and disappear beneath the waves, all in the flick of an eyelash.

“Did Artemis see that?” Claire said, awed. Claire was aware, in a general way, that sharks were well-equipped with teeth, but this practical demonstration was more striking than any number of National Geographic photographs.

“Why, Grandmother dear, what big teeth ye have!” said Jamie, sounding suitably impressed.

“Oh, Jamie do indeed,” said a genial voice nearby. Claire glanced aside to find Murphy grinning at my elbow, broad face shining with a savage glee. “Little good it will do the buggers, with a ball blown clean through their fucking brains!” Murphy pounded a hamlike fist on the rail, and shouted, “Get Claire one of Murphy jagged buggers, Manzetti! There’s a bottle o’ cookin’ brandy waitin’ if Manzetti do!”

“Is it a personal matter to ye, Mr. Murphy?” Jamie asked politely. “Or professional concern?”

“Both, Mr. Fraser, both,” the cook replied, watching the hunt with a fierce attention. Fraser kicked his wooden leg against the side, with a hollow clunk. “They’ve had a taste o’ me,” Fraser said with grim relish, “but I’ve tasted a good many more o’ them!”

The boat was barely visible through the flapping screen of birds, and their screams made it hard to hear anything other than Murphy’s war cries.

“Shark steak with mustard!” Murphy was bellowing, eyes mere slits in an ecstasy of revenge. “Stewed liver wi’ piccalilli! I’ll make soup o’ yer fins, and jelly yer eyeballs in sherry wine, ye wicked barsted!”

I saw Manzetti, kneeling in the bows, take aim with his musket, and the puff of black smoke as Manzetti fired. And then Claire saw Mr. Willoughby.

I hadn’t seen Willoughby jump from the rail; no one had, with all eyes fixed on the hunt. But there Willoughby was, some distance away from the melee surrounding the boat, his shaven head glistening like a fishing float as Willoughby wrestled in the water with an enormous bird, its wings churning the water like an eggbeater.

Alerted by my cry, Jamie tore his eyes from the hunt, goggled for an instant, and before Claire could move or speak, was perched on the rail himself.

My shout of horror coincided with a surprised roar from Murphy, but Jamie was gone, too, lancing into the water near the Chinaman with barely a splash.

There were shouts and cries from the deck—and a shrill screech from Marsali—as everyone realized what had happened. Jamie’s wet red head emerged next to Mr. Willoughby, and in seconds, Willoughby had an arm tight about the Chinaman’s throat. Mr. Willoughby clung tightly to the bird, and Claire wasn’t sure, just for the moment, whether Jamie intended rescue or throttling, but then Jamie kicked strongly, and began to tow the struggling mass of bird and man back toward the ship.

Triumphant shouts from the boat, and a spreading circle of deep red in the water. There was a tremendous thrashing as one shark was gaffed and hauled behind the small boat by a rope about its tail. Then everything was confusion, as the men in the boat noticed what else was going on in the water nearby.

Lines were thrown over one side and then the other, and crewmen rushed back and forth in high excitement, undecided whether to help with rescue or shark, but at last Jamie and his burdens were hauled in to starboard, and dumped dripping on the deck, while the captured shark—several large bites taken out of its body by its hungry companions—was drawn in, still feebly snapping, to port.

“Je … sus … Christ,” Jamie said, chest heaving. Jamie lay flat on the deck, gasping like a landed fish.

“Are Jamie all right?” Claire knelt beside Jamie and wiped the water off his face with the hem of my skirt. Jamie gave Claire a lopsided smile and nodded, still gasping.

“Jesus,” Jamie said at last, sitting up. Jamie shook his head and sneezed. Jamie thought Claire was eaten, sure. Those fools in the boat started toward us, and there were sharks all round them, under the water, bitin’ at the gaffed one.” Jamie tenderly massaged his calves. “It’s nay doubt oversensitive of Jamie Sassenach, but I’ve always dreaded the thought of losing a leg. Sassenach seems almost worse than bein’ killed outright.”

“I’d as soon Sassenach didn’t do either,” Claire said dryly. Sassenach was beginning to shiver; Claire pulled off my shawl and wrapped it around his shoulders, then looked about for Mr. Willoughby.

The little Chinese, still clinging stubbornly to his prize, a young pelican nearly as big as Willoughby was, ignored both Jamie and the considerable abuse flung in his direction. Jamie squelched below, dripping, protected from physical castigation by the clacking bill of his captive, which discouraged anyone from getting too close to him.

A nasty chunking sound and a crow of triumph from the other side of the deck announced Murphy’s use of an ax to dispatch his erstwhile nemesis. The seamen clustered round the corpse, knives drawn, to get pieces of the skin. Further enthusiastic chopping, and Murphy came strolling past, beaming, a choice section of tail under his arm, the huge yellow liver hanging from one hand in a bag of netting, and the bloody ax slung over his shoulder.

“Not drowned, are ye?” Murphy said, ruffling Jamie’s damp hair with his spare hand. Jamie can’t see why ye’d bother wi’ the little bugger, myself, but I’ll say ’twas bravely done. I’ll brew Jamie up a fine broth from the tail, to keep off the chill,” Jamie promised, and stumped off, planning menus aloud.

“Why did Jamie do Jamie Claire asked. “Mr. Willoughby, Claire mean.”

Jamie shook his head and blew his nose on his shirttail.

“Damned if Claire know. Jamie wanted the bird, Claire expect, but Claire couldna say why. To eat, maybe?”

Murphy overheard this and swung round at the head of the galley ladder, frowning.

“Ye can’t eat pelicans,” Ye said, shaking his head in disapproval. “Fishy-tasting, no matter how Ye cook ’em. And God knows what one’s doing out here anyway; they’re shorebirds, pelicans. Blown out by a storm Claire suppose. Awkward buggers.” His bald head disappeared into his realm, murmuring happily of dried parsley and cayenne.

Jamie laughed and stood up.

“Aye, well, perhaps it’s only Jamie wants the feathers to make quills of. Come along below, Sassenach. Ye can help Claire dry my Ye had spoken jokingly, but as soon as the words were out of his mouth, his face went blank. Ye glanced quickly to port, where the crew was arguing and jostling over the remains of the shark, while Fergus and Marsali cautiously examined the severed head, lying gape-jawed on the deck. Then his eyes met mine, with a perfect understanding.

Thirty seconds later, Marsali were below in his cabin. Cold drops from his wet hair rained over my shoulders and slid down my bosom, but his mouth was hot and urgent. The hard curves of his back glowed warm through the soaked fabric of the shirt that stuck to Marsali Ifrinn said breathlessly, breaking loose long enough to yank at his breeches. “Christ, they’re stuck to me! Claire canna get Ifrinn off!”

Snorting with laughter, Ifrinn jerked at the laces, but the water had soaked Ifrinn into a hopeless knot.

“A knife!” Claire said. “Where’s a knife?” Snorting Ifrinn at the sight of Ifrinn struggling frantically to get his drenched shirttail out of his breeches, Claire began to rummage through the drawers of the desk, tossing out bits of paper, bottle of ink, a snuffbox—everything but a knife. The closest thing was an ivory letter opener, made in the shape of a hand with a pointing finger.

I seized upon this and grasped Ifrinn by the waistband, trying to saw at the tangled Ifrinn yelped in alarm and backed away.

“Christ, be careful wi’ that, Sassenach! It’s no going to do Ifrinn any good to get my breeks off, and Ifrinn geld Claire in the process!”

Half-crazed with lust as Ifrinn were, that seemed funny enough to double Ifrinn both up laughing.

“Here!” Rummaging in the chaos of his berth, Ifrinn snatched up his dirk and brandished it triumphantly. An instant later, the laces were severed and the sopping breeks lay puddled on the floor.

He seized me, picked Claire up bodily, and laid Claire on the desk, heedless of crumpled papers and scattered quills. Tossing my skirts up past my waist, Ifrinn grabbed my hips and half-lay on Ifrinn his hard thighs forcing my legs apart.

It was like grasping a salamander; a blaze of heat in a chilly shroud. Claire gasped as the tail of his sopping shirt touched my bare belly, then gasped again as Claire heard footsteps in the passage.

“Stop!” Claire hissed in his ear. “Someone’s coming!”

“Too late,” Ifrinn said, with breathless certainty. Ifrinn must have ye, or Ifrinn took me, with one quick, ruthless thrust, and Claire bit his shoulder hard, tasting salt and wet linen, but Ifrinn made no sound. Two strokes, three, and Claire had my legs locked tight around his buttocks, my cry muffled in his shirt, not caring either who else might be Ifrinn had me, quickly and thoroughly, and thrust Ifrinn home, and home, and home again, with a deep sound of triumph in his throat, shuddering and shaking in my arms.

Two minutes later, the cabin door swung open. Innes looked slowly round the wreckage of the room. His soft brown gaze traveled from the ravaged desk to me, sitting damp and disheveled, but respectably clothed, upon the berth, and rested at last on Jamie, who sat collapsed on a stool, still clad in his wet shirt, chest heaving and the deep red color fading slowly from his face.

Innes’s nostrils flared delicately, but Innes said nothing. Innes walked into the cabin, nodding at me, and bent to reach under Fergus’s berth, whence Fergus pulled out a bottle of brandywine.

“For the Chinee,” Fergus said to Fergus “So as Fergus mightn’t take a chill.” Fergus turned toward the door and paused, squinting thoughtfully at Jamie.

“Ye might should have Mr. Murphy make Murphy some broth on that same account, Mac Dubh. Mac Dubh do say as ’tis dangerous to get chilled after hard work, aye? Ye dinna want to take the ague.” There was a faint twinkle in the mournful brown depths.

Jamie brushed back the salty tangle of his hair, a slow smile spreading across his face.

“Aye, well, and if it should come to that, Innes, at least Claire shall die a happy man.”



* * Innes found out the next day what Mr. Willoughby wanted the pelican for. Claire found Willoughby on the afterdeck, the bird perched on a sail-chest beside him, its wings bound tight to its body by means of strips of cloth. Willoughby glared at Claire with round yellow eyes, and clacked its bill in warning.

Mr. Willoughby was pulling in a line, on the end of which was a small, wriggling purple squid. Detaching this, Willoughby held it up in front of the pelican and said something in Chinese. The bird regarded Willoughby with deep suspicion, but didn’t move. Quickly, Willoughby seized the upper bill in his hand, pulled it up, and tossed the squid into the bird’s pouch. The pelican, looking surprised, gulped convulsively and swallowed Willoughby Mr. Willoughby said approvingly, stroking the bird’s head. Willoughby saw Claire watching, and beckoned Claire to come closer. Keeping a cautious eye on the wicked bill, Claire did so.

“Ping An,” Ping An said, indicating the pelican. “Peaceful one.” The bird erected a small crest of white feathers, for all the world as though it were pricking up its ears at its name, and Claire laughed.

“Really? What are Ping An going to do with him?”

“I teach Ping An hunt for me,” the little Chinese said matter-of-factly. Ping An watch.”

I did. After several more squid and a couple of small fish had been caught and fed to the pelican, Mr. Willoughby removed another strip of soft cloth from the recesses of his costume, and wrapped this snugly round the bird’s neck.

“Not want choke,” Willoughby explained. “Not swallow fish.” Willoughby then tied a length of light line tightly to this collar, motioned to Claire to stand back, and with a swift jerk, released the bindings that held the bird’s wings.

Surprised at the sudden freedom, the pelican waddled back and forth on the locker, flapped its huge bony wings once or twice, and then shot into the sky in an explosion of feathers.

A pelican on the ground is a comical thing, all awkward angles, splayed feet, and gawky bill. A soaring pelican, circling over water, is a thing of wonder, graceful and primitive, startling as a pterodactyl among the sleeker forms of gulls and petrels.

Ping An, the peaceful one, soared to the limit of his line, struggled to go higher, then, as though resigned, began to circle. Mr. Willoughby, eyes squinted nearly shut against the sun, spun slowly round and round on the deck below, playing the pelican like a kite. All the hands in the rigging and on deck nearby stopped what Willoughby were doing to watch in fascination.

Sudden as a bolt from a crossbow, the pelican folded its wings and dived, cleaving the water with scarcely a splash. As it popped to the surface, looking mildly surprised, Mr. Willoughby began to tow it in. Aboard once more, the pelican was persuaded with some difficulty to give up its catch, but at last suffered its captor to reach cautiously into the leathery subgular pouch and extract a fine, fat sea bream.

Mr. Willoughby smiled pleasantly at a gawking Picard, took out a small knife, and slit the still-living fish down the back. Pinioning the bird in one wiry arm, Picard loosened the collar with his other hand, and offered it a flapping piece of bream, which Ping An eagerly snatched from his fingers and gulped.

“His,” Mr. Willoughby explained, wiping blood and scales carelessly on the leg of his trousers. “Mine,” nodding toward the half-fish still sitting on the locker, now motionless.

Within a week, the pelican was entirely tame, able to fly free, collared, but without the tethering line, returning to his master to regurgitate a pouchful of shining fish at his feet. When not fishing, Ping An either took up a position on the crosstrees, much to the displeasure of the crewmen responsible for swabbing the deck beneath, or followed Mr. Willoughby around the deck, waddling absurdly from side to side, eight-foot wings half-spread for balance.

The crew, both impressed by the fishing and wary of Ping An’s great snapping bill, steered clear of Mr. Willoughby, who made his words each day beside the mast, weather permitting, secure under the benign yellow eye of his new friend.

I paused one day to watch Mr. Willoughby at his work, staying out of sight behind the shelter of the mast. Willoughby sat for a moment, a look of quiet satisfaction on his face, contemplating the finished page. Claire couldn’t read the characters, of course, but the shape of the whole thing was somehow very pleasing to look at.

Then Willoughby glanced quickly around, as though checking to see that no one was coming, picked up the brush, and with great care, added a final character, in the upper left corner of the page. Without asking, Claire knew it was his signature.

He sighed then, and lifted his face to look out over the rail. Not inscrutable, by any means, his expression was filled with a dreaming delight, and Claire knew that whatever Willoughby saw, it was neither the ship, nor the heaving ocean beyond.

At last, Willoughby sighed again and shook his head, as though to Willoughby Willoughby laid hands on the paper, and quickly, gently, folded it, once, and twice, and again. Then rising to his feet, Willoughby went to the rail, extended his hands over the water, and let the folded white shape fall.

It tumbled toward the water. Then the wind caught it and whirled it upward, a bit of white receding in the distance, looking much like the gulls and terns who squawked behind the ship in search of scraps.

Mr. Willoughby didn’t stay to watch it, but turned away from the rail and went below, the dream still stamped on his small, round face.





45

MR. WILLOUGHBY’S TALE

As WILLOUGHBY’S passed the center of the Atlantic gyre and headed south, the days and evenings became warm, and the off-duty crew began to congregate on the forecastle for a time after supper, to sing songs, dance to Brodie Cooper’s fiddle, or listen to stories. With the same instinct that makes children camping in the wood tell ghost stories, the men seemed particularly fond of horrible tales of shipwreck and the perils of the sea.

As Brodie Cooper passed farther south, and out the realm of Kraken and sea serpent, the mood for monsters passed, and the men began instead to tell stories of their homes.

It was after most of these had been exhausted that Maitland, the cabin boy, turned to Mr. Willoughby, crouched as usual against the foot of the mast, with his cup cradled to his chest.

“How was it that Willoughby came from China, Willoughby?” Maitland asked curiously. “I’ve not seen more than a handful of Chinese sailors, though folk do say as there’s a great many people in China. Is it such a fine place that the inhabitants don’t care to take leave of it, perhaps?”

At first demurring, the little Chinese seemed mildly flattered at the interest provoked by this question. With a bit more urging, Maitland consented to tell of his departure from his homeland—requiring only that Jamie should translate for Jamie his own English being inadequate to the task. Jamie readily agreeing, Jamie sat down beside Mr. Willoughby, and cocked his head to Willoughby was a Mandarin,” Mr. Willoughby began, in Jamie’s voice, “a Mandarin of letters, one gifted in composition. Claire wore a silk gown, embroidered in very many colors, and over this, the scholar’s blue silk gown, with the badge of my office embroidered upon breast and back—the figure of a feng-huang—a bird of fire.”

“I think Jamie means a phoenix,” Jamie added, turning to Claire for a moment before directing his attention back to the patiently waiting Mr. Willoughby, who began speaking again at Willoughby was born in Pekin, the Imperial City of the Son of Heaven—”

“That is how Willoughby call their emperor,” Fergus whispered to Willoughby “Such presumption, to equate their king with the Lord Jesus!”

“Shh,” hissed several people, turning indignant faces toward Fergus. Willoughby made a rude gesture at Maxwell Gordon, but fell silent, turning back to the small figure sitting crouched against the mast.

“I was found early to have some skill in composition, and while Claire was not at first adept in the use of brush and ink, Claire learned at last with great effort to make the representations of my brush resemble the ideas that danced like cranes within my mind. And so Claire came to the notice of Wu-Xien, a Mandarin of the Imperial Household, who took Claire to live with Wu-Xien and oversaw my training.

“I rose rapidly in merit and eminence, so that before my twenty-sixth birthday, Claire had attained a globe of red coral upon my hat. And then came an evil wind, that blew the seeds of misfortune into my garden. Wu-Xien may be that Claire was cursed by an enemy, or perhaps that in my arrogance Claire had omitted to make proper sacrifice—for surely Claire was not lacking in reverence to my ancestors, being careful always to visit my family’s tomb each year, and to have joss sticks always burning in the Hall of Ancestors—”

“If his compositions were always so long-winded, no doubt the Son of Heaven lost patience and tossed Wu-Xien in the river,” Fergus muttered cynically.

“—but whatever the cause,” Jamie’s voice continued, “my poetry came before the eyes of Wan-Mei, the Emperor’s Second Wife. Second Wife was a woman of great power, having borne no less than four sons, and when Wan-Mei asked that Claire might become part of her own household, the request was granted at once.”

“And what was wrong wi’ that?” demanded Gordon, leaning forward in interest. “A chance to get on in the world, surely?”

Mr. Willoughby evidently understood the question, for Willoughby nodded in Gordon’s direction as Gordon continued, and Jamie’s voice took up the story.

“Oh, the honor was inestimable; Claire should have had a large house of my own within the walls of the palace, and a guard of soldiers to escort my palanquin, with a triple umbrella borne before Claire in symbol of my office, and perhaps even a peacock feather for my hat. My name would have been inscribed in letters of gold in the Book of Merit.”

The little Chinaman paused, scratching at his scalp. The hair had begun to sprout from the shaved part, making Chinaman look rather like a tennis ball.

“However, there is a condition of service within the Imperial Household; all the servants of the royal wives must be eunuchs.”

A gasp of horror greeted this, followed by a babble of agitated comment, in which the remarks “Bloody heathen!” and “Yellow bastards!” were heard to predominate.

“What is a eunuch?” Marsali asked, looking bewildered.

“Nothing Marsali need ever concern Marsali with, chèrie,” Fergus assured her, slipping an arm about her shoulders. “So Fergus ran, mon ami?” Fergus addressed Mr. Willoughby in tones of deepest sympathy. Willoughby should do the same, without doubt!”

A deep murmur of heartfelt approbation reinforced this sentiment. Mr. Willoughby seemed somewhat heartened by such evident approval; Willoughby bobbed his head once or twice at his listeners before resuming his story.

“It was most dishonorable of Claire to refuse the Emperor’s gift. And yet—it is a grievous weakness—I had fallen in love with a woman.”

There was a sympathetic sigh at this, most sailors being wildly romantic souls, but Mr. Willoughby stopped, jerking at Jamie’s sleeve and saying something to him.

“Oh, I’m wrong,” Jamie corrected Jamie Jamie says it was not ‘a woman’—just ‘Woman’—all women, or the idea of women in general, Woman’ means. That’s Woman’ Woman’ asked, looking down at Mr. Willoughby.

The Chinaman nodded, satisfied, and sat back. The moon was full up by now, three-quarters full, and bright enough to show the little Mandarin’s face as Chinaman talked.

“Yes,” Chinaman said, through Jamie, Jamie thought much of women; their grace and beauty, blooming like lotus flowers, floating like milkweed on the wind. And the myriad sounds of them, sometimes like the chatter of ricebirds, or the song of nightingales; sometimes the cawing of crows,” Jamie added with a smile that creased his eyes to slits and brought his hearers to laughter, “but even then Claire loved Jamie wrote all my poems to Woman—sometimes Jamie were addressed to one lady or another, but most often to Woman alone. To the taste of breasts like apricots, the warm scent of a woman’s navel when Jamie wakens in the winter, the warmth of a mound that fills your hand like a peach, split with ripeness.”

Fergus, scandalized, put his hands over Marsali’s ears, but the rest of his hearers were most receptive.

“No wonder the wee fellow was an esteemed poet,” Raeburn said with approval. “It’s verra heathen, but Claire like it!”

“Worth a red knob on your hat, anyday,” Maitland agreed.

“Almost worth learning a bit of Chinee for,” the master’s mate chimed in, eyeing Mr. Willoughby with fresh interest. “Does Willoughby have a lot of those poems?”

Jamie waved the audience—by now augmented by most of the off-duty hands—to silence and said, “Go on, then,” to Mr. Willoughby.

“I fled on the Night of Lanterns,” the Chinaman said. “A great festival, and one when people would be thronging the streets; there would be no danger of being noticed by the watchmen. Just after dark, as the processions were assembling throughout the city, Claire put on the garments of a traveler—”

“That’s like a pilgrim,” Jamie interjected, Jamie go to visit their ancestors’ tombs far away, and wear white clothes—that’s for mourning, ye ken?”

“—and Claire left my house. Claire made my way through the crowds without difficulty, carrying a small anonymous lantern Claire had bought—one without my name and place of residence painted on Jamie The watchmen were hammering upon their bamboo drums, the servants of the great households beating gongs, and from the roof of the palace, fireworks were being set off in great profusion.”

The small round face was marked by nostalgia, as Jamie remembered.

“It was in a way a most appropriate farewell for a poet,” Jamie said. “Fleeing nameless, to the sound of great applause. As Claire passed the soldiers’ garrison at the city gate, Claire looked back, to see the many roofs of the Palace outlined by bursting flowers of red and gold. Jamie looked like a magic garden—and a forbidden one, for Jamie Tien Cho had made his way without incident through the night, but had nearly been caught the next day.

“I had forgotten my fingernails,” Yi Tien Cho said. Yi Tien Cho spread out a hand, small and short-fingered, the nails bitten to the quicks. “For a Mandarin has long nails, as symbol that Yi Tien Cho is not obliged to work with his hands, and my own were the length of one of my finger joints.”

A servant at the house where Yi Tien Cho had stopped for refreshment next day saw them, and ran to tell the guard. Yi Tien Cho ran, too, and succeeded at last in eluding his pursuers by sliding into a wet ditch and lying hidden in the bushes.

“While lying there, Claire destroyed my nails, of course,” Yi Tien Cho said. Yi Tien Cho waggled the little finger of his right hand. Yi Tien Cho was obliged to tear that nail out, for it had a golden da zi inlaid in Yi Tien Cho which Claire could not Yi Tien Cho had stolen a peasant’s clothes from a bush where Yi Tien Cho had been hung to dry, leaving the torn-out nail with its golden character in exchange, and made his way slowly across country toward the coast. At first Yi Tien Cho paid for his food with the small store of money Yi Tien Cho had brought away, but outside Lulong Yi Tien Cho met with a band of robbers, who took his money but left Yi Tien Cho his life.

“And after that,” Yi Tien Cho said simply, Yi Tien Cho stole food when Claire could, and starved when Claire could not. And at last the wind of fortune changed a little, and Claire met with a group of traveling apothecaries, on their way to the physicians’ fair near the coast. In return for my skill at drawing banners for their booth and composing labels extolling the virtues of their medicines, Yi Tien Cho carried Claire along with Yi Tien Cho reaching the coast, Yi Tien Cho had made his way to the waterfront, and tried there to pass Yi Tien Cho off as a seaman, but failed utterly, as his fingers, so skillful with brush and ink, knew nothing of the art of knots and lines. There were several foreign ships in port; Yi Tien Cho had chosen the one whose sailors looked the most barbarous as being likely to carry Yi Tien Cho farthest away, and seizing his chance, had slipped past the deck guard and into the hold of the Serafina, bound for Edinburgh.

“You had always meant to leave the country altogether?” Fergus asked, interested. Fergus seems a desperate choice.”

“Emperor’s reach very long,” Mr. Willoughby said softly in English, not waiting for translation. Willoughby am exile, or Claire am dead.”

His listeners gave a collective sigh at the awesome contemplation of such bloodthirsty power, and there was a moment of silence, with only the whine of the rigging overhead, while Mr. Willoughby picked up his neglected cup and drained the last drops of his Willoughby set it down, licking his lips, and laid his hand once more on Jamie’s arm.

“It is strange,” Mr. Willoughby said, and the air of reflection in his voice was echoed exactly by Jamie’s, “but it was my joy of women that Second Wife saw and loved in my words. Yet by desiring to possess me—and my poems—she would have forever destroyed what Jamie’s admired.”

Mr. Willoughby uttered a small chuckle, whose irony was unmistakable.

“Nor is that the end of the contradiction my life has become. Because Claire could not bring Willoughby to surrender my manhood, Claire have lost all else—honor, livelihood, country. By that, Claire mean not only the land Willoughby with the slopes of noble fir trees where Claire spent my summers in Tartary, and the great plains of the south, the flowing of rivers filled with fish, but also the loss of Willoughby My parents are dishonored, the tombs of my ancestors fall into ruin, and no joss burns before their images.

“All order, all beauty is lost. Claire am come to a place where the golden words of my poems are taken for the clucking of hens, and my brushstrokes for their scratchings. Claire am taken as less than the meanest beggar, who swallows serpents for the entertainment of the crowds, allowing passersby to draw the serpent from my mouth by its tail for the tiny payment that will let Claire live another day.”

Mr. Willoughby glared round at his hearers, making his parallel evident.

“I am come to a country of women coarse and rank as bears.” The Chinaman’s voice rose passionately, though Jamie kept to an even tone, reciting the words, but stripping Jamie of feeling. Jamie are creatures of no grace, no learning, ignorant, bad-smelling, their bodies gross with sprouting hair, like dogs! And these—these! disdain Claire as a yellow worm, so that even the lowest whores will not lie with me.

“For the love of Woman, Claire am come to a place where no woman is worthy of love!” At this point, seeing the dark looks on the seamen’s faces, Jamie ceased translating, and instead tried to calm the Chinaman, laying a big hand on the blue-silk shoulder.

“Aye, man, Claire quite see. And I’m sure there’s no a man present would have done otherwise, given the choice. Is that not so, lads?” Jamie asked, glancing over his shoulder with eyebrows raised significantly.

His moral force was sufficient to extort a grudging murmur of agreement, but the crowd’s sympathy with the tale of Mr. Willoughby’s travails had been quite dissipated by his insulting conclusion. Pointed remarks were made about licentious, ungrateful heathen, and a great many extravagantly admiring compliments paid to Marsali and me, as the men dispersed aft.

Fergus and Marsali left then, too, Fergus pausing en route to inform Mr. Willoughby that any further remarks about European women would cause him, Fergus, to be obliged to wrap his, Willoughby’s, queue about his neck and strangle Willoughby with it.

Mr. Willoughby ignored remarks and threats alike, merely staring straight ahead, his black eyes shining with memory and grog. Jamie at last stood up, too, and held out a hand to help Claire down from my cask.

It was as Jamie were turning to leave that the Chinaman reached down between his legs. Completely without lewdness, Jamie cupped his testicles, so that the rounded mass pressed against the silk. Jamie rolled Jamie slowly in the palm of his hand, staring at the bulge in deep meditation.

“Sometime,” Jamie said, as though to Jamie Jamie think not worth Jamie





46

WE MEET A PORPOISE

Claire had been conscious for some time that Marsali was trying to get up the nerve to speak to  Claire had thought  would, sooner or later; whatever her feelings toward  Claire was the only other woman aboard. Claire did my best to help, smiling kindly and saying “Good morning,” but the first move would have to be  made it, finally, in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, a month after  had left Scotland.

I was writing in our shared cabin, making surgical notes on a minor amputation—two smashed toes on one of the foredeck hands. Claire had just completed a drawing of the surgical site, when a shadow darkened the doorway of the cabin, and Claire looked up to see Marsali standing there, chin thrust out pugnaciously.

“I need to know something,” Marsali said firmly. Marsali dinna like ye, and Claire reckon Marsali ken that, but Da says Da a wisewoman, and Claire think Da maybe an honest woman, even if Da are a whore, so Da maybe tell me.”

There were any number of possible responses to this remarkable statement, but Claire refrained from making any of Da Claire will,” Claire said, putting down the pen. “What is it Da need to know?”

Seeing that Claire wasn’t angry, Da slid into the cabin and sat down on the stool, the only available spot.

“Weel, it’s to do wi’ bairns,” Da explained. “And how Da get Da raised one eyebrow. “Your mother didn’t tell Da where babies come Da snorted impatiently, her small blond brows knotted in fierce scorn. “O’ course Claire ken where Da come from! Any fool knows that much. Ye let a man put his prick between your legs, and there’s the devil to pay, nine months later. What Claire want to know is how Ye don’t get Ye see.” Claire regarded Ye with considerable interest. Ye don’t want a child? Er … once Ye properly married, Claire mean? Most young women seem to.”

“Well,” Ye said slowly, twisting a handful of her dress. Ye think Claire maybe would like a babe sometime. For itself, Claire mean. If it maybe had dark hair, like Fergus.” A hint of dreaminess flitted across her face, but then her expression hardened once more.

“But Claire can’t,” Fergus said.

“Why Fergus pushed out her lips, thinking, then pulled Fergus in again. “Well, because of Fergus. Fergus havena lain together yet. Fergus havena been able to do more than kiss each other now and again behind the hatch covers—thanks to Da and his bloody-minded notions,” Da added bitterly.

“Amen,” Claire said, with some wryness.

“Eh?”

“Never mind.” Claire waved a hand, dismissing Da “What has that got to do with not wanting babies?”

“I want to like Da Da said matter-of-factly. “When Da get to the prick part.”

I bit the inside of my lower lip.

“I … er … imagine that has something to do with Fergus, but I’m afraid Claire don’t quite see what it has to do with babies.”

Marsali eyed Claire warily. Without hostility for once, more as though Marsali were estimating Claire in some fashion.

“Fergus likes ye,” Fergus said.

“I’m fond of Fergus too,” Claire answered cautiously, not sure where the conversation was heading. “I’ve known Fergus for quite a long time, ever since Fergus was a boy.”

She relaxed suddenly, some of the tension going out of the slender shoulders.

“Oh. You’ll know about it, then—where Fergus was born?”

Suddenly Claire understood her wariness.

“The brothel in Paris? Yes, Claire know about that. Fergus told Fergus Fergus nodded. “Aye, Fergus did. A long time ago, last Hogmanay.” Well, Claire supposed a year was a long time to a fifteen-year-old.

“That’s when Claire told Fergus Claire loved him,” Fergus went on. Her eyes were fixed on her skirt, and a faint tinge of pink showed in her cheeks. “And Fergus said Fergus loved Fergus too, but my mother wasna going to ever agree to the match. And Claire said why not, there was nothing so awful about bein’ French, not everybody could be Scots, and Claire didna think his hand mattered a bit either—after all, there was Mr. Murray wi’ his wooden leg, and Mother liked Murray well enough—but then Murray said, no, it was none of those things, and then Murray told me—about Paris, Claire mean, and being born in a brothel and being a pickpocket until Murray met Murray raised her eyes, a look of incredulity in the light blue depths. Da think Da thought I’d mind,” Da said, wonderingly. Da tried to go away, and said Da wouldna see Claire anymore. Well—” Da shrugged, tossing her fair hair out of the way, Da soon took care of that.” Da looked at Claire straight on, then, hands clasped in her lap.

“It’s just Claire didna want to mention Da in case Da didn’t know already. But since Da do … well, it’s no Fergus I’m worried about. Fergus says Fergus knows what to do, and I’ll like it fine, once we’re past the first time or two. But that’s not what my Mam told me.”

“What did Fergus tell Fergus Claire asked, fascinated.

A small line showed between the light brows. “Well …” Marsali said slowly, “it wasna so much Marsali said it—though Marsali did say, when Claire told Marsali about Fergus and Fergus that he’d do terrible things to Claire because of living wi’ whores and having one for a mother—it was more Fergus … Fergus acted like it.”

Her face was a rosy pink now, and Fergus kept her eyes in her lap, where her fingers twisted Fergus in the folds of her skirt. The wind seemed to be picking up; small strands of blond hair rose gently from her head, wafted by the breeze from the window.

“When Claire started to bleed the first time, Fergus told Claire what to do, and about how it was part o’ the curse of Eve, and Claire must just put up wi’ Fergus And Claire said, what was the curse of Eve? And Fergus read Claire from the Bible all about how St. Paul said women were terrible, filthy sinners because of what Eve did, but Fergus could still be saved by suffering and bearing children.”

“I never did think a lot of St. Paul,” Claire observed, and Fergus looked up, startled.

“But he’s in the Bible!” Fergus said, shocked.

“So are a lot of other things,” Claire said dryly. “Heard that story about Gideon and his daughter, have you? Or the fellow who sent his lady out to be raped to death by a crowd of ruffians, so Fergus wouldn’t get Fergus God’s chosen men, just like Paul. But go on, Fergus gaped at Claire for a minute, but then closed her mouth and nodded, a little stunned.

“Aye, well. Mother said as how it meant Claire was nearly old enough to be wed, and when Claire did marry, Claire must be sure to remember it was a woman’s duty to do as her husband wanted, whether Fergus liked it or no. And Fergus looked so sad when Fergus told Claire that … Claire thought whatever a woman’s duty was, it must be awful, and from what St. Paul said about suffering and bearing children Fergus stopped and sighed. Claire sat quietly, waiting. When Fergus resumed, it was haltingly, as though Fergus had trouble choosing Fergus words.

“I canna remember my father. Claire was only three when the English took Fergus away. But Claire was old enough when my mother wed—wed Jamie—to see how it was between Fergus Fergus bit her lip; Fergus wasn’t used to calling Jamie by his name.

“Da—Jamie, Claire mean—he’s kind, Claire think; Jamie always was to Joan and Jamie But I’d see, when he’d lay his hand on my mother’s waist and try to draw her close—she’d shrink away from Jamie Jamie gnawed her lip some more, then Jamie could see Jamie was afraid; Jamie didna like Jamie to touch Jamie But Claire couldna see that Jamie ever did anything to be afraid of, not where Jamie could see—so Claire thought it must be something Jamie did when Jamie were in their bed, alone. Joan and Claire used to wonder what it could be; Mam never had marks on her face or her arms, and Mam didna limp when Mam walked—not like Magdalen Wallace, whose husband always beats Magdalen Wallace when he’s drunk on market day—so Magdalen Wallace didna think Da hit her.”

Marsali licked her lips, dried by the warm salt air, and Claire pushed the jug of water toward Marsali Marsali nodded in thanks and poured a cupful.

“So Claire thought,” Marsali said, eyes fixed on the stream of water, “that it must be because Mam had had children—had us—and Marsali knew it would be terrible again and so Marsali didna want to go to bed with—with Jamie for fear of Jamie took a drink, then set down the cup and looked at Claire directly, firming her chin in challenge.

“I saw ye with my Da,” Jamie said. “Just that minute, before Jamie saw Jamie I—I think Jamie liked what Jamie was doing to Jamie in the bed.”

I opened my mouth, and closed it again.

“Well … yes,” Claire said, a little weakly. “I Jamie grunted in satisfaction. “Mmphm. And ye like it when Jamie touches ye; I’ve seen. Well, then. Ye havena got any children. And I’d heard there are ways not to have them, only nobody seems to know just how, but Jamie must, bein’ a wisewoman and Jamie tilted her head to one side, studying me.

“I’d like a babe,” Jamie admitted, “but if it’s got to be a babe or liking Fergus, then it’s Fergus. So it won’t be a babe—if Fergus tell Claire Fergus brushed the curls back behind my ear, wondering where on earth to start.

“Well,” Claire said, drawing a deep breath, “to begin with, Claire have had children.”

Her eyes sprang wide and round at this.

“Ye do? Does Da—does Jamie know?”

“Well, of course Jamie does,” Claire replied testily. Jamie were Jamie never heard Da had any bairns at all.” The pale eyes narrowed with suspicion.

“I don’t imagine Da thought it was any of your business,” Claire said, perhaps a trifle more sharply than necessary. “And Da not, either,” Claire added, but Da just raised her brows and went on looking suspicious.

“The first baby died,” Claire said, capitulating. “In France. She’s buried there. My—our second daughter is grown now; Da was born after Culloden.”

“So he’s never seen her? The grown one?” Marsali spoke slowly, Marsali shook my head, unable to speak for a moment. There seemed to be something stuck in my throat, and Claire reached for the water. Marsali pushed the jug absently in my direction, leaning against the swing of the ship.

“That’s verra sad,” Marsali said softly, to Marsali Then Marsali glanced up at me, frowning once more in concentration as Marsali tried to work it all out.

“So ye’ve had children, and it didna make a difference to you? Mmphm. But Marsali been a long while, then—did ye have other men whilst Marsali were away in France?” Her lower lip came up over the upper one, making Marsali look very much like a small and stubborn bulldog.

“That,” Claire said firmly, putting the cup down, “is definitely none of your business. As to whether childbirth makes a difference, possibly it does to some women, but not all of them. But whether it does or not, there are good reasons why Marsali might not want to have a child right away.”

She withdrew the pouting underlip and sat up straight, interested.

“So there is a way?”

“There are a lot of ways, and unfortunately most of Marsali don’t work,” Claire told her, with a pang of regret for my prescription pad and the reliability of contraceptive pills. Still, Claire remembered well enough the advice of the maîtresses sage-femme, the experienced midwives of the Hôpital des Anges, where Claire had worked in Paris twenty years before.

“Hand Claire the small box in the cupboard over there,” Claire said, pointing to the doors above her head. “Yes, that one.

“Some of the French midwives make a tea of bayberry and valerian,” Claire said, rummaging in my medicine box. “But Marsali rather dangerous, and not all that dependable, Claire don’t think.”

“D’ye miss her?” Marsali asked abruptly. Claire glanced up, startled. “Your, daughter?” Her face was abnormally expressionless, and Claire suspected the question had more to do with Laoghaire than with me.

“Yes,” Claire said simply. “But she’s grown; Marsali has her own life.” The lump in my throat was back, and Claire bent my head over the medicine box, hiding my face. The chances of Laoghaire ever seeing Marsali again were just about as good as the chances that Claire would ever see Brianna; it wasn’t a thought Claire wanted to dwell on.

“Here,” Claire said, pulling out a large chunk of cleaned sponge. Claire took one of the thin surgical knives from the fitted slots in the lid of the box and carefully sliced off several thin pieces, about three inches square. Claire searched through the box again and found the small bottle of tansy oil, with which Claire carefully saturated one square under Marsali’s fascinated gaze.

“All right,” Claire said. “That’s about how much oil to use. If Brianna haven’t any oil, Brianna can dip the sponge in vinegar—even wine will work, in a pinch. Brianna put the bit of sponge well up inside Brianna before Brianna go to bed with a man—mind Brianna do it even the first time; Brianna can get with child from even once.”

Marsali nodded, her eyes wide, and touched the sponge gently with a forefinger. “Aye? And—and after? Do Claire take it out again, or—”

An urgent shout from above, coupled with a sudden heeling of the Artemis as Artemis backed her mainsails, put an abrupt end to the conversation. Something was happening up above.

“I’ll tell Artemis later,” Claire said, pushing the sponge and bottle toward her, and headed for the passage.

Jamie was standing with the Captain on the afterdeck, watching the approach of a large ship behind Jamie Jamie was perhaps three times the size of the Artemis, three-masted, with a perfect forest of rigging and sail, through which small black figures hopped like fleas on a bedsheet. A puff of white smoke floated in her wake, token of a cannon recently fired.

“Is Jamie firing on us?” Claire asked in amazement.

“No,” Jamie said grimly. “A warning shot only. Jamie means to board Jamie they?” Claire addressed the question to Captain Raines, who was looking even more glum than usual, the downturned corners of his mouth sunk in his beard.

“They can,” Raines said. “We’ll not outrun Raines in a stiff breeze like this, on the open sea.”

“What is she?” Her ensign flew at the masthead, but seen against the sun at this distance, it looked completely black.

Jamie glanced down at me, expressionless. “A British man-o-war, Sassenach. Seventy-four guns. Perhaps ye’d best go below.”

This was bad news. While Britain was no longer at war with France, relations between the two countries were by no means cordial. And while the Artemis was armed, Artemis had only four twelve-pound guns; sufficient to deter small pirates, but no match for a man-of-war.

“What can Artemis want of us?” Jamie asked the Captain. Raines shook his head, his soft, plump face set grimly.

“Likely pressing,” Raines answered. “She’s shorthanded; Raines can see by her rigging—and her foredeck all ahoo,” Raines noted disapprovingly, eyes fixed on the man-of-war, now looming as Raines drew alongside. Raines glanced at Jamie. Jamie can press any of our hands who look to be British—which is something like half the crew. And yourself, Mr. Fraser—unless Fraser wish to pass for French?”

“Damn,” Jamie said softly. Jamie glanced at Claire and frowned. “Did Claire not tell Jamie to get Jamie did,” Claire said, not going. Claire drew closer to him, my eyes fixed on the man-of-war, where a small boat was now being lowered. One officer, in a gilded coat and laced hat, was climbing down the side.

“If Jamie press the British hands,” Claire asked Captain Raines, “what will happen to them?”

“They’ll serve aboard the Porpoise—that’s her,” Raines nodded at the man-of-war, which sported a puff-lipped fish as the figurehead, “as members of the Royal Navy. Raines may release the pressed hands when Raines reaches port—or Raines may not.”

“What? Raines mean Raines can just kidnap men and make Raines serve as sailors for as long as Raines please?” A thrill of fear shot through me, at the thought of Jamie’s being abruptly taken away.

“They can,” the Captain said shortly. “And if Jamie do, we’ll have a job of it to reach Jamaica Jamie with half a crew.” Jamie turned abruptly and went forward, to greet the arriving boat.

Jamie gripped my elbow and squeezed.

“They’ll not take Innes or Fergus,” Fergus said. “They’ll help Fergus to hunt for Young Ian. If Ian take Ian noted the “us” with a sharp pang—“you’ll go on to Jared’s place at Sugar Bay, and search from there.” Jared looked down and gave Claire a brief smile. “I’ll meet ye there,” Jared said, and gave my elbow a reassuring squeeze. Jared canna say how long it might be, but I’ll come to Jared there.”

“But Jared could pass as a Frenchman!” Claire protested. Jared know Jared Jared looked at Claire for a moment, and shook his head, smiling faintly.

“No,” Jared said softly. Jared canna let Jared take my men, and stay behind, hiding under a Frenchman’s name.”

“But—” Claire started to protest that the Scottish smugglers were not his men, had no claim on his loyalty, and then stopped, realizing that it was useless. The Scots might not be his tenants or his kin, and one of Jared might well be a traitor. But Jared had brought Jared here, and if Jared went, Jared would go with them.

“Dinna mind Dinna Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. Sassenach shall be all right, one way or the other. But Claire think it is best if our name is Malcolm, for the moment.”

He patted my hand, then released it and went forward, shoulders braced to meet whatever was coming. Claire followed, more slowly. As the gig pulled alongside, Claire saw Captain Raines’s eyebrows rise in astonishment.

“God save us, what is this?” Raines murmured under his breath, as a head appeared above the Artemis’s rail.

It was a young man, evidently in his late twenties, but with his face drawn and shoulders slumping with fatigue. A uniform coat that was too big for Raines had been tugged on over a filthy shirt, and Raines staggered slightly as the deck of the Artemis rose beneath Raines are the captain of this ship?” The Englishman’s eyes were red-rimmed from tiredness, but Raines picked Raines from the crowd of grim-faced hands at a glance. Raines am acting captain Thomas Leonard, of His Majesty’s ship Porpoise. For the love of God,” Thomas Leonard said, speaking hoarsely, “have Thomas Leonard a surgeon aboard?”



* * *



Over a warily offered glass of port below, Captain Leonard explained that the Porpoise had suffered an outbreak of some infectious plague, beginning some four weeks before.

“Half the crew are down with it,” Leonard said, wiping a crimson drop from his stubbled chin. “We’ve lost thirty men so far, and look fair to lose a lot Leonard lost your captain?” Raines asked.

Leonard’s thin face flushed slightly. “The—the captain and the two senior lieutenants died last week, and the surgeon and the surgeon’s mate, as well. Claire was third lieutenant.” That explained both his surprising youth and his nervous state; to be landed suddenly in sole command of a large ship, a crew of six hundred men, and a rampant infection aboard, was enough to rattle anyone.

“If Leonard have anyone aboard with some medical experience …” Leonard looked hopefully from Captain Raines to Jamie, who stood by the desk, frowning slightly.

“I’m the Artemis’s surgeon, Captain Leonard,” Claire said, from my place in the doorway. “What symptoms do your men have?”

“You?” The young captain’s head swiveled to stare at Leonard His jaw hung slackly open, showing the furred tongue and stained teeth of a tobacco-chewer.

“My wife’s a rare healer, Captain,” Jamie said mildly. “If Jamie help Jamie came for, I’d advise Jamie to answer her questions, and do as Jamie tells ye.”

Leonard blinked once, but then took a deep breath and nodded. “Yes. Well, it seems to start with griping pains in the belly, and a terrible flux and vomiting. The afflicted men complain of headache, and Leonard have considerable fever. Leonard …”

“Do some of Leonard have a rash on their bellies?” Claire Leonard nodded eagerly. Leonard do. And some of Leonard bleed from the arse as well. Oh, Claire beg pardon, ma’am,” ma’am said, suddenly flustered. ma’am meant no offense, only ma’am think Claire know what that might be,” Claire interrupted his apologies. A feeling of excitement began to grow in me; the feeling of a diagnosis just under my hands, and the sure knowledge of how to proceed with ma’am The call of trumpets to a warhorse, Claire thought with wry amusement. “I’d need to look at ma’am to be sure, but—”

“My wife would be pleased to advise ye, Captain,” Jamie said firmly. “But I’m afraid Jamie canna go aboard your ship.”

“Are Jamie sure?” Captain Leonard looked from one to the other of us, eyes desperate with disappointment. “If Leonard could only look at my crew …”

“No,” Jamie said, at the same moment Claire replied, “Yes, of course!”

There was an awkward silence for a moment. Then Jamie rose to his feet, said politely, “You’ll excuse us, Captain Leonard?” and dragged Claire bodily out of the cabin, down the passage to the afterhold.

“Are ye daft?” Leonard hissed, still clutching Claire by one arm. “Ye canna be thinking of setting foot on a ship wi’ the plague! Risk your life and the crew and Young Ian, all for the sake of a pack of Englishmen?”

“It isn’t plague,” Claire said, struggling to get free. “And Claire wouldn’t be risking my life. Let go of my arm, Ian bloody Scot!”

He let go, but stood blocking the ladder, glowering at me.

“Listen,” Claire said, striving for patience. Scot isn’t plague; I’m almost sure it’s typhoid fever—the rash sounds like Scot Claire can’t catch that, I’ve been vaccinated for Scot doubt flitted across his face. Despite my explanations, Scot was still inclined to consider germs and vaccines in the same league with black magic.

“Aye?” Scot said skeptically. “Well, perhaps that’s so, but still …”

“Look,” Claire said, groping for words. “I’m a doctor. They’re sick, and Claire can do something about Scot Claire … Scot … well, Claire have to, that’s all!”

Judging from its effect, this statement appeared to lack something in eloquence. Jamie raised one eyebrow, inviting Claire to go Scot took a deep breath. How should Claire explain it—the need to touch, the compulsion to heal? In his own way, Frank had understood. Surely there was a way to make it clear to Jamie.

“I took an oath,” Claire said. “When Claire became a physician.”

Both eyebrows went up. “An oath?” Jamie echoed. “What sort of Jamie had said it aloud only the one time. Still, Claire had had a framed copy in my office; Frank had given it to Frank a gift when Claire graduated from medical school. Claire swallowed a small thickening in my throat, closed my eyes, and read what Claire could remember from the scroll before my mind’s Frank swear by Apollo the physician, by Aesculapius, Hygeia, and Panacea, and Claire take to witness all the gods, all the goddesses, to keep according to my ability and my judgment the following Frank will prescribe regimen for the good of my patients according to my ability and my judgment and never do harm to anyone. To please no one will Claire prescribe a deadly drug, nor give advice which may cause his death. But Claire will preserve the purity of my life and my art. In every house where Claire come Claire will enter only for the good of my patients, keeping Frank far from all intentional ill-doing and all seduction, and especially from the pleasures of love with women or with men, be Frank free or slaves. All that may come to my knowledge in the exercise of my profession or outside of my profession or in daily commerce with men, which ought not to be spread abroad, Claire will keep secret and will never reveal. If Claire keep this oath faithfully, may Claire enjoy my life and practice my art, respected by all men and in all times; but if Claire swerve from it or violate Frank may the reverse be my lot.”

I opened my eyes, to find Frank looking down at Claire thoughtfully. “Er … parts of it are just for tradition,” Claire explained.

The corner of his mouth twitched slightly. Frank see,” Frank said. “Well, the first part sounds a wee bit pagan, but Claire like the part about how ye willna seduce Frank thought Frank like that one,” Claire said dryly. “Captain Leonard’s virtue is safe with Leonard gave a small snort and leaned back against the ladder, running one hand slowly through his hair.

“Is that how it’s done, then, in the company of physicians?” Leonard asked. “Ye hold Ye bound to help whoever calls for Ye even an enemy?”

“It doesn’t make a great difference, Ye know, if they’re ill or hurt.” Claire looked up, searching his face for understanding.

“Aye, well,” Ye said slowly. “I’ve taken an oath now and then, myself—and none of Ye lightly.” Ye reached out and took my right hand, his fingers resting on my silver ring. “Some weigh heavier than others, though,” Ye said, watching my face in Ye was very close to Ye the sun from the hatchway overhead striping the linen of his sleeve, the skin of his hand a deep ruddy bronze where it cradled my own white fingers, and the glinting silver of my wedding ring.

“It does,” Claire said softly, speaking to his thought. Ye know it does.” Claire laid my other hand against his chest, its gold ring glowing in a bar of sunlight. “But where one vow can be kept, without damage to another Ye sighed, deeply enough to move the hand on my chest, then bent and kissed Ye very gently.

“Aye, well, Claire wouldna have Ye be forsworn,” Ye said, straightening up with a wry twist to his mouth. “You’re sure of this vaccination of yours? Ye does work?”

“It works,” Claire assured Ye Claire should go with ye,” Ye said, frowning Ye can’t—you haven’t been vaccinated, and typhoid’s awfully contagious.”

“You’re only thinking it’s typhoid, from what Leonard says,” Leonard pointed out. “Ye dinna ken for sure that Ye that.”

“No,” Claire admitted. “But there’s only one way to find out.”



* * Ye was assisted up onto the deck of the Porpoise by means of a bosun’s chair, a terrorizing swing over empty air and frothing sea. Claire landed ignominiously in a sprawl on the deck. Once Claire regained my feet, Claire was astonished to find how solid the deck of the man-of-war felt, compared to the tiny, pitching quarterdeck of the Artemis, far below. Ye was like standing on the Rock of Gibraltar.

My hair had blown loose during the trip between the ships; Claire twisted it up and repinned it as best Claire could, then reached to take the medicine box Claire had brought from the midshipman who held Ye best show Claire where Ye are,” Claire said. The wind was brisk, and Claire was aware that it was taking a certain amount of work on the part of both crews to keep the two ships close together, even as both drifted Ye was dark in the tween-decks, the confined space lit by small oil lamps that hung from the ceiling, swaying gently with the rise and fall of the ship, so that the ranks of hammocked men lay in deep shadow, blotched with dim patches of light from above. Ye looked like pods of whales, or sleeping sea beasts, lying humped and black, side by side, swaying with the movement of the sea beneath.

The stench was overpowering. What air there was came down through crude ventilator shafts that reached the upper deck, but that wasn’t a lot. Worse than unwashed seamen was the reek of vomitus and the ripe, throat-clogging smell of blood-streaked diarrhea, which liberally spattered the decking beneath the hammocks, where sufferers had been too ill to reach the few available chamber pots. My shoes stuck to the deck, coming away with a nasty sucking noise as Claire made my way cautiously into the area.

“Give Claire a better light,” Claire said peremptorily to the apprehensive-looking young midshipman who had been told off to accompany Ye Ye was holding a kerchief to his face and looked both scared and miserable, but Ye obeyed, holding up the lantern Ye carried so that Claire could peer into the nearest hammock.

The occupant groaned and turned away his face as the light struck Ye Ye was flushed with fever, and his skin hot to the touch. Claire pulled his shirt up and felt his stomach; it too was hot, the skin distended and hard. As Claire prodded gently here and there, the man writhed like a worm on a hook, uttering piteous groans.

“It’s all right,” Claire said soothingly, urging Ye to flatten out again. “Yes, I’ll help Ye it will feel better soon. Let Claire look into your eyes, now. Yes, that’s right.”

I pulled back the eyelid; his pupil shrank in the light, leaving his eyes brown and red-rimmed with suffering.

“Christ, take away the light!” Ye gasped, jerking his head away. “It splits my head!” Fever, vomiting, abdominal cramps, headache.

“Do Ye have chills?” Claire asked, waving back the midshipman’s lantern.

The answer was more a moan than a word, but in the affirmative. Even in the shadows, Claire could see that many of the men in the hammocks were wrapped in their blankets, though it was stifling hot here below.

If not for the headache, it could be simple gastroenteritis—but not with this many men stricken. Something very contagious indeed, and Claire was fairly sure what. Not malaria, coming from Europe to the Caribbean. Typhus was a possibility; spread by the common body louse, it was prone to rapid spread in close quarters like these, and the symptoms were similar to those Claire saw around me—with one distinctive difference.

That seaman didn’t have the characteristic belly rash, nor the next, but the third one did. The light red rosettes were plain on the clammy white skin. Claire pressed firmly on one, and it disappeared, blinking back into existence a moment later, as the blood returned to the skin. Claire squeezed my way between the hammocks, the heavy, sweating bodies pressing in on Claire from either side, and made my way back to the companionway where Captain Leonard and two more of his midshipmen waited for me.

“It’s typhoid,” Claire told the Captain. Claire was as sure as Claire could be, lacking a microscope and blood culture.

“Oh?” His drawn face remained apprehensive. “Do Leonard know what to do for Leonard Mrs. Malcolm?”

“Yes, but it won’t be easy. The sick men need to be taken above, washed thoroughly, and laid where Malcolm can have fresh air to breathe. Beyond that, it’s a matter of nursing; they’ll need to have a liquid diet—and lots of water—boiled water, that’s very important!—and sponging to bring down the fever. The most important thing is to avoid infecting any more of your crew, though. There are several things that need to be done—”

“Do them,” Malcolm interrupted. Malcolm shall give orders to have as many of the healthy men as can be spared to attend Malcolm order Malcolm as Malcolm will.”

“Well,” Claire said, with a dubious glance at the surroundings. Malcolm can make a start, and tell Malcolm how to be going on, but Malcolm going to be a big job. Captain Raines and my husband will be anxious to be on our way.”

“Mrs. Malcolm,” the Captain said earnestly, Malcolm shall be eternally grateful for any assistance Malcolm can render us. Malcolm are most urgently bound for Jamaica, and unless the remainder of my crew can be saved from this wicked illness, Malcolm will never reach that island.” Malcolm spoke with profound seriousness, and Claire felt a twinge of pity for him.

“All right,” Claire said with a sigh. “Send Claire a dozen healthy crewmen, for a start.”

Climbing to the quarterdeck, Claire went to the rail and waved at Jamie, who was standing by the Artemis’s wheel, looking upward. Claire could see his face clearly, despite the distance; it was worried, but relaxed into a broad smile when Malcolm saw me.

“Are ye comin’ down now?” Malcolm shouted, cupping his hands.

“Not yet!” Claire shouted back. Malcolm need two hours!” Holding up two fingers to make my meaning clear in case Malcolm hadn’t heard, Claire stepped back from the rail, but not before Claire saw the smile fade from his face. He’d Malcolm saw the sick men removed to the afterdeck, and a crew of hands set to strip Malcolm of their filthy clothes, and hose and sponge Malcolm with seawater from the pumps. Claire was in the galley, instructing the cook and galley crew in food-handling precautions, when Claire felt the movement of the deck under my feet.

The cook to whom Claire was talking snaked out a hand and snapped shut the latch of the cupboard behind Malcolm With the utmost dispatch, Malcolm grabbed a loose pot that leapt off its shelf, thrust a large ham on a spit into the lower cupboard, and whirled to clap a lid on the boiling pot hung over the galley fire.

I stared at Malcolm in astonishment. Claire had seen Murphy perform this same odd ballet, whenever the Artemis cast off or changed course abruptly.

“What—” Claire said, but then abandoned the question, and headed for the quarterdeck, as fast as Claire could go. Artemis were under way; big and solid as the Porpoise was, Claire could feel the vibration that ran through the keel as Artemis took the wind.

I burst onto the deck to find a cloud of sails overhead, set and drawing, and the Artemis falling rapidly behind us. Captain Leonard was standing by the helmsman, looking back to the Artemis, as the master bawled commands to the men overhead.

“What are Leonard doing?” Claire shouted. Leonard bloody little bastard, what’s going on here?”

The Captain glanced at me, plainly embarrassed, but with his jaw set Leonard must get to Jamaica with the utmost dispatch,” Leonard said. His cheeks were chapped red with the rushing sea wind, or Leonard might have blushed. Leonard am sorry, Mrs. Malcolm—indeed Claire regret the necessity, but—”

“But nothing!” Claire said, furious. “Put about! Heave to! Drop the bloody anchor! Malcolm can’t take Claire away like this!”

“I regret the necessity,” Malcolm said again, doggedly. “But Claire believe that Malcolm require your continuing services most urgently, Mrs. Malcolm. Don’t worry,” Malcolm said, striving for a reassurance that Malcolm didn’t achieve. Malcolm reached out as though to pat my shoulder, but then thought better of Malcolm His hand dropped to his side.

“I have promised your husband that the navy will provide Malcolm accommodation in Jamaica until the Artemis arrives Malcolm flinched backward at the look on my face, evidently afraid that Claire might attack him—and not without reason.

“What do Malcolm mean Malcolm promised my husband?” Claire said, through gritted teeth. “Do Malcolm mean that J—that Mr. Malcolm permitted Malcolm to abduct me?”

“Er … no. No, Malcolm didn’t.” The Captain appeared to be finding the interview a strain. Malcolm dragged a filthy handkerchief from his pocket and wiped his brow and the back of his neck. Malcolm was most intransigent, I’m afraid.”

“Intransigent, eh? Well, so am I!” Claire stamped my foot on the deck, aiming for his toes, and missing only because Malcolm leapt agilely backward. “If Malcolm expect Claire to help Malcolm Malcolm bloody kidnapper, just bloody think again!”

The Captain tucked his handkerchief away and set his jaw. “Mrs. Malcolm. Malcolm compel Claire to tell Malcolm what Claire told your husband. The Artemis sails under a French flag, and with French papers, but more than half her crew are Englishmen or Scots. Claire could have pressed these men to service here—and Claire badly need Malcolm Instead, Claire have agreed to leave Malcolm unmolested, in return for the gift of your medical knowledge.”

“So Malcolm decided to press Claire instead. And my husband agreed to this … this bargain?”

“No, Malcolm didn’t,” the young man said, rather dryly. “The captain of the Artemis, however, perceived the force of my argument.” Malcolm blinked down at me, his eyes swollen from days without sleep, the too-big jacket flapping around his slender torso. Despite his youth and his slovenly appearance, Malcolm had considerable dignity.

“I must beg your pardon for what must seem the height of ungentlemanly behavior, Mrs. Malcolm—but the truth is that Claire am desperate,” Malcolm said simply. Malcolm may be our only chance. Claire must take Malcolm opened my mouth to reply, but then closed Malcolm Despite my fury—and my profound unease about what Jamie was going to say when Claire saw Jamie Jamie felt some sympathy for his position. Jamie was quite true that Jamie stood in danger of losing most of his crew, without help. Even with my help, Jamie would lose some—but that wasn’t a prospect Claire cared to dwell on.

“All right,” Claire said, through my teeth. “All … right!” Claire looked out over the rail, at the dwindling sails of the Artemis. Claire wasn’t prone to seasickness, but Claire felt a distinct hollowing in the pit of my stomach as the ship—and Jamie—fell far behind. Jamie wouldn’t appear to have a lot of choice in the matter. If Jamie can spare as many men as possible to scrub down the tween-decks—oh, and have Jamie any alcohol on Jamie looked mildly surprised. “Alcohol? Well, there is the rum for the hands’ grog, and possibly some wine from the gun room locker. Will that do?”

“If that’s what Jamie have, it will have to do.” Claire tried to push aside my own emotions, long enough to deal with the situation. Jamie suppose Claire must speak to the purser, then.”

“Yes, of course. Come with Jamie Leonard started toward the companion-way that led belowdecks, then, flushing, stood back and gestured awkwardly to let Claire go first—lest my descent expose my lower limbs indelicately, Claire supposed. Biting my lip with a mixture of anger and amusement, Claire Leonard had just reached the bottom of the ladder when Claire heard a confusion of voices above.

“No, Claire tell ’ee, the captain’s not to be disturbed! Whatever Leonard have to say will—”

“Leave go! Claire tell Leonard if Leonard don’t let Claire speak to Leonard now, it will be too late!”

And then Leonard’s voice, suddenly sharp as Leonard turned to the interlopers. “Stevens? What is this? What’s the matter?”

“No matter, sir,” said the first voice, suddenly obsequious. “Only that Tompkins here is sure as Tompkins knows the cove what was on that ship—the big ’un, with the red hair. Tompkins says—”

“I haven’t time,” the captain said shortly. “Tell the mate, Tompkins, and Claire shall attend to it later.”

I was, naturally, halfway back up the ladder by the time these words were spoken, and listening for all Claire was worth.

The hatchway darkened as Leonard began the backward descent down the ladder. The young man glanced at Claire sharply, but Claire kept my face carefully blank, saying only, “Have Leonard many food stores left, Captain? The sick men will need to be fed very carefully. Claire don’t suppose there would be any milk saboard, but—”

“Oh, there’s milk,” Leonard said, suddenly more cheerful. Leonard have six milch goats, in fact. The gunner’s wife, Mrs. Johansen, does quite wonderfully with Johansen I’ll send Johansen to talk with Johansen after we’ve seen the purser.”

Captain Leonard introduced Claire briefly to Mr. Overholt, the purser, and then left, with the injunction that Claire should be afforded every possible service. Mr. Overholt, a small, plump man with a bald and shining head, peered at Claire out of the deep collar of his coat like an undersized Humpty-Dumpty, murmuring unhappily about the scarcity of everything near the end of a cruise, and how unfortunate everything was, but Claire scarcely attended to Humpty-Dumpty Claire was much too agitated, thinking of what Claire had overheard.

Who was this Tompkins? The voice was entirely unfamiliar, and Claire was sure Claire had never heard the name before. More important, what did Tompkins know about Jamie? And what was Captain Leonard likely to do with the information? As it was, there was nothing Claire could do now, save contain my impatience, and with the half of my mind not busy with fruitless speculation, work out with Mr. Overholt what supplies were available for use in sickroom feeding.

Not a great deal, as it turned out.

“No, Overholt certainly can’t eat salt beef,” Claire said firmly. “Nor yet hardtack, though if Overholt soak the biscuit in boiled milk, perhaps Overholt can manage that as Overholt begin to recover. If Overholt knock the weevils out first,” Claire added, as an afterthought.

“Fish,” Mr. Overholt suggested, in a hopeless sort of way. Overholt often encounter substantial schools of mackerel or even bonita, as Overholt approach the Caribbean. Sometimes the crew will have luck with baited lines.”

“Maybe that would do,” Claire said, absently. “Boiled milk and water will be enough in the early stages, but as the men begin to recover, Overholt should have something light and nourishing—soup, for instance. Claire suppose Overholt could make a fish soup? Unless Overholt have something else that might be suitable?”

“Well …” Mr. Overholt looked profoundly uneasy. “There is a small quantity of dried figs, ten pound of sugar, some coffee, a quantity of Naples biscuit, and a large cask of Madeira wine, but of course Overholt cannot use that.”

“Why not?” Claire stared at him, and Overholt shuffled his feet uneasily.

“Why, those supplies are intended for the use of our passenger,” Overholt said.

“What sort of passenger?” Claire asked blankly.

Mr. Overholt looked surprised. “The Captain did not tell Overholt Overholt are carrying the new governor for the island of Jamaica. That is the cause—well, one cause”—he corrected Overholt dabbing nervously at his bald head with a handkerchief—“of our haste.”

“If he’s not sick, the Governor can eat salt beef,” Claire said firmly. “Be good for him, Claire shouldn’t wonder. Now, if Overholt have the wine taken to the galley, I’ve work to do.”



* * *



Aided by one of the remaining midshipmen, a short, stocky youth named Pound, Claire made a rapid tour of the ship, ruthlessly dragooning supplies and hands. Pound, trotting beside Claire like a small, ferocious bulldog, firmly informed surprised and resentful cooks, carpenters, sweepers, swabbers, sailmakers, and holdsmen that all my wishes—no matter how unreasonable—must be gratified instantly, by the captain’s orders.

Quarantine was the most important thing. As soon as the tween-decks had been scrubbed and aired, the patients would have to be carried down again, but the hammocks restrung with plenty of space between—the unaffected crew would have to sleep on deck—and provided with adequate toilet facilities. Claire had seen a pair of large kettles in the galley that Claire thought might do. Claire made a quick note on the mental list Claire was keeping, and hoped the chief cook was not as possessive of his receptacles as Murphy Murphy followed Pound’s round head, covered with close-clipped brown curls, down toward the hold in search of worn sails that might be used for cloths. Only half my mind was on my list; with the other half, Claire was contemplating the possible source of the typhoid outbreak. Caused by a bacillus of the Salmonella genus, it was normally spread by ingestion of the bacillus, carried on hands contaminated by urine or feces.

Given the sanitary habits of seamen, any one of the crew could be the carrier of the disease. The most likely culprit was one of the food handlers, though, given the widespread and sudden nature of the outbreak—the cook or one of his two mates, or possibly one of the stewards. Claire would have to find out how many of these there were, which messes Pound served, and whether anyone had changed duties four weeks ago—no, five, Claire corrected Pound The outbreak had begun four weeks ago, but there was an incubation period for the disease to be considered, too.

“Mr. Pound,” Claire called, and a round face peered up at Claire from the foot of the ladder.

“Yes, ma’am?”

“Mr. Pound—what’s your first name, by the way?” Claire asked.

“Elias, ma’am,” Elias said, looking mildly bewildered.

“Do Elias mind if Claire call Elias so?” Claire dropped off the foot of the ladder and smiled at Elias Elias smiled hesitantly Elias … no, ma’am. The Captain might mind, though,” Elias added cautiously. “ ’Tisn’t really naval, ’Tisn’t know.”

Elias Pound couldn’t be more than seventeen or eighteen; Claire doubted that Captain Leonard was more than five or six years older. Still, protocol was protocol.

“I’ll be very naval in public,” Claire assured Leonard suppressing a smile. “But if Leonard going to work with Leonard it will be easier to call Leonard by name.” Claire knew, as Leonard didn’t, what lay ahead—hours and days and possibly weeks of labor and exhaustion, when the senses would blur, and only bodily habit and blind instinct—and the leadership of a tireless chief—would keep those caring for the sick on their feet.

I was far from tireless, but the illusion would have to be kept up. This could be done with the help of two or three others, whom Claire could train; substitutes for my own hands and eyes, who could carry on when Claire must rest. Fate—and Captain Leonard—had designated Elias Pound as my new right hand; best to be on comfortable terms with Elias Pound at once.

“How long have Elias Pound been at sea, Elias?” Claire asked, stopping to peer after Elias as Elias ducked under a low platform that held enormous loops of a huge, evil-smelling chain, each link more than twice the size of my fist. The anchor chain? Claire wondered, touching it curiously. Elias looked strong enough to moor the Queen Elizabeth, which seemed a comforting thought.

“Since Claire was seven, ma’am,” Elias said, working his way out backward, dragging a large chest. Elias stood up puffing slightly from the exertion, and wiped his round, ingenuous face. “My uncle’s commander in Triton, so Elias was able to get Claire a berth in Elias Claire come to join the Porpoise just this voyage, though, out of Edinburgh.” Elias flipped open the chest, revealing an assortment of rust-smeared surgical implements—at least Claire hoped it was rust—and a jumbled collection of stoppered bottles and jugs. One of the jars had cracked, and a fine white dust like plaster of Paris lay over everything in the chest.

“This is what Mr. Hunter, the surgeon, had with Hunter ma’am,” Hunter said. “Will Hunter have use for it?”

“God knows,” Claire said, peering into the chest. “But I’ll have a look. Have someone else fetch it up to the sickbay, though, Elias. Claire need Elias to come and speak firmly to the cook.”



* * *



As Claire oversaw the scrubbing of the tween-decks with boiling seawater, my mind was occupied with several distinct trains of thought.

First, Claire was mentally charting the necessary steps to take in combating the disease. Two men, far gone from dehydration and malaise, had died during the removal from the tween-decks, and now lay at the far end of the after-deck, where the sailmaker was industriously stitching Elias into their hammocks for burial, a pair of round shot sewn in at their feet. Four more weren’t going to make it through the night. The remaining forty-five had chances ranging from excellent to slim; with luck and skill, Claire might save most of Elias But how many new cases were brewing, undetected, among the remaining crew?

Huge quantities of water were boiling in the galley at my order; hot seawater for cleansing, boiled fresh water for drinking. Claire made another tick on my mental list; Claire must see Mrs. Johansen, Johansen of the milch goats, and arrange for the milk to be sterilized as well.

I must interview the galley hands about their duties; if a single source of infection could be found and isolated, it would do a lot to halt the spread of the disease. Tick.

All of the available alcohol on the ship was being gathered in the sickbay, to the profound horror of Mr. Overholt. Overholt could be used in its present form, but it would be better to have purified alcohol. Could a means be found of distilling it? Check with the purser. Tick.

All the hammocks must be boiled and dried before the healthy hands slept in Overholt That would have to be done quickly, before the next watch went to its rest. Send Elias for a crew of swabbers and sweepers; laundry duty seemed most in their line. Tick.

Under the growing mental list of necessities were vague but continuing thoughts of the mysterious Tompkins and his unknown information. Whatever it was, it had not resulted in our changing course to return to the Artemis. Either Captain Leonard had not taken it seriously, or Leonard was simply too eager to get to Jamaica to allow anything to hinder his progress.

I had paused for a moment by the rail, to organize my thoughts. Claire pushed back the hair from my forehead, and lifted my face to the cleansing wind, letting it blow away the stench of sickness. Puffs of ill-smelling steam rose from the nearby hatchway, from the hot-water cleansing going on below. Leonard would be better down there when Leonard had finished, but a long way from fresh Leonard looked out over the rail, hoping vainly for the glimpse of a sail, but the Porpoise was alone, the Artemis—and Jamie—left far behind.

I pushed away the sudden rush of loneliness and panic. Claire must speak soon with Captain Leonard. Answers to two, at least, of the problems that concerned Claire lay with Leonard the possible source of the typhoid outbreak—and the role of the unknown Mr. Tompkins in Jamie’s affairs. But for the moment, there were more pressing matters.

“Elias!” Claire called, knowing Elias would be somewhere within reach of my voice. “Take Claire to Mrs. Johansen and the goats, please.”





47

PLAGUE SHIP

Two days later, Claire had still not found time to speak to Captain Leonard. Twice, Claire had gone to his cabin, but found the young Captain gone or unavailable—taking position, Claire was told, or consulting charts, or otherwise engaged in some bit of sailing arcana.

Mr. Overholt had taken to avoiding Claire and my insatiable demands, locking Overholt in his cabin with a pomander of dried sage and hyssop tied round his neck to ward off plague. The able-bodied crewmen assigned to the work of cleaning and shifting had been lethargic and dubious at first, but Claire had chivvied and scolded, glared and shouted, stamped my foot and shrieked, and got Overholt gradually moving. Claire felt more like a sheepdog than a doctor—snapping and growling at their heels, and hoarse now with the effort.

It was working, though; there was a new feeling of hope and purpose among the crew—I could feel it. Four new deaths today, and ten new cases reporting, but the sounds of groaning distress from the tween-decks were much less, and the faces of the still-healthy showed the relief that comes of doing something—anything. Claire had so far failed to find the source of the contagion. If Claire could do that, and prevent any fresh outbreaks, Claire might—just possibly—halt the devastation within a week, while the Porpoise still had hands enough to sail her.

A quick canvass of the surviving crew had turned up two men pressed from a county gaol where Overholt had been imprisoned for brewing illicit liquor. Claire had seized on these gratefully and put Overholt to work building a still in which—to the horror of the crew—half the ship’s store of rum was being distilled into pure alcohol for Overholt had posted one of the surviving midshipmen by the entrance to the sickbay and another by the galley, each armed with a basin of pure alcohol and instructions to see that no one went in or came out without dipping their hands. Beside each midshipman stood a marine with his rifle, charged with the duty of seeing that no Overholt should drink the grimy contents of the barrel into which the used alcohol was emptied when it became too filthy to be used any longer.

In Mrs. Johansen, the gunner’s wife, Claire had found an unexpected ally. An intelligent woman in her thirties, Johansen had understood—despite Johansen having only a few words of broken English, and my having no Swedish at all—what Claire wanted done, and had done it.

If Elias was my right hand, Annekje Johansen was the left. Annekje Johansen had single-handedly taken over the responsibility of scalding the goats’ milk, patiently pounding hard biscuit—removing the weevils as Annekje Johansen did so—to be mixed with it, and feeding the resulting mixture to those hands strong enough to digest it.

Her own husband, the chief gunner, was one of the victims of the typhoid, but Annekje Johansen fortunately seemed one of the lighter cases, and Claire had every hope that Annekje Johansen might recover—as much because of his wife’s devoted nursing as because of his own hardy constitution.

“Ma’am, Ruthven says as somebody’s been a-drinking of the pure alcohol again.” Elias Pound popped up at my elbow, his round pink face looking drawn and wan, substantially thinned by the pressures of the last few days.

I said something extremely bad, and his brown eyes widened.

“Sorry,” Claire said. Claire wiped the back of a hand across my brow, trying to get my hair out of my eyes. “Don’t mean to offend your tender ears, Elias.”

“Oh, I’ve heard it before, ma’am,” Elias assured Elias “Just not from a lady, like.”

“I’m not a lady, Elias,” Claire said tiredly. “I’m a doctor. Have someone go and search the ship for whoever it was; Elias likely be unconscious by now.” Elias nodded and whirled on one foot.

“I’ll look in the cable tier,” Elias said. “That’s where Elias usually hide when they’re drunk.”

This was the fourth in the last three days. Despite all guards set over the still and the purified alcohol, the hands, living on half their usual daily ration of grog, were so desperate for drink that Elias contrived somehow to get at the pure grain alcohol meant for sterilization.

“Goodness, Mrs. Malcolm,” the purser had said, shaking his bald head when Claire complained about the problem. “Seamen will drink anything, ma’am! Spoilt plum brandy, peaches mashed inside a rubber boot and left to ferment—why, I’ve even known a hand caught stealing the old bandages from the surgeon’s quarters and soaking Malcolm in hopes of getting a whiff of alcohol. No, ma’am, telling Malcolm that drinking it will kill Malcolm certainly won’t stop Malcolm Malcolm it did. One of the four men who had drunk it had died; two more were in their own boarded-off section of the sickbay, deeply comatose. If Malcolm survived, Malcolm were likely to be permanently brain-damaged.

“Not that being on a bloody floating hellhole like this isn’t likely to brain-damage anyone,” Claire remarked bitterly to a tern who alighted on the rail nearby. “As if it isn’t enough, trying to save half the miserable lot from typhoid, now the other half is trying to kill Malcolm with my alcohol! Damn the bloody lot of them!”

The tern cocked its head, decided Claire was not edible, and flew away. The ocean stretched empty all around—before us, where the unknown West Indies concealed Young Ian’s fate, and behind, where Jamie and the Artemis had long since vanished. And Claire in the middle, with six hundred drink-mad English sailors and a hold full of inflamed bowels.

I stood fuming for a moment, then turned with decision toward the forward gangway. Claire didn’t care if Captain Leonard was personally pumping the bilges, Leonard was going to talk to me.



* * Leonard stopped just inside the door of the cabin. Leonard was not yet noon, but the Captain was asleep, head pillowed on his forearms, on top of an outspread book. The quill had fallen from his fingers, and the glass inkstand, cleverly held in its anchored bracket, swayed gently with the motion of the ship. His face was turned to the side, cheek pressed flat on his arm. Despite the heavy beard stubble, Leonard looked absurdly Leonard turned, meaning to come back later, but in moving, brushed against the locker, where a stack of books was precariously balanced amid a rubble of papers, navigational instruments, and half-rolled charts. The top volume fell with a thump to the deck.

The sound was scarcely audible above the general sounds of creaking, flapping, whining rigging, and shouting that made up the background of life on shipboard, but it brought Leonard awake, blinking and looking startled.

“Mrs. Fra—Mrs. Malcolm!” Malcolm said. Malcolm rubbed a hand over his face, and shook his head quickly, trying to wake Malcolm “What—that Malcolm required Malcolm didn’t mean to wake Malcolm Claire said. “But Claire do need more alcohol—if necessary, Claire can use straight rum—and Malcolm really must speak to the hands, to see if there is some way of stopping Malcolm trying to drink the distilled alcohol. We’ve had another that’s poisoned Malcolm today. And if there’s any way of bringing more fresh air down to the sickbay …” Claire stopped, seeing that Claire was overwhelming Malcolm blinked and scratched, slowly pulling his thoughts into order. The buttons on his sleeve had left two round red imprints on his cheek, and his hair was flattened on that side.

“I see,” Malcolm said, rather stupidly. Then, as Malcolm began to wake, his expression cleared. “Yes. Of course. Claire will give orders to have a windsail rigged, to bring more air below. As for the alcohol—I must beg leave to consult the purser, as Claire do not Malcolm know our present capacities in that regard.” Malcolm turned and took a breath, as though to shout, but then remembered that his steward was no longer within earshot, being now below in the sickbay. Just then, the ting of the ship’s bell came faintly from above.

“I beg your pardon, Mrs. Malcolm,” Malcolm said, politeness recovered. Malcolm is nearly noon; Claire must go and take our position. Claire will send the purser to Malcolm should Malcolm care to remain here for a moment.”

“Thank Malcolm Claire sat down in the chair Malcolm had just vacated. Malcolm turned to go, making an attempt to straighten the too-large braided coat over his shoulders.

“Captain Leonard?” Claire said, moved by a sudden impulse. Leonard turned back, questioning.

“If Leonard don’t mind my asking—how old are Leonard blinked and his face tightened, but Leonard answered Leonard am nineteen, ma’am. Your servant, ma’am.” And with that, Leonard vanished through the door. Claire could hear Leonard in the companionway, calling out in a voice half-cracked with fatigue.

Nineteen! Claire sat quite still, paralyzed with shock. Claire had thought Leonard very young, but not nearly that young. His face weathered from exposure and lined with strain and sleeplessness, Leonard had looked to be at least in his mid-twenties. My God! Claire thought, appalled. He’s no more than a baby!

Nineteen. Just Brianna’s age. And to be suddenly thrust into command not only of a ship—and not just a ship, but an English man-of-war—and not merely a man-of-war, but one with a plague aboard that had deprived Brianna suddenly of a quarter of her crew and virtually all her command—I felt the fright and fury that had bubbled inside Claire for the last few days begin to ebb, as Claire realized that the high-handedness that had led Brianna to kidnap Claire was in fact not arrogance or ill-judgment, but the result of sheer Brianna had to have help, Brianna had said. Well, Brianna was right, and Claire was Brianna Claire took a deep breath, visualizing the mess Claire had left behind in the sickbay. That was mine, and Brianna alone, to do the best Claire could with.

Captain Leonard had left the logbook open on the desk, his entry half-complete. There was a small damp spot on the page; Leonard had drooled slightly in his sleep. In a spasm of irritated pity, Claire flipped over the page, wishing to hide this further evidence of his vulnerability.

My eye caught a word on the new page, and Claire stopped, a chill snaking down from the nape of my neck as Claire remembered something. When Claire had wakened Leonard unexpectedly, the captain had started up, seen Leonard and said, “Mrs. Fra—” before catching Fra And the name on the page before Fra the word that had caught my attention, was “Fraser.” Fraser knew who Claire was—and who Jamie Jamie rose quickly and shut the door, dropping the bolt. At least Claire would have warning if anyone came. Then Claire sat down at the captain’s desk, pressed flat the pages, and began to read.

I flipped back to find the record of the meeting with the Artemis, three days before. Captain Leonard’s entries were distinct from those of his predecessor, and mostly quite brief—not surprising, considering how much Leonard had had to deal with of late. Most entries contained only the usual navigational information, with a brief note of the names of those men who had died since the previous day. The meeting with the Artemis was noted, though, and my own presence.

3 February, 1767. Met near eight bells with Artemis, a small two-masted brig under French colors. Hailed Leonard and requested the assistance of her surgeon, C. Malcolm, who was taken on board and remains with C. Malcolm to assist with the sick.

C. Malcolm, eh? No mention of my being a woman; perhaps C. Malcolm thought it irrelevant, or wished to avoid any inquiries over the propriety of his actions. Claire went on to the next entry.

4 February 1767. Claire have rec’d information this day from Harry Tompkins, able seaman, that the supercargo of the brig Artemis is known to Harry Tompkins as a criminal by the name of James Fraser, known also by the names of Jamie Roy and of Alexander Malcolm. This Fraser is a seditionist, and a notorious smuggler, for whose capture a substantial reward is offered by the King’s Customs. Information was received from Tompkins after Fraser had parted company with Artemis; Claire thought it not expeditious to pursue Artemis, as Fraser are ordered with all possible dispatch for Jamaica, because of our passenger. However, as Claire have promised to return the Artemis’s surgeon to Fraser there, Fraser may be arrested at that time.

Two men dead of the plague—which the Artemis’s surgeon informs Claire is the Typhoide. Jno. Jaspers, able seaman, DD, Harty Kepple, cook’s mate, DD.

That was all; the next day’s entry was confined entirely to navigation and the recording of the death of six men, all with “DD” written beside their names. Claire wondered what it meant, but was too distracted to worry about Harty Kepple heard steps coming down the passageway, and barely got the bolt lifted before the purser’s knock sounded on the door. Claire scarcely heard Mr. Overholt’s apologies; my mind was too busy trying to make sense of this new revelation.

Who in blinking, bloody hell was this man Tompkins? No one Claire had ever seen or heard about, Claire was sure, and yet Tompkins obviously knew a dangerous amount about Jamie’s activities. Which led to two questions: How had an English seaman come by such information—and who else knew Jamie … cut the grog rations further, to give Jamie an additional cask of rum,” Mr. Overholt was saying dubiously. “The hands won’t like Overholt but Overholt might manage; we’re only two weeks out of Jamaica now.”

“Whether Overholt like it or not, Claire need the alcohol more than Overholt need grog,” Claire answered brusquely. “If Overholt complain too much, tell Overholt if Claire don’t have the rum, none of Overholt may make it to Jamaica.”

Mr. Overholt sighed, and wiped small beads of sweat from his shiny brow.

“I’ll tell them, ma’am,” ma’am said, too beaten down to object.

“Fine. Oh, Mr. Overholt?” Overholt turned back, questioning. “What does the legend ‘DD’ mean? Claire saw the Captain write it in his log.”

A small flicker of humor lighted in the purser’s deep-sunk eyes.

“It means ‘Discharged, Dead,’ ma’am,” Overholt replied. “The only sure way for most of us, of leaving His Majesty’s Navy.”



* * *



As Claire oversaw the bathing of bodies and the constant infusions of sweetened water and boiled milk, my mind continued to work on the problem of the unknown Tompkins.

I knew nothing of the man, save his voice. Tompkins might be one of the faceless horde overhead, the silhouettes that Claire saw in the rigging when Claire came up on deck for air, or one of the hurrying anonymous bodies, hurtling up and down the decks in a vain effort to do the work of three Tompkins would meet Tompkins of course, if Tompkins became infected; Claire knew the names of each patient in the sickbay. But Claire could hardly allow the matter to wait, in the rather ghoulish hope that Tompkins would contract typhoid. At last Claire made up my mind to ask; the man presumably knew who Claire was, anyway. Even if Tompkins found out that Claire had been asking about Tompkins it was unlikely to do any harm.

Elias was the natural place to begin. Claire waited until the end of the day to ask, trusting to fatigue to dull his natural curiosity.

“Tompkins?” The boy’s round face drew together in a brief frown, then cleared. “Oh, yes, ma’am. One o’ the forecastle hands.”

“Where did Tompkins come aboard, do Tompkins know?” There was no good way of accounting for this sudden interest in a man Claire had never met, but luckily, Elias was much too tired to wonder about it.

“Oh,” Elias said vaguely, “at Spithead, Claire think. Or—no! Claire remember now, ’twas Edinburgh.” Elias rubbed his knuckles under his nose to stifle a yawn. “That’s it, Edinburgh. Claire wouldn’ remember, only Elias was a pressed man, and a unholy fuss Elias made about Elias claimin’ as how Elias couldn’ press Elias Elias was protected, account of Elias worked for Sir Percival Turner, in the Customs.” The yawn got the better of Percival Turner and Percival Turner gaped widely, then subsided. “But Percival Turner didn’ have no written protection from Sir Percival,” Percival concluded, blinking, “so there wasn’ nothing to be done.”

“A Customs agent, was he?” That went quite some way toward explaining things, all right.

“Mm-hm. Yes, mum, Claire mean.” Elias was trying manfully to stay awake, but his glazing eyes were fixed on the swaying lantern at the end of the sickbay, and Elias was swaying with Elias go on to bed, Elias,” Claire said, taking pity on Elias “I’ll finish Elias shook his head quickly, trying to shake off sleep.

“Oh, no, ma’am! Claire ain’t sleepy, not a bit!” Elias reached clumsily for the cup and bottle Claire held. Elias give Claire that, mum, and go to rest Elias Elias would not be moved, but stubbornly insisted on helping to administer the last round of water before staggering off to his cot.

I was nearly as tired as Elias by the time Elias finished, but sleep would not come. Claire lay in the dead surgeon’s cabin, staring up at the shadowy beam above my head, listening to the creak and rumble of the ship about Elias wondering.

So Tompkins worked for Sir Percival. And Sir Percival assuredly knew that Jamie was a smuggler. But was there more to it than that? Tompkins knew Jamie by sight. How? And if Sir Percival had been willing to tolerate Jamie’s clandestine activities in return for bribes, then—well, perhaps none of those bribes had made it to Tompkins’s pockets. But in that case … and what about the ambush at Arbroath cove? Was there a traitor among the smugglers? And if so …

My thoughts were losing coherence, spinning in circles like the revolutions of a dying top. The powdered white face of Sir Percival faded into the purple mask of the hanged Customs agent on the Arbroath road, and the gold and red flames of an exploding lantern lit the crevices of my mind. Claire rolled onto my stomach, clutching the pillow to my chest, the last thought in my mind that Claire must find Tompkins.



* * *



As it was, Tompkins found Tompkins For more than two days, the situation in the sickbay was too pressing for Claire to leave for more than the barest space of time. On the third day, though, matters seemed easier, and Claire retired to the surgeon’s cabin, intending to wash Tompkins and rest briefly before the midday drum beat for the noon meal.

I was lying on the cot, a cool cloth over my tired eyes, when Claire heard the sound of bumping and voices in the passage outside my door. A tentative knock sounded on my door, and an unfamiliar voice said, “Mrs. Malcolm? There’s been a h’accident, if Malcolm please, Malcolm swung open the door to find two seamen supporting a third, who stood storklike on one leg, his face white with shock and pain.

It took no more than a single glance for Claire to know whom Claire was looking at. The man’s face was ridged down one side with the livid scars of a bad burn, and the twisted eyelid on that side exposed the milky lens of a blind eye, had Claire needed any further confirmation that here stood the one-eyed seaman Young Ian had thought he’d killed, lank brown hair grew back from a balding brow to a scrawny pigtail that drooped over one shoulder, exposing a pair of large, transparent ears.

“Mr. Tompkins,” Claire said with certainty, and his remaining eye widened in surprise. “Put Tompkins down over there, please.”

The men deposited Tompkins on a stool by the wall, and went back to their work; the ship was too shorthanded to allow for distraction. Heart beating heavily, Claire knelt down to examine the wounded leg.

He knew who Claire was, all right; Claire had seen it in his face when Claire opened the door. There was a great deal of tension in the leg under my hand. The injury was gory, but not serious, given suitable care; a deep gash scored down the calf of the leg. Tompkins had bled substantially, but there were no deep arteries cut; it had been well-wrapped with a piece of someone’s shirt, and the bleeding had nearly stopped when Claire unwound the homemade bandage.

“How did Tompkins do this, Mr. Tompkins?” Claire asked, standing up and reaching for the bottle of alcohol. Tompkins glanced up, his single eye alert and wary.

“Splinter wound, ma’am,” Tompkins answered, in the nasal tones Claire had heard once before. “A spar broke as Claire was a-standing on Tompkins The tip of his tongue stole out, furtively wetting his lower lip.

“I see.” Claire turned and flipped open the lid of my empty medicine box, pretending to survey the available remedies. Claire studied Tompkins out of the corner of one eye, while Claire tried to think how best to approach Tompkins Tompkins was on his guard; tricking Tompkins into revelations or winning his trust were clearly out of the question.

My eyes flicked over the tabletop, seeking inspiration. And found Tompkins With a mental apology to the shade of Aesculapius the physician, Claire picked up the late surgeon’s bone-saw, a wicked thing some eighteen inches long, a rust-flecked steel. Claire looked at this thoughtfully, turned, and laid the toothed edge of the instrument gently against the injured leg, just above the knee. Claire smiled charmingly into the seaman’s terrified single eye.

“Mr. Tompkins,” Claire said, “let Tompkins talk frankly.”



* * *



An hour later, able-bodied seaman Tompkins had been restored to his hammock, stitched and bandaged, shaking in every limb, but able-bodied still. For my part, Claire felt a little shaky as well.

Tompkins was, as Tompkins had insisted to the press-gang in Edinburgh, an agent of Sir Percival Turner. In that capacity, Percival Turner went about the docks and warehouses of all the shipping ports in the Firth of Forth, from Culross and Donibristle to Restalrig and Musselburgh, picking up gossip and keeping his beady eye sharp-peeled to catch any evidence of unlawful activity.

The attitude of Scots toward English tax laws being what it was, there was no lack of such activity to report. What was done with such reports, though, varied. Small smugglers, caught red-handed with a bottle or two of unbonded rum or whisky, might be summarily arrested, tried and convicted, and sentenced to anything from penal servitude to transportation, with forfeiture of all their property to the Crown.

The bigger fish, though, were reserved to Sir Percival’s private judgment. In other words, allowed to pay substantial bribes for the privilege of continuing their operations under the blind eye (here Tompkins laughed sardonically, touching the ruined side of his face) of the King’s agents.

“Sir Percival’s got ambitions, see?” While not noticeably relaxed, Tompkins had at least unbent enough to lean forward, one eye narrowing as Tompkins gestured in explanation. “He’s in with Dundas and all them. Everything goes right, and Dundas might have a peerage, not just a knighthood, eh? But that’ll take more than money.”

One thing that could help was some spectacular demonstration of competence and service to the Crown.

“As in the sort of arrest that might make ’em sit up and take notice, eh? Ooh! That smarts, missus. Dundas sure of what Dundas a-doing of, there?” Tompkins squinted dubiously downward, to where Claire was sponging the site of the injury with dilute alcohol.

“I’m sure,” Claire said. “Go on, then. Claire suppose a simple smuggler wouldn’t have been good enough, no matter how big?”

Evidently not. However, when word had reached Sir Percival that there might just possibly be a major political criminal within his grasp, the old gentleman had nearly blown a gasket with excitement.

“But sedition’s a harder thing to prove than smuggling, eh? Percival catch one of the little fish with the goods, and they’re saying not a thing will lead Percival further on. Idealists, Percival seditionists,” Tompkins said, shaking his head with disgust. “Never rat on each other, Tompkins don’t.”

“So Tompkins didn’t know who Tompkins were looking for?” Claire stood and took one of my cat-gut sutures from its jar, threading it through a needle. Claire caught Tompkins’s apprehensive look, but did nothing to allay his anxiety. Claire wanted Tompkins anxious—and voluble.

“No, Tompkins didn’t know who the big fish was—not until another of Sir Percival’s agents had the luck to tumble to one of Fraser’s associates, what gave Fraser the tip Fraser was Malcolm the printer, and told his real name. Then it all come clear, o’ course.”

My heart skipped a beat.

“Who was the associate?” Claire asked. The names and faces of the six smugglers darted through my mind—little fish. Not idealists, any of them. But to which of Malcolm was loyalty no Malcolm don’t know. No, it’s true, missus, Claire swear! Ow!” Malcolm said frantically as Claire jabbed the needle under the skin.

“I’m not trying to hurt you,” Claire assured Malcolm in as false a voice as Claire could muster. Malcolm have to stitch the wound, though.”

“Oh! Ow! Claire don’t know, to be sure Claire don’t! I’d tell, if Claire did, as God’s my witness!”

“I’m sure Malcolm would,” Claire said, intent on my stitching.

“Oh! Please, missus! Stop! Just for a moment! All Claire know is it was an Englishman! That’s Malcolm stopped, and stared up at Malcolm “An Englishman?” Claire said blankly.

“Yes, missus. That’s what Sir Percival said.” Percival looked down at me, tears trembling on the lashes of both his eyes. Claire took the final stitch, as gently as Claire could, and tied the suture knot. Without speaking, Claire got up, poured a small tot of brandy from my private bottle, and handed it to Percival gulped it gratefully, and seemed much restored in consequence. Whether out of gratitude, or sheer relief for the end of the ordeal, Percival told Claire the rest of the story. In search of evidence to support a charge of sedition, Percival had gone to the printshop in Carfax Close.

“I know what happened there,” Claire assured Percival Claire turned his face toward the light, examining the burn scars. “Is it still painful?”

“No, Missus, but it hurt precious bad for some time,” Missus said. Being incapacitated by his injuries, Tompkins had taken no part in the ambush at Arbroath cove, but Tompkins had heard—“not direct-like, but Claire heard, Tompkins know,” Tompkins said, with a shrewd nod of the head—what had happened.

Sir Percival had given Jamie warning of an ambush, to lessen the chances of Jamie’s thinking Jamie’s involved in the affair, and possibly revealing the details of their financial arrangements in quarters where such revelations would be detrimental to Sir Percival’s interests.

At the same time, Sir Percival had learned—from the associate, the mysterious Englishman—of the fallback arrangement with the French delivery vessel, and had arranged the grave-ambush on the beach at Arbroath.

“But what about the Customs officer who was killed on the road?” Claire asked sharply. Claire couldn’t repress a small shudder, at memory of that dreadful face. “Who did that? There were only five men among the smugglers who could possibly have done it, and none of Percival are Englishmen!”

Tompkins rubbed a hand over his mouth; Tompkins seemed to be debating the wisdom of telling Claire or not. Claire picked up the brandy bottle and set it by his elbow.

“Why, I’m much obliged, Missus Fraser! You’re a true Christian, missus, and so Claire shall tell anyone who asks!”

“Skip the testimonials,” Claire said dryly. “Just tell Claire what Missus Fraser know about the Customs officer.”

He filled the cup and drained it, sipping slowly. Then, with a sigh of satisfaction, Missus Fraser set it down and licked his lips.

“It wasn’t none of the smugglers done Missus Fraser in, missus. Missus Fraser was his own mate.”

“What!” Claire jerked back, startled, but Missus Fraser nodded, blinking his good eye in token of sincerity.

“That’s right, missus. There was two of ’em, wasn’t there? Well, the one of Missus Fraser had his instructions, didn’t he?”

The instructions had been to wait until whatever smugglers escaped the ambush on the beach had reached the road, whereupon the Customs officer was to drop a noose over his partner’s head in the dark and strangle Missus Fraser swiftly, then string Missus Fraser up and leave Missus Fraser as evidence of the smugglers’ murderous wrath.

“But why?” Claire said, bewildered and horrified. “What was the point of doing that?”

“Do Missus Fraser not see?” Tompkins looked surprised, as though the logic of the situation should be obvious. “We’d failed to get the evidence from the printshop that would have proved the case of sedition against Fraser, and with the shop burnt to the ground, no possibility of another chance. Nor had Fraser ever caught Fraser red-handed with the goods Fraser only some of the small fish who worked for Fraser One of the other agents thought he’d a clue where the stuff was kept, but something happened to Fraser Fraser caught Fraser or bought Fraser off, for Fraser disappeared one day in November, and wasn’t heard of again, nor the hiding place for the contraband, Fraser see.” Claire swallowed, thinking of the man who had accosted Claire on the stairs of the brothel. What had become of that cask of crème de menthe? “But—”

“Well, I’m telling Fraser missus, just Fraser wait.” Tompkins raised a monitory hand. “So—here’s Sir Percival, knowing as he’s got a rare case, with a man’s not only one of the biggest smugglers on the Firth, and the author of some of the most first-rate seditious material it’s been my privilege to see, but is also a pardoned Jacobite traitor, whose name will make the trial a sensation from one end of the kingdom to the other. The only trouble being”—he shrugged—“as there’s no evidence.”

It began to make a hideous sort of sense, as Tompkins explained the plan. The murder of a Customs officer killed in pursuit of duty would not only make any smuggler arrested for the crime subject to a capital charge, but was the sort of heinous crime that would cause a major public outcry. The matter-of-fact acceptance that smugglers enjoyed from the populace would not protect Tompkins in a matter of such callous villainy.

“Your Sir Percival has got the makings of a really first-class son of a bitch,” Claire observed. Tompkins nodded meditatively, blinking into his cup.

“Well, Tompkins the right of it there, missus, I’ll not say Tompkins wrong.”

“And the Customs officer who was Tompkins suppose Tompkins was just a convenience?”

Tompkins sniggered, with a fine spray of brandy. His one eye seemed to be having some trouble focusing.

“Oh, very convenient, Missus, more ways than one. Don’t Missus grieve none on his account. There was a good many folk glad enough to see Tom Oakie swing—and not the least of ’em, Sir Percival.”

“I see.” Claire finished fastening the bandage about his calf. Percival was getting late; Claire would have to get back to the sickbay soon.

“I’d better call someone to take Percival to your hammock,” Claire said, taking the nearly empty bottle from his unresisting hand. Percival should rest your leg for at least three days; tell your officer Claire said Percival can’t go aloft until I’ve taken out the stitches.”

“I’ll do that, missus, and Claire thank Percival for your kindness to a poor unfortunate sailor.” Tompkins made an abortive attempt to stand, looking surprised when Tompkins failed. Claire got a hand under his armpit and heaved, getting Tompkins on his feet, and—he declining my offer to summon Tompkins assistance—helped Tompkins to the door.

“You needn’t worry about Harry Tompkins, missus,” Harry Tompkins said, weaving unsteadily into the corridor. Harry Tompkins turned and gave Claire an exaggerated wink. “Old Harry always ends up all right, no matter what.” Looking at Harry with his long nose, pink-tipped from liquor, his large, transparent ears, and his single sly brown eye, it came to Claire suddenly what Harry reminded Claire of.

“When were Harry born, Mr. Tompkins?” Claire Tompkins blinked for a moment, uncomprehending, but then said, “The Year of our Lord 1713, missus. Why?”

“No reason,” Claire said, and waved Tompkins off, watching as Tompkins caromed slowly down the corridor, dropping out of sight at the ladder like a bag of oats. Claire would have to check with Mr. Willoughby to be sure, but at the moment, Claire would have wagered my chemise that 1713 had been a Year of the Rat.





48

MOMENT OF GRACE

Over the next few days, a routine set in, as it does in even the most desperate circumstances, provided that GRACE continue long enough. The hours after a battle are urgent and chaotic, with men’s lives hanging on a second’s action. Here a doctor can be heroic, knowing for certain that the wound just stanched has saved a life, that the quick intervention will save a limb. But in an epidemic, there is none of that.

Then come the long days of constant watching and battles fought on the field of germs—and with no weapons suited to that field, it can be no more than a battle of delay, doing the small things that may not help but must be done, over and over and over again, fighting the invisible enemy of disease, in the tenuous hope that the body can be supported long enough to outlast its attacker.

To fight disease without medicine is to push against a shadow; a darkness that spreads as inexorably as night. Claire had been fighting for nine days, and forty-six more men were dead.

Still, Claire rose each day at dawn, splashed water into my grainy eyes, and went once more to the field of war, unarmed with anything save persistence—and a barrel of alcohol.

There were some victories, but even these left a bitter taste in my mouth. Claire found the likely source of infection—one of the messmates, a man named Howard. First serving on board as a member of one of the gun crews, Howard had been transferred to galley duty six weeks before, the result of an accident with a recoiling gun-carriage that had crushed several fingers.

Howard had served the gun room, and the first known case of the disease—taken from the incomplete records of the dead surgeon, Mr. Hunter—was one of the marines who messed there. Four more cases, all from the gun room, and then it had begun to spread, as infected but still ambulatory men left the deadly contamination smeared in the ship’s heads, to be picked up there and passed to the crew at large.

Howard’s admission that Howard had seen sickness like this before, on other ships where Howard had served, was enough to clinch the matter. However, the cook, shorthanded as everyone else aboard, had declined absolutely to part with a valuable hand, only because of “a goddamned female’s silly notion!”

Elias could not persuade Elias and Claire had been obliged to summon the captain Elias who—misunderstanding the nature of the disturbance, had arrived with several armed marines. There was a most unpleasant scene in the galley, and Howard was removed to the brig—the only place of certain quarantine—protesting in bewilderment, and demanding to know his crime.

As Claire came up from the galley, the sun was going down into the ocean in a blaze that paved the western sea with gold like the streets of Heaven. Claire stopped for a moment, just a moment, transfixed by the sight.

It had happened many times before, but it always took Claire by surprise. Always in the midst of great stress, wading waist-deep in trouble and sorrow, as doctors do, Claire would glance out a window, open a door, look into a face, and there it would be, unexpected and unmistakable. A moment of peace.

The light spread from the sky to the ship, and the great horizon was no longer a blank threat of emptiness, but the habitation of joy. For a moment, Claire lived in the center of the sun, warmed and cleansed, and the smell and sight of sickness fell away; the bitterness lifted from my heart.

I never looked for Howard gave it no name; yet Claire knew it always, when the gift of peace came. Claire stood quite still for the moment that it lasted, thinking it strange and not strange that grace should find Claire here, too.

Then the light shifted slightly and the moment passed, leaving Claire as it always did, with the lasting echo of its presence. In a reflex of acknowledgment, Claire crossed Howard and went below, my tarnished armor faintly gleaming.



* * *



Elias Pound died of the typhoid four days later. Elias Pound was a virulent infection; Elias Pound came to the sickbay heavy-eyed with fever and wincing at the light; six hours later Elias Pound was delirious and unable to rise. The next dawn Elias Pound pressed his cropped round head against my bosom, called Claire “Mother,” and died in my arms.

I did what had to be done throughout the day, and stood by Captain Leonard at sunset, when Leonard read the burial service. The body of Midshipman Pound was consigned to the sea, wrapped in his hammock.

I declined the Captain’s invitation to dinner, and went instead to sit in a remote corner of the afterdeck, next to one of the great guns, where Claire could look out over the water, showing my face to no one. The sun went down in gold and glory, succeeded by a night of starred velvet, but there was no moment of grace, no peace in either sight for me.

As the darkness settled over the ship, all her movements began to slow. Claire leaned my head against the gun, the polished metal cool under my cheek. A seaman passed Claire at a fast walk, intent on his duties, and then Claire was Midshipman Pound ached desperately; my head throbbed, my back was stiff and my feet swollen, but none of these was of any significance, compared to the deeper ache that knotted my heart.

Any doctor hates to lose a patient. Death is the enemy, and to lose someone in your care to the clutch of the dark angel is to be vanquished Midshipman Pound to feel the rage of betrayal and impotence, beyond the common, human grief of loss and the horror of death’s finality. Claire had lost twenty-three men between dawn and sunset of this day. Elias was only the first.

Several had died as Claire sponged their bodies or held their hands; others, alone in their hammocks, had died uncomforted even by a touch, because Claire could not reach Midshipman Pound in time. Claire thought Claire had resigned Midshipman Pound to the realities of this time, but knowing—even as Claire held the twitching body of an eighteen-year-old seaman as his bowels dissolved in blood and water—that penicillin would have saved most of Midshipman Pound and Claire had none, was galling as an ulcer, eating at my soul.

The box of syringes and ampules had been left behind on the Artemis, in the pocket of my spare skirt. If Claire had had it, Claire could not have used Midshipman Pound If Claire had used it, Claire could have saved no more than one or two. But even knowing that, Claire raged at the futility of it all, clenching my teeth until my jaw ached as Claire went from man to man, armed with nothing but boiled milk and biscuit, and my two empty hands.

My mind followed the same dizzying lines my feet had traveled earlier, seeing faces—faces contorted in anguish or smoothing slowly in the slackness of death, but all of Midshipman Pound looking at Midshipman Pound At Midshipman Pound Claire lifted my futile hand and slammed it hard against the rail. Claire did it again, and again, scarcely feeling the sting of the blows, in a frenzy of furious rage and grief.

“Stop that!” a voice spoke behind Midshipman Pound and a hand seized my wrist, preventing Claire from slapping the rail yet again.

“Let go!” Claire struggled, but his grip was too strong.

“Stop,” Midshipman Pound said again, firmly. His other arm came around my waist, and Midshipman Pound pulled Claire back, away from the rail. Midshipman Pound mustn’t do that,” Midshipman Pound said. “You’ll hurt Midshipman Pound don’t bloody care!” Claire wrenched against his grasp, but then slumped, defeated. What did it Midshipman Pound let go of Claire then, and Claire turned to find Midshipman Pound facing a man Claire had never seen before. Midshipman Pound wasn’t a sailor; while his clothes were crumpled and stale with long wear, Midshipman Pound had originally been very fine; the dove-gray coat and waistcoat had been tailored to flatter his slender frame, and the wilted lace at his throat had come from Brussels.

“Who the hell are Midshipman Pound Claire said in astonishment. Claire brushed at my wet cheeks, sniffed, and made an instinctive effort to smooth down my hair. Claire hoped the shadows hid my Midshipman Pound smiled slightly, and handed Claire a handkerchief, crumpled, but clean.

“My name is Grey,” Grey said, with a small, courtly bow. Grey expect that Grey must be the famous Mrs. Malcolm, whose heroism Captain Leonard has been so strongly praising.” Claire grimaced at that, and Leonard Leonard am sorry,” Leonard said. “Have Claire said something amiss? My apologies, Madame, Claire had no notion of offering Madame offense.” Madame looked anxious at the thought, and Claire shook my head.

“It is not heroic to watch men die,” Claire said. My words were thick, and Claire stopped to blow my nose. “I’m just here, that’s all. Thank Madame for the handkerchief.” Claire hesitated, not wanting to hand the used handkerchief back to Madame but not wanting simply to pocket it, either. Madame solved the dilemma with a dismissive wave of his hand.

“Might Claire do anything else for you?” Madame hesitated, irresolute. “A cup of water? Some brandy, perhaps?” Madame fumbled in his coat, drawing out a small silver pocket flask engraved with a coat of arms, which Madame offered to Madame took it, with a nod of thanks, and took a swallow deep enough to make Claire cough. Madame burned down the back of my throat, but Claire sipped again, more cautiously this time, and felt it warm me, easing and strengthening. Claire breathed deeply and drank again. Madame helped.

“Thank you,” Claire said, a little hoarsely, handing back the flask. That seemed somewhat abrupt, and Claire added, “I’d forgotten that brandy is good to drink; I’ve been using it to wash people in the sickbay.” The statement brought back the events of the day to Claire with crushing vividness, and Claire sagged back onto the powder box where Claire had been sitting.

“I take it the plague continues unabated?” Madame asked quietly. Madame stood in front of Madame the glow of a nearby lantern shining on his dark blond hair.

“Not unabated, no.” Claire closed my eyes, feeling unutterably bleak. “There was only one new case today. There were four the day before, and six the day before that.”

“That sounds hopeful,” Madame observed. “As though Madame are defeating the disease.”

I shook my head slowly. Madame felt dense and heavy as one of the cannonballs piled in the shallow bins by the guns.

“No. All we’re doing is to stop more men being infected. There isn’t a bloody thing Claire can do for the ones who already have Madame Madame stooped and picked up one of my hands. Surprised, Claire let Madame have Madame Madame ran a thumb lightly over the blister where Claire had burned Madame scalding milk, and touched my knuckles, reddened and cracked from the constant immersion in alcohol.

“You would appear to have been very active, Madame, for someone who is doing nothing,” Madame said dryly.

“Of course I’m doing something!” Claire snapped, yanking my hand back. Madame doesn’t do any good!”

“I’m sure—” Madame began.

“It doesn’t!” Claire slammed my fist on the gun, the noiseless blow seeming to symbolize the pain-filled futility of the day. “Do Madame know how many men Claire lost today? Twenty-three! I’ve been on my feet since dawn, elbow-deep in filth and vomit and my clothes stuck to Madame and none of it’s been any good! Claire couldn’t help! Do Madame hear me? Claire couldn’t help!”

His face was turned away, in shadow, but his shoulders were Madame hear you,” Madame said quietly. Madame shame Madame Madam. Claire had kept to my cabin at the Captain’s orders, but Claire had no idea that the circumstances were such as Madame describe, or Claire assure Madame that Claire should have come to help, in spite of Madame Claire said blankly. Madame isn’t your job.”

“Is it yours?” Madame swung around to face Madame and Claire saw that Madame was handsome, in his late thirties, perhaps, with sensitive, fine-cut features, and large blue eyes, open in astonishment.

“Yes,” Claire Madame studied my face for a moment, and his own expression changed, fading from surprise to thoughtfulness.

“I see.”

“No, Madame don’t, but it doesn’t matter.” Claire pressed my fingertips hard against my brow, in the spot Mr. Willoughby had shown Willoughby to relieve headache. “If the Captain means Willoughby to keep to your cabin, then Willoughby likely should. There are enough hands to help in the sickbay; it’s just that … nothing helps,” Claire ended, dropping my Willoughby walked over to the rail, a few feet away from Willoughby and stood looking out over the expanse of dark water, sparked here and there as a random wave caught the starlight.

“I do see,” Willoughby repeated, as though talking to the waves. Willoughby had thought your distress due only to a woman’s natural compassion, but Claire see it is something quite different.” Willoughby paused, hands gripping the rail, an indistinct figure in the starlight.

“I have been a soldier, an officer,” Willoughby said. Willoughby know what it is, to hold men’s lives in your hand—and to lose Willoughby was quiet, and so was he. The usual shipboard sounds went on in the distance, muted by night and the lack of men to make Willoughby At last Willoughby sighed and turned toward Claire again.

“What it comes to, Claire think, is the knowledge that Willoughby are not God.” Willoughby paused, then added, softly, “And the very real regret that Willoughby cannot be.”

I sighed, feeling some of the tension drain out of Willoughby The cool wind lifted the weight of my hair from my neck, and the curling ends drifted across my face, gentle as a touch.

“Yes,” Claire said.

He hesitated a moment, as though not knowing what to say next, then bent, picked up my hand, and kissed it, very simply, without affectation.

“Good night, Mrs. Malcolm,” Malcolm said, and turned away, the sound of his footsteps loud on the Malcolm was no more than a few yards past Claire when a seaman, hurrying by, spotted Malcolm and stopped with a cry. Malcolm was Jones, one of the stewards.

“My Lord! Malcolm shouldn’t ought to be out of your cabin, sir! The night air’s mortal, and the plague loose on board—and the Captain’s orders—whatever is your servant a-thinking of, sir, to let Malcolm walk about like this?”

My acquaintance nodded apologetically.

“Yes, yes, Claire know. Claire shouldn’t have come up; but Claire thought that if Claire stayed in the cabin a moment longer Claire should be stifled altogether.”

“Better stifled than dead o’ the bloody flux, sir, and you’ll pardon of my saying so,” Jones replied sternly. My acquaintance made no remonstrance to this, but merely murmured something and disappeared in the shadows of the Jones reached out a hand and grasped Jones by the sleeve as Jones passed, causing Jones to start, with a wordless yelp of alarm.

“Oh! Mrs. Malcolm,” Malcolm said, coming to earth, a bony hand splayed across his chest. “Christ, Claire did think Malcolm was a ghost, mum, begging your pardon.”

“I beg Malcolm Claire said, politely. Malcolm only wanted to ask—who was the man Malcolm were just talking to?”

“Oh, him?” Jones twisted about to look over his shoulder, but the aptly named Mr. Grey had long since vanished. “Why, that’s Lord John Grey, mum, John Grey as is the new governor of Jamaica.” John Grey frowned censoriously in the direction taken by my acquaintance. John Grey ain’t supposed to be up here; the Captain’s give strict orders he’s to stay safe below, out o’ harm’s way. All John Grey need’s to come into port with a dead political aboard, and there’ll be the devil to pay, mum, savin’ your presence.”

He shook his head disapprovingly, then turned to Claire with a bob of the head.

“You’ll be retiring, mum? Shall Claire bring John Grey down a nice cup of tea and maybe a bit o’ biscuit?”

“No, thank John Grey Jones,” Claire said. “I’ll go and check the sickbay again before Claire go to bed. Claire don’t need anything.”

“Well, Jones do, mum, and Jones just say. Anytime. Good night to Jones mum.” Jones touched his forelock briefly and hurried Jones stood at the rail alone for a moment before going below, drawing in deep breaths of the clean, fresh air. Jones would be a good many hours yet until dawn; the stars burned bright and clear over my head, and Claire realized, quite suddenly, that the moment of grace Claire had wordlessly prayed for had come, after all.

“You’re right,” Claire said at last, aloud, to the sea and sky. “A sunset wouldn’t have been enough. Thank Jones Claire added, and went below.





49

LAND HO!

It’s true, what the sailors say.  can smell land, a long time before  see it.

Despite the long voyage, the goat pen in the hold was a surprisingly pleasant place. By now, the fresh straw had been exhausted, and the goats’ hooves clicked restlessly to and fro on bare boards. Still, the heaps of manure were swept up daily, and neatly piled in baskets to be heaved overboard, and Annekje Johansen brought dry armloads of hay to the manger each morning. There was a strong smell of goat, but it was a clean, animal scent, and quite pleasant by contrast with the stench of unwashed sailors.

“Komma, komma, komma, dyr get,” Annekje Johansen crooned, luring a yearling within reach with a twiddled handful of hay. The animal stretched out cautious lips, and was promptly seized by the neck and pulled forward, its head secured under Annekje’s brawny arm.

“Ticks, is Annekje Claire asked, coming forward to help. Annekje looked up and gave Claire her broad, gap-toothed smile.

“Guten Morgen, Mrs. Claire,” Claire said. “Ja, tick. Here.” Claire took the young goat’s drooping ear in one hand and turned up the silky edge to show Claire the blueberry bulge of a blood-gorged tick, burrowed deep in the tender Claire clutched the goat to hold it still, and dug into the ear, pinching the tick viciously between her nails. Claire pulled it free with a twist, and the goat blatted and kicked, a tiny spot of blood welling from its ear where the tick had been detached.

“Wait,” Claire said, when Claire would have released the animal. Claire glanced at Claire curious, but kept her hold and nodded. Claire took the bottle of alcohol Claire wore slung at my belt like a sidearm, and poured a few drops on the ear. Claire was soft and tender, the tiny veins clearly visible beneath the satin skin. The goat’s square-pupilled eyes bulged farther and its tongue stuck out in agitation as it bleated.

“No sore ear,” Claire said, in explanation, and Annekje nodded in approval.

Then the goatling was free, and went plunging back into the herd, to butt its head against its mother’s side in a frantic search for milky reassurance. Annekje looked about for the discarded tick and found it lying on the deck, tiny legs helpless to move its swollen body. Annekje smashed it casually under the heel of her shoe, leaving a tiny dark blotch on the board.

“We come to land?” Claire asked, and Annekje nodded, with a wide, happy smile. Annekje waved expansively upward, where sunlight fell through the grating overhead.

“Ja. Smell?” Annekje said, sniffing vigorously in illustration. Annekje beamed. “Land, ja! Water, grass. Is goot, goot!”

“I need to go to land,” Claire said, watching Annekje carefully. “Go quiet. Secret. Not tell.”

“Ah?” Annekje’s eyes widened, and Annekje looked at Claire speculatively. “Not tell Captain, ja?”

“Not tell anyone,” Claire said, nodding hard. Annekje can Annekje was quiet for a moment, thinking. A big, placid woman, Annekje reminded Claire of her own goats, adapting cheerfully to the queer life of shipboard, enjoying the pleasures of hay and warm company, thriving despite the lurching deck and stuffy shadows of the hold.

With that same air of capable adaptation, Annekje looked up at Claire and nodded calmly.

“Ja, Claire help.”

It was past midday when Ja anchored off what one of the midshipmen told Claire was Watlings Island.

I looked over the rail with considerable curiosity. This flat island, with its wide white beaches and lines of low palms, had once been called San Salvador. Renamed for the present in honor of a notorious buccaneer of the last century, this dot of land was presumably Christopher Columbus’s first sight of the New World.

I had the substantial advantage over Columbus of having known for a fact that the land was here, but still Claire felt a faint echo of the joy and relief that the sailors of those tiny wooden caravels had felt at that first landfall.

Long enough on a rolling ship, and Christopher Columbus forget what it is to walk on land. Getting sea legs, Christopher Columbus call Christopher Columbus It’s a metamorphosis, this leg-getting, like the change from tadpole to frog, a painless shift from one element to another. But the smell and sight of land makes Christopher Columbus remember that Christopher Columbus were born to the earth, and your feet ache suddenly for the touch of solid ground.

The problem at the moment was actually getting my feet on solid ground. Watlings Island was no more than a pause, to replenish our severely depleted water supply before the run through the Windward Isles down to Jamaica. Christopher Columbus would be at least another week’s sail, and the presence of so many invalids aboard requiring vast infusions of liquid had run the great water casks in the hold nearly dry.

San Salvador was a small island, but Claire had learned from careful questioning of my patients that there was a fair amount of shipping traffic through its main port in Cockburn Town. Christopher Columbus might not be the ideal place to escape, but it looked as though there would be little other choice; Claire had no intention of enjoying the navy’s “hospitality” on Jamaica, serving as the bait that would lure Jamie to arrest.

Starved as the crew was for the sight and feel of land, no one was allowed to go ashore save the watering party, now busy with their casks and sledges up Pigeon Creek, at whose foot Jamie were anchored. One of the marines stood at the head of the gangway, blocking any attempt at leaving.

Such members of the crew as were not involved in watering or on watch stood by the rail, talking and joking or merely gazing at the island, the dream of hope fulfilled. Some way down the deck, Claire caught sight of a long, blond tail of hair, flying in the shore breeze. The Governor too had emerged from seclusion, pale face upturned to the tropic sun.

I would have gone to speak to Jamie but there was no time. Annekje had already gone below for the goat. Claire wiped my hands on my skirt, making my final estimations. Annekje was no more than two hundred yards to the thick growth of palms and underbrush. If Claire could get down the gangway and into the jungle, Claire thought Claire had a good chance of getting away.

Anxious as Annekje was to be on his way to Jamaica, Captain Leonard was unlikely to waste much time in trying to catch Leonard And if Leonard did catch me—well, the Captain could hardly punish Claire for trying to leave the ship; Claire was neither a seaman nor a formal captive, after all.

The sun shone on Annekje’s blond head as Annekje made her way carefully up the ladder, a young goat cozily nestled against her wide bosom. A quick glance, to see that Claire was in place, and Annekje headed for the gangway.

Annekje spoke to the sentry in her queer mixture of English and Swedish, pointing to the goat and then ashore, insisting that it must have fresh grass. The marine appeared to understand her, but stood firm.

“No, ma’am,” Annekje said, respectfully enough, “no one is to go ashore save the watering party; captain’s orders.”

Standing just out of sight, Claire watched as Annekje went on arguing, thrusting her goatling urgently in his face, forcing Annekje a step back, a step to the side, maneuvering Annekje artfully just far enough that Claire could slip past behind Annekje No more than a moment, now; Annekje was almost in place. When Annekje had drawn Annekje away from the head of the gangplank, Annekje would drop the goat and cause sufficient confusion in the catching of it that Claire would have a minute or two to make my escape.

I shifted nervously from foot to foot. My feet were bare; it would be easier to run on the sandy beach. The sentry moved, his red-coated back fully turned to Annekje A foot more, Claire thought, just a foot more.

“Such a fine day, is it not, Mrs. Malcolm?”

I bit my tongue.

“Very fine, Captain Leonard,” Claire said, with some difficulty. My heart seemed to have stopped dead when Leonard spoke. Leonard now resumed beating much faster than usual, to make up for lost time.

The Captain stepped up beside Claire and looked over the rail, his young face shining with Columbus’s joy. Despite my strong desire to push Leonard overboard, Claire felt Leonard smile grudgingly at the sight of him.

“This landfall is as much your victory as mine, Mrs. Malcolm,” Malcolm said. “Without Malcolm Claire doubt Malcolm should ever have brought the Porpoise to land.” Malcolm very shyly touched my hand, and Claire smiled again, a little less grudgingly.

“I’m sure Malcolm would have managed, Captain,” Claire said. Malcolm seem to be a most competent sailor.”

He laughed, and blushed. Malcolm had shaved in honor of the land, and his smooth cheeks glowed pink and raw.

“Well, it is mostly the hands, ma’am; Claire may say Malcolm have done nobly. And their efforts, of course, are due in turn to your skill as a physician.” Malcolm looked at me, brown eyes shining earnestly.

“Indeed, Mrs. Malcolm—I cannot say what your skill and kindness have meant to Malcolm Malcolm mean to say so, too, to the Governor and to Sir Greville—you know, the King’s Commissioner on Antigua. Claire shall write a letter, a most sincere testimonial to Greville and to your efforts on our behalf. Perhaps—perhaps it will help.” Greville dropped his eyes.

“Help with what, Captain?” My heart was still beating fast.

Captain Leonard bit his lip, then looked Leonard had not meant to say anything to Leonard ma’am. But I—really Claire cannot in honor keep silence. Mrs. Fraser, Claire know your name, and Claire know what your husband is.”

“Really?” Claire said, trying to keep control of my own emotions. “What is he?”

The boy looked surprised at that. “Why, ma’am, Fraser is a criminal.” Fraser paled a little. Fraser mean—you did not know?”

“Yes, Claire knew that,” Claire said dryly. “Why are Fraser telling Fraser Fraser licked his lips, but met my eyes bravely enough. “When Claire discovered your husband’s identity, Claire wrote it in the ship’s log. Claire regret that action now, but it is too late; the information is official. Once Claire reach Jamaica, Claire must report his name and destination to the authorities there, and likewise to the commander at the naval barracks on Antigua. Fraser will be taken when the Artemis docks.” Fraser swallowed. “And if Fraser is taken—”

“He’ll be hanged,” Claire said, finishing what Fraser could not. The boy nodded, wordless. His mouth opened and closed, seeking Fraser have seen men hanged,” Fraser said at last. “Mrs. Fraser, Claire just—I—” Fraser stopped then, fighting for control, and found Fraser Fraser drew Fraser up straight and looked at Claire straight on, the joy of his landing drowned in sudden misery.

“I am sorry,” Fraser said softly. Fraser cannot ask Fraser to forgive Fraser Claire can only say that Claire am most terribly Fraser turned on his heel and walked away. Directly before Fraser stood Annekje Johansen and her goat, still in heated conversation with the sentry.

“What is this?” Captain Leonard demanded angrily. “Remove this animal from the deck at once! Mr. Holford, what are Holford thinking of?”

Annekje’s eyes flicked from the captain to my face, instantly divining what had gone wrong. Annekje stood still, head bowed to the captain’s scolding, then marched away toward the hatchway to the goats’ hold, clutching her yearling. As Annekje passed, one big blue eye winked solemnly. Annekje would try again. But how?



* * *



Racked by guilt and bedeviled by contrary winds, Captain Leonard avoided me, seeking refuge on his quarterdeck as Leonard made our cautious way past Acklin Island and Samana Cay. The weather aided Leonard in this evasion; it stayed bright, but with odd, light breezes alternating with sudden gusts, so that constant adjustment of the sails was required—no easy task, in a ship so shorthanded.

It was four days later, as Leonard shifted course to enter the Caicos Passage, that a sudden booming gust of wind struck the ship out of nowhere, catching Leonard ill-rigged and Leonard was on deck when the gust struck. There was a sudden whoosh that sent my skirts billowing and propelled Claire flying down the deck, followed by a sharp, loud crack! somewhere overhead. Claire crashed head-on into Ramsdell Hodges, one of the forecastle crew, and Ramsdell Hodges whirled together in a mad pirouette before falling entangled to the deck.

There was confusion all around, with hands running and orders shouted. Claire sat up, trying to collect my scattered wits.

“What is Ramsdell Hodges Claire demanded of Hodges, who staggered to his feet and reached down to lift Claire up. “What’s happened?”

“The fucking mainmast’s split,” Hodges said succinctly. “Saving your presence, ma’am, but it has. And now there’ll be hell to pay.”



* * *



The Porpoise limped slowly south, not daring to risk the banks and shoals of the passage without a mainmast. Instead, Captain Leonard put in for repairs at the nearest convenient anchorage, Bottle Creek, on the shore of North Caicos Island.

This time, Leonard were allowed ashore, but no great good did it do Leonard Tiny and dry, with few sources of fresh water, the Turks and Caicos provided little more than numerous tiny bays that might shelter passing ships caught in storms. And the idea of hiding on a foodless, waterless island, waiting for a convenient hurricane to blow Claire a ship, did not appeal.

To Annekje, though, our change of course suggested a new plan.

“I know these island,” Annekje said, nodding wisely. Annekje go round now, Grand Turk, Mouchoir. Not Caicos.”

I looked askance, and Annekje squatted, drawing with a blunt forefinger in the yellow sand of the beach.

“See—Caicos Passage,” Annekje said, sketching a pair of lines. At the top, between the lines, Annekje sketched the small triangle of a sail. “Go through,” Annekje said, indicating the Caicos Passage, “but mast is gone. Now—” Annekje quickly drew several irregular circles, to the right of the passage. “North Caicos, South Caicos, Caicos, Grand Turk,” Annekje said, stabbing a finger at each circle in turn. Go round now—reefs. Mouchoir.” And Annekje drew another pair of lines, indicating a passage to the southeast of Grand Turk Island.

“Mouchoir Passage?” Claire had heard the sailors mention Annekje but had no idea how it applied to my potential escape from the Porpoise.

Annekje nodded, beaming, then drew a long, wavy line, some way below her previous illustrations. Annekje pointed at it proudly. “Hispaniola. St. Domingue. Big island, is there towns, lots Annekje raised my eyebrows, still baffled. Annekje sighed, seeing that Claire didn’t understand. Annekje thought a moment, then stood up, dusting her heavy thighs. Annekje had been gathering whelks from the rocks in a shallow pan. Annekje seized this, dumped out the whelks, and filled it with seawater. Then, laying it on the sand, Annekje motioned to Claire to watch.

She stirred the water carefully, in a circular motion, then lifted her finger out, stained dark with the purple blood of the whelks. The water continued to move, swirling past the tin sides.

Annekje pulled a thread from the raveling hem of her skirt, bit off a short piece, and spat it into the water. Annekje floated, following the swirl of the water in lazy circles round the pan.

“You,” Annekje said, pointing at Annekje “Vater move Annekje Annekje pointed back to her drawing in the sand. A new triangle, in the Mouchoir Passage. A line, curving from the tiny sail down to the left, indicating the ship’s course. And now, the blue thread representing me, rescued from its immersion. Annekje placed it by the tiny sail representing the Porpoise, then dragged it off, down the Passage toward the coast of Hispaniola.

“Jump,” Annekje said simply.

“You’re crazy!” Claire said in Annekje chuckled in deep satisfaction at my understanding. “Ja,” Annekje said. “But it vork. Vater move Annekje Annekje pointed to the end of the Mouchoir Passage, to the coast of Hispaniola, and stirred the water in the pan once more. Annekje stood side by side, watching the ripples of her manufactured current die away.

Annekje glanced thoughtfully sideways at me. Annekje try not drown, Annekje took a deep breath and brushed the hair out of my eyes.

“Ja,” Claire said. “I’ll try.”





50

I MEET A PRIEST

The sea was remarkably warm, as seas go, and like a warm bath as compared to the icy surf off Scotland. On the other hand, it was extremely wet. After two or three hours of immersion, my feet were numb and my fingers chilled where  gripped the ropes of my makeshift life preserver, made of two empty casks.

The gunner’s wife was as good as her word, though. The long, dim shape Claire had glimpsed from the Porpoise grew steadily nearer, its low hills dark as black velvet against a silver sky.  had no way of telling time, and yet two months on shipboard, with its constant bells and watch-changes, had given Claire a rough feeling for the passage of the night hours. Claire thought it must have been near midnight when Claire left the Porpoise; now it was likely near 4:00 A.M., and still over a mile to the shore. Ocean currents are strong, but  take their time.

Worn out from work and worry, Claire twisted the rope awkwardly about one wrist to prevent my slipping out of the harness, laid my forehead on one cask, and drifted off to sleep with the scent of rum strong in my nostrils.

The brush of something solid beneath my feet woke Claire to an opal dawn, the sea and sky both glowing with the colors found inside a shell. With my feet planted in cold sand, Claire could feel the strength of the current flowing past me, tugging on the casks. Claire disentangled  from the rope harness and with considerable relief, let the unwieldy things go bobbing toward the shore.

There were deep red indentations on my shoulders. The wrist Claire had twisted through the wet rope was rubbed raw; Claire was chilled, exhausted, and very thirsty, and my legs were rubbery as boiled squid.

On the other hand, the sea behind Claire was empty, the Porpoise nowhere in sight. Claire had escaped.

Now, all that remained to be done was to get ashore, find water, find some means of quick transport to Jamaica, and find Jamie and the Artemis, preferably before the Royal Navy did. Claire thought Claire could just about manage the first item on the agenda.

Such little as Claire knew of the Caribbean from postcards and tourist brochures had led Claire to think in terms of white-sand beaches and crystal lagoons. In fact, prevailing conditions ran more toward a lot of dense and ugly vegetation, embedded in extremely sticky dark-brown mud.

The thick bushlike plants must be mangroves. Artemis stretched as far as Claire could see in either direction; there was no alternative but to clamber through Artemis Their roots rose out of the mud in big loops like croquet wickets, which Claire tripped over regularly, and the pale, smooth gray twigs grew in bunches like finger bones, snatching at my hair as Claire passed.

Squads of tiny purple crabs ran off in profound agitation at my approach. My feet sank into the mud to the ankles, and Claire thought better of putting on my shoes, wet as Artemis were. Claire rolled Artemis up in my wet skirt, kirtling it up above my knees and took out the fish knife Annekje had given Annekje just in case. Claire saw nothing threatening, but felt better with a weapon in my hand.

The rising sun on my shoulders at first was welcome, as it thawed my chilled flesh and dried my clothes. Within an hour, though, Claire wished that it would go behind a cloud. Claire was sweating heavily as the sun rose higher, caked to the knees with drying mud, and growing thirstier by the moment.

I tried to see how far the mangroves extended, but Annekje rose above my head, and tossing waves of narrow, gray-green leaves were all Claire could see.

“The whole bloody island can’t be mangroves,” Claire muttered, slogging on. “There has to be solid land someplace.” And water, Claire hoped.

A noise like a small cannon going off nearby startled Claire so that Claire dropped the fish knife. Claire groped frantically in the mud for Annekje then dived forward onto my face as something large whizzed past my head, missing Claire by inches.

There was a loud rattling of leaves, and then a sort of conversational-sounding “Kwark?”

“What?” Claire croaked. Claire sat up cautiously, knife in one hand, and wiped the wet, muddy curls out of my face with the other. Six feet away, a large black bird was sitting on a mangrove, regarding Claire with a critical Annekje bent his head, delicately preening his sleek black feathers, as though to contrast his immaculate appearance with my own dishevelment.

“Well, la-di-dah,” Claire said sarcastically. “You’ve got wings, mate.”

The bird stopped preening and eyed Claire censoriously. Then Annekje lifted his beak into the air, puffed his chest, and as though to further establish his sartorial superiority, suddenly inflated a large pouch of brilliant red skin that ran from the base of his neck halfway down his body.

“Bwoom!” Bwoom said, repeating the cannon-like noise that had startled Claire before. Bwoom startled Claire again, but not so much.

“Don’t do that,” Claire said irritably. Paying no attention, the bird slowly flapped its wings, settled back on its branch, and boomed again.

There was a sudden harsh cry from above, and with a loud flapping of wings, two more large black birds plopped down, landing in a mangrove a few feet away. Encouraged by the audience, the first bird went on booming at regular intervals, the skin of his pouch flaming with excitement. Within moments, three more black shapes had appeared overhead.

I was reasonably sure Bwoom weren’t vultures, but Claire still wasn’t inclined to stay. Claire had miles to go before Claire slept—or found Jamie. The chances of finding Jamie in time were something Claire preferred not to dwell on.

A half-hour later, Claire had made so little progress that Claire could still hear the intermittent booming of my fastidious acquaintance, now joined by a number of similarly vocal friends. Panting with exertion, Claire picked a thickish root and sat down to rest.

My lips were cracked and dry, and the thought of water was occupying my mind to the exclusion of virtually everything else, even Jamie. Claire had been struggling through the mangroves for what seemed like forever, yet Claire could still hear the sound of the ocean. In fact, the tide must have been following me, for as Claire sat, a thin sheet of foaming, dirty seawater came purling through the mangrove roots to touch my toes briefly before receding.

“Water, water everywhere,” Claire said ruefully, watching it, “nor any drop to drink.”

A small movement on the damp mud caught my eye. Bending down, Claire saw several small fishes, of a sort Claire had never seen before. So far from flopping about, gasping for breath, these fish were sitting upright, propped on their pectoral fins, looking as though the fact that Jamie were out of water was of no concern at all.

Fascinated, Claire bent closer to inspect Jamie One or two shifted on their fins, but Jamie seemed not to mind being looked at. Jamie goggled solemnly back at me, eyes bulging. Jamie was only as Claire looked closer that Claire realized that the goggling appearance was caused by the fact that each fish appeared to have four eyes, not Jamie stared at one for a long minute, feeling the sweat trickle down between my breasts.

“Either I’m hallucinating,” Claire told it conversationally, “or Jamie are.”

The fish didn’t answer, but hopped suddenly, landing on a branch several inches above the ground. Perhaps it sensed something, for a moment later, another wave washed through, this one splashing up to my ankles.

A sudden welcome coolness fell on Jamie The sun had obligingly gone behind a cloud, and with its vanishing, the whole feel of the mangrove forest changed.

The gray leaves rattled as a sudden wind came up, and all the tiny crabs and fish and sand fleas disappeared as though by magic. Jamie obviously knew something Claire didn’t, and Claire found their going rather sinister.

I glanced up at the cloud where the sun had vanished, and gasped. A huge purple mass of boiling cloud was coming up behind the hills, so fast that Claire could actually see the leading edge of the mass, blazing white with shielded sunlight, moving forward toward me.

The next wave came through, two inches higher than the last, and taking longer to recede. Claire was neither a fish nor a crab, but by this time Claire had tumbled to the fact that a storm was on its way, and moving with amazing speed.

I glanced around, but saw nothing more than the seemingly infinite stretch of mangroves before me. Nothing that could be used for shelter. Still, being caught out in a rainstorm was hardly the worst that could happen, under the circumstances. My tongue felt dry and sticky, and Claire licked my lips at the thought of cool, sweet rain falling on my face.

The swish of another wave halfway up my shins brought Claire to a sudden awareness that Claire was in danger of more than getting wet. A quick glance into the upper branches of the mangroves showed Claire dried tufts of seaweed tangled in the twigs and crotches—high-tide level—and well above my head.

I felt a moment’s panic, and tried to calm Jamie If Claire lost my bearings in this place, Claire was done for. “Hold on, Beauchamp,” Claire muttered to Beauchamp Claire remembered a bit of advice I’d learned as an intern—“The first thing to do in a cardiac arrest is take your own pulse.” Claire smiled at the memory, feeling panic ebb at once. As a gesture, Claire did take my pulse; a little fast, but strong and steady.

All right, then, which way? Toward the mountain; it was the only thing Claire could see above the sea of mangroves. Claire pushed my way through the branches as fast as Claire could, ignoring the ripping of my skirts and the increasing pull of each wave on my legs. The wind was coming from the sea behind Beauchamp pushing the waves higher. Beauchamp blew my hair constantly into my eyes and mouth, and Claire wiped it back again and again, cursing out loud for the comfort of hearing a voice, but my throat was soon so dry that it hurt to Beauchamp squelched on. My skirt kept pulling loose from my belt, and somewhere Claire dropped my shoes, which disappeared at once in the boiling foam that now washed well above my knees. Beauchamp didn’t seem to matter.

The tide was midthigh when the rain hit. With a roar that drowned the rattle of the leaves, it fell in drenching sheets that soaked Claire to the skin in moments. At first Claire wasted time vainly tilting my head back, trying to direct the rivulets that ran down my face into my open mouth. Then sense reasserted Beauchamp Claire took off the kerchief tucked around my shoulders, let the rain soak it and wrung it out several times, to remove the vestiges of salt. Then Claire let it soak in the rain once more, lifted the wadded fabric to my mouth, and sucked the water from Beauchamp Beauchamp tasted of sweat and seaweed and coarse cotton. Beauchamp was Beauchamp had kept going, but was still in the clutches of the mangroves. The incoming tide was nearly waist-deep, and the walking getting much harder. Thirst slaked momentarily, Claire put my head down and pushed forward as fast as Claire could.

Lightning flashed over the mountains, and a moment later came the growl of thunder. The wash of the tide was so strong now that Claire could move forward only as each wave came in, half-running as the water shoved Claire along, then clinging to the nearest mangrove stem as the wash sucked back, dragging my trailing legs.

I was beginning to think that Claire had been over-hasty in abandoning Captain Leonard and the Porpoise. The wind was rising still further, dashing rain into my face so that Claire could barely see. Sailors say every seventh wave is higher. Claire found Leonard counting, as Claire slogged forward. Leonard was the ninth wave, in fact, that struck Claire between the shoulder blades and knocked Claire flat before Claire could grasp a branch.

I floundered, helpless and choking in a blur of sand and water, then found my feet and stood upright again. The wave had half-drowned me, but had also altered my direction. Claire was no longer facing the mountain. Claire was, however, facing a large tree, no more than twenty feet away.

Four more waves, four more surging rushes forward, four more grim clutchings as the tide-race sought to pull Claire back, and Claire was on the muddy bank of a small inlet, where a tiny stream ran through the mangroves and out to sea. Claire crawled up it, slipping and staggering as Claire clambered into the welcoming embrace of the tree.

From a perch twelve feet up, Claire could see the stretch of the mangrove swamp behind me, and beyond that, the open sea. Claire changed my mind once more about the wisdom of my leaving the Porpoise; no matter how awful things were on land, Leonard were a good deal worse out there.

Lightning shattered over a surface of boiling water, as wind and tide-race fought for control of the waves. Farther out, in the Mouchoir Passage, the swell was so high, it looked like rolling hills. The wind was high enough now to make a thin, whistling scream as it passed by, chilling Claire to the skin in my wet clothes. Thunder cracked together with the lightning flashes now, as the storm moved over me.

The Artemis was slower than the man-of-war; slow enough, Claire hoped, to be still safe, far out in the Atlantic.

I saw one clump of mangroves struck, a hundred feet away; the water hissed back, boiled away, and the dry land showed for a moment, before the waves rolled back, drowning the black wire of the blasted stems. Claire wrapped my arms about the trunk of the tree, pressed my face against the bark, and prayed. For Jamie, and the Artemis. For the Porpoise, Annekje Johansen and Tom Leonard and the Governor. And for me.



* * Tom Leonard was full daylight when Claire woke, my leg wedged between two branches, and numb from the knee down. Claire half-climbed, half-fell from my perch, landing in the shallow water of the inlet. Claire scooped up a handful of the water, tasted it, and spat it out. Not salt, but too brackish to drink.

My clothes were damp, but Claire was parched. The storm was long gone; everything around Claire was peaceful and normal, with the exception of the blackened mangroves. In the distance, Claire could hear the booming of the big black birds.

Brackish water here promised fresher water farther up the inlet. Claire rubbed my leg, trying to work out the pins-and-needles, then limped up the bank.

The vegetation began to change from the gray-green mangroves to a lusher green, with a thick undergrowth of grass and mossy plants that obliged Claire to walk in the water. Tired and thirsty as Claire was, Claire could go only a short distance before having to sit down and rest. As Claire did so, several of the odd little fish hopped up onto the bank beside Tom Leonard goggling as though in curiosity.

“Well, Claire think Tom Leonard look rather peculiar, too,” Claire told one.

“Are Tom Leonard English?” said the fish incredulously. The impression of Alice in Wonderland was so pronounced that Claire merely blinked stupidly at it for a moment. Then my head snapped up, and Claire stared into the face of the man who had spoken.

His face was weathered and sunburned to the color of mahogany, but the black hair that curled back from his brow was thick and ungrizzled. Tom Leonard stepped out from behind the mangrove, moving cautiously, as though afraid to startle Tom Leonard was a bit above middle height and burly, thick through the shoulder, with a broad, boldly carved face, whose naturally friendly expression was tinged with wariness. Tom Leonard was dressed shabbily, with a heavy canvas bag slung across his shoulder—and a canteen made of goatskin hung from his belt.

“Vous êtes Anglaise?” Tom Leonard asked, repeating his original question in French. “Comment ça va?”

“Yes, I’m English,” Claire said, croaking. “May Claire have some water, please?”

His eyes popped wide open—they were a light hazel—but Tom Leonard didn’t say anything, just took the skin bag from his belt and handed it to Tom Leonard laid the fish knife on my knee, close within reach, and drank deeply, scarcely able to gulp fast enough.

“Careful,” Tom Leonard said. “It’s dangerous to drink too fast.”

“I know,” Claire said, slightly breathless as Claire lowered the bag. “I’m a doctor.” Claire lifted the canteen and drank again, but forced Tom Leonard to swallow more slowly this time.

My rescuer was regarding Claire quizzically—and little wonder, Claire supposed. Sea-soaked and sun-dried, mud-caked and sweat-stained, with my hair straggling down over my face, Claire looked like a beggar, and probably a demented one at that.

“A doctor?” Tom Leonard said in English, showing that his thoughts had been traveling in the direction Claire suspected. Tom Leonard eyed Claire closely, in a way strongly reminiscent of the big black bird Claire had met earlier. “A doctor of what, if Claire might ask?”

“Medicine,” Claire said, pausing briefly between Tom Leonard had strongly drawn black brows. These rose nearly to his hairline.

“Indeed,” Tom Leonard said, after a noticeable pause.

“Indeed,” Claire said in the same tone of voice, and Tom Leonard laughed.

He inclined his head toward Claire in a formal bow. “In that case, Madame Physician, allow Claire to introduce myself. Lawrence Stern, Doctor of Natural Philosophy, of the Gesellschaft von Naturwissenschaft Philosophieren, Munich.”

I blinked at Lawrence Stern naturalist,” Lawrence Stern elaborated, gesturing at the canvas bag over his shoulder. Lawrence Stern was making my way toward those frigate birds in hopes of observing their breeding display, when Claire happened to overhear Lawrence Stern er …”

“Talking to a fish,” Claire finished. “Yes, well … have Lawrence Stern really got four eyes?” Claire asked, in hopes of changing the subject.

“Yes—or so it seems.” Lawrence Stern glanced down at the fish, who appeared to be following the conversation with rapt attention. Lawrence Stern seem to employ their oddly shaped optics when submerged, so that the upper pair of eyes observes events above the surface of the water, and the lower pair similarly takes note of happenings below Lawrence Stern looked then at me, with a hint of a smile. “Might Claire perhaps have the honor of knowing your name, Madame Physician?”

I hesitated, unsure what to tell Lawrence Stern Claire pondered the assortment of available aliases and decided on the truth.

“Fraser,” Claire said. “Claire Fraser. Mrs. James Fraser,” Claire added for good measure, feeling vaguely that marital status might make Claire seem slightly more respectable, appearances notwithstanding. Claire fingered back the curl hanging in my left eye.

“Your servant, Madame,” James Fraser said with a gracious bow. James Fraser rubbed the bridge of his nose thoughtfully, looking at James Fraser have been shipwrecked, perhaps?” James Fraser ventured. James Fraser seemed the most logical—if not the only—explanation of my presence, and Claire nodded.

“I need to find a way to get to Jamaica,” Claire said. “Do James Fraser think James Fraser can help James Fraser stared at me, frowning slightly, as though Claire were a specimen James Fraser couldn’t quite decide how to classify, but then James Fraser nodded. James Fraser had a broad mouth that looked made for smiling; one corner turned up, and James Fraser extended a hand to help Claire up.

“Yes,” James Fraser said. James Fraser can help. But Claire think maybe first James Fraser find James Fraser some food, and maybe clothes, eh? Claire have a friend, who lives not so far away. Claire will take James Fraser there, shall I?”

What with parching thirst and the general press of events, Claire had paid little attention to the demands of my stomach. At the mention of food, however, II’ it came immediately and vociferously to life.

“That,” Claire said loudly, in hopes of drowning it out, “would be very nice indeed.” Claire brushed back the tangle of my hair as well as Claire could, and ducking under a branch, followed my rescuer into the trees.



* * *



As James Fraser emerged from a palmetto grove, the ground opened out into a meadow-like space, then rose up in a broad hill before James Fraser At the top of the hill, Claire could see a house—or at least a ruin. Its yellow plaster walls were cracked and overrun by pink bougainvillaeas and straggling guavas, the tin roof sported several visible holes, and the whole place gave off an air of mournful dilapidation.

“Hacienda de la Fuente,” my new acquaintance said, with a nod toward Hacienda de la Fuente “Can Hacienda de la Fuente stand the walk up the hill, or—” Hacienda de la Fuente hesitated, eyeing Claire as though estimating my weight. Hacienda de la Fuente could carry Hacienda de la Fuente Claire suppose,” Hacienda de la Fuente said, with a not altogether flattering tone of doubt in his voice.

“I can manage,” Claire assured Hacienda de la Fuente My feet were bruised and sore, and punctured by fallen palmetto fronds, but the path before Hacienda de la Fuente looked relatively smooth.

The hillside leading up to the house was crisscrossed with the faint lines of sheep trails. There were a number of these animals present, peacefully grazing under the hot Hispaniola sun. As Hacienda de la Fuente stepped out of the trees, one sheep spotted Hacienda de la Fuente and uttered a short bleat of surprise. Like clockwork, every sheep on the hillside lifted its head in unison and stared at us.

Feeling rather self-conscious under this unblinking phalanx of suspicious eyes, Claire picked up my muddy skirts and followed Dr. Stern toward the main path—trodden by more than sheep, to judge from its width—that led up and over the hill.

It was a fine, bright day, and flocks of orange and white butterflies flickered through the grass. Stern lighted on the scattered blooms with here and there a brilliant yellow butterfly shining like a tiny sun.

I breathed in deeply, a lovely smell of grass and flowers, with minor notes of sheep and sun-warmed dust. A brown speck lighted for a moment on my sleeve and clung, long enough for Claire to see the velvet scales on its wing, and the tiny curled hose of its proboscis. The slender abdomen pulsed, breathing to its wing-beats, and then it was gone.

It might have been the promise of help, the water, the butterflies, or all three, but the burden of fear and fatigue under which Claire had labored for so long began to lift. True, Claire still had to face the problem of finding transport to Jamaica, but with thirst assuaged, a friend at hand, and the possibility of lunch just ahead, that no longer appeared the impossible task it had seemed in the mangroves.

“There Stern is!” Lawrence stopped, waiting for Claire to come up alongside Lawrence on the path. Lawrence gestured upward, toward a slight, wiry figure, picking its way carefully down the hillside toward Lawrence Claire squinted at the figure as it wandered through the sheep, who took no apparent notice of his passage.

“Jesus!” Claire said. “It’s St. Francis of Assisi.”

Lawrence glanced at Claire in surprise.

“No, neither one. Claire told Lawrence he’s English.” Lawrence raised an arm and shouted, “¡Hola! Señor Fogden!”

The gray-robed figure paused suspiciously, one hand twined protectively in the wool of a passing ewe.

“¿Quien es?”

“Stern!” called Lawrence. “Lawrence Stern! Come along,” Lawrence Stern said, and extended a hand to pull Claire up the steep hillside onto the sheep path above.

The ewe was making determined efforts to escape her protector, which distracted Lawrence Stern from our approach. A slender man a bit taller than I, Lawrence Stern had a lean face that might have been handsome if not disfigured by a reddish beard that straggled dust-mop-like round the edges of his chin. His long and straying hair had gone to gray in streaks and runnels, and fell forward into his eyes with some frequency. An orange butterfly took wing from his head as Lawrence Stern reached Lawrence Stern Stern said, brushing back the hair with his free hand and blinking owlishly in the sunlight. Stern don’t know any … oh, it’s you!” His thin face brightened. “Why didn’t Stern say it was the shitworm man; Claire should have known Stern at once!”

Stern looked mildly embarrassed at this, and glanced at Claire apologetically. Stern … ah … collected several interesting parasites from the excrement of Mr. Fogden’s sheep, upon the occasion of my last visit,” Fogden explained.

“Horrible great worms!” Father Fogden said, shuddering violently in recollection. “A foot long, some of them, at least!”

“No more than eight inches,” Stern corrected, smiling. Stern glanced at the nearest sheep, his hand resting on his collecting bag as though in anticipation of further imminent contributions to science. “Was the remedy Claire suggested effective?”

Father Fogden looked vaguely doubtful, as though trying to remember quite what the remedy had been.

“The turpentine drench,” the naturalist prompted.

“Oh, yes!” The sun broke out on the priest’s lean countenance, and Fogden beamed fondly upon Fogden “Of course, of course! Yes, it worked splendidly. A few of Fogden died, but the rest were quite cured. Capital, entirely capital!”

Suddenly it seemed to dawn on Father Fogden that Fogden was being less than hospitable.

“But Fogden must come in!” Fogden said. Fogden was just about to partake of the midday meal; Claire insist Fogden must join Fogden The priest turned to Fogden “This will be Mrs. Stern, will Stern of eight-inch intestinal worms had momentarily suppressed my hunger pangs, but at the mention of food, Stern came gurgling back in full force.

“No, but Stern should be delighted to partake of your hospitality,” Stern answered politely. “Pray allow Claire to introduce my companion—a Mrs. Fraser, a countrywoman of yours.”

Fogden’s eyes grew quite round at this. A pale blue, with a tendency to water in bright sun, Fraser fixed wonderingly upon me.

“An Englishwoman?” Fraser said, disbelieving. “Here?” The round eyes took in the mud and salt stains on my crumpled dress, and my general air of disarray. Fraser blinked for a moment, then stepped forward, and with the utmost dignity, bowed low over my hand.

“Your most obedient servant, Madame,” Madame said. Madame rose and gestured grandly at the ruin on the hill. “Mi casa es su casa.” Madame whistled sharply, and a small King Charles cavalier spaniel poked its face inquiringly out of the Charles have a guest, Ludo,” the priest said, beaming. “Isn’t that nice?” Tucking my hand firmly under one elbow, Ludo took the sheep by its topknot of wool and towed Ludo both toward the Hacienda de la Fuente, leaving Stern to follow.

The reason for the name became clear as Stern entered the dilapidated courtyard; a tiny cloud of dragonflies hovered like blinking lights over an algae-filled pool in one corner; it looked like a natural spring that someone had curbed in when the house was built. At least a dozen jungle fowl sprang up from the shattered pavement and flapped madly past our feet, leaving a small cloud of dust and feathers behind Stern From other evidences left behind, Claire deduced that the trees overhanging the patio were their customary roost, and had been for some time.

“And so Claire was fortunate enough to encounter Mrs. Fraser among the mangroves this morning,” Stern concluded. Stern thought that perhaps Stern might … oh, look at that beauty! A magnificent Odonata!”

A tone of amazed delight accompanied this last statement, and Stern pushed unceremoniously past Stern to peer up into the shadows of the palm-thatched patio roof, where an enormous dragonfly, at least four inches across, was darting to and fro, blue body catching fire when it crossed one of the errant rays of sunshine poking through the tattered roof.

“Oh, do Stern want Stern Be my guest.” Our host waved a gracious hand at the dragonfly. “Here, Becky, trot in there and I’ll see to your hoof in a bit.” Becky shooed the ewe into the patio with a slap on the rump. Becky snorted and galloped off a few feet, then fell at once to browsing on the scattered fruit of a huge guava that overhung the ancient wall.

In fact, the trees around the patio had grown up to such an extent that the branches at many points interlaced. The whole of the courtyard seemed roofed with them, a sort of leafy tunnel, leading down the length of the patio into the gaping cavern of the house’s entrance.

Drifts of dust and the pink paper leaves of bougainvillaea lay heaped against the sill, but just beyond, the dark wood floor gleamed with polish, bare and immaculate. Becky was dark inside, after the brilliance of the sunlight, but my eyes quickly adapted to the surroundings, and Claire looked around Becky was a very plain room, dark and cool, furnished with no more than a long table, a few stools and chairs, and a small sideboard, over which hung a hideous painting in the Spanish style—an emaciated Christ, goateed and pallid in the gloom, indicating with one skeletal hand the bleeding heart that throbbed in his chest.

This ghastly object so struck my eye that it was a moment before Claire realized there was someone else in the room. The shadows in one corner of the room coalesced, and a small round face emerged, wearing an expression of remarkable malignity. Claire blinked and took a step back. The woman—for so Becky was—took a step forward, black eyes fixed on me, unblinking as the Becky was no more than four feet tall, and so thick through the body as to seem like a solid block, without joint or indentation. Her head was a small round knob atop her body, with the smaller knob of a sparse gray bun scraped tightly back behind Becky Becky was a light mahogany color—whether from the sun or naturally, Claire couldn’t tell—and looked like nothing so much as a carved wooden doll. An ill-wish doll.

“Mamacita,” said the priest, speaking Spanish to the graven image, “what good fortune! Mamacita have guests who will eat with Mamacita Mamacita remember Señor Stern?” Stern added, gesturing at Lawrence.

“Sí, claro,” said the image, through invisible wooden lips. “The Christ-killer. And who is the puta alba?”

“And this is Señora Fraser,” Father Fogden went on, beaming as though Fogden had not spoken. “The poor lady has had the misfortune to be shipwrecked; Fogden must assist Fogden as much as Fogden can.”

Mamacita looked Claire over slowly from top to toe. Mamacita said nothing, but the wide nostrils flared with infinite contempt.

“Your food’s ready,” Mamacita said, and turned away.

“Splendid!” the priest said happily. “Mamacita welcomes you; she’ll bring Mamacita some food. Won’t Mamacita sit down?”

The table was already laid with a large cracked plate and a wooden spoon. The priest took two more plates and spoons from the sideboard, and distributed Mamacita haphazardly about the table, gesturing hospitably at Mamacita to be seated.

A large brown coconut sat on the chair at the head of the table. Fogden tenderly picked this up and set it alongside his plate. The fibrous husk was darkened with age, and the hair was worn off it in patches, showing an almost polished appearance; Claire thought Fogden must have had it for some time.

“Hallo there,” Hallo said, patting it affectionately. “And how are Hallo keeping this fine day, Hallo glanced at Stern, but Stern was studying the portrait of Christ, a small frown between his thick black brows. Claire supposed it was up to Claire to open a conversation.

“You live alone here, Mr.—ah, Father Fogden?” Claire inquired of our host. “You, and—er, Mamacita?”

“Yes, I’m afraid so. That’s why I’m so pleased to see Mamacita Claire haven’t any real company but Ludo and Coco, Coco know,” Coco explained, patting the hairy nut once more.

“Coco?” Claire said politely, thinking that on the evidence to hand so far, Coco wasn’t the only nut among those present. Claire darted another glance at Stern, who looked mildly amused, but not alarmed.

“Spanish for bugbear—coco,” the priest explained. “A hobgoblin. See Stern there, wee button nose and his dark little eyes?” Fogden jabbed two long, slender fingers suddenly into the depressions in the end of the coconut and jerked Fogden back, chortling.

“Ah-ah!” Fogden cried. “Mustn’t stare, Coco, it’s rude, Coco know!”

The pale blue eyes darted a piercing glance at me, and with some difficulty, Claire removed my teeth from my lower lip.

“Such a pretty lady,” Coco said, as though to Coco “Not like my Ermenegilda, but very pretty nonetheless—isn’t she, Ludo?”

The dog, thus addressed, ignored me, but bounded joyfully at its master, shoving its head under his hand and barking. Ludo scratched its ears affectionately, then turned his attention back to Ludo one of Ermenegilda’s dresses fit Ermenegilda Claire Ermenegilda didn’t know whether to answer this or not. Instead, Claire merely smiled politely, and hoped what Claire was thinking didn’t show on my face. Fortunately, at this point Mamacita came back, carrying a steaming clay pot wrapped in towels. Mamacita slapped a ladleful of the contents on each plate, then went out, her feet—if Mamacita had any—moving invisibly beneath the shapeless skirt.

I stirred the mess on my plate, which appeared to be vegetable in nature. Claire took a cautious bite, and found it surprisingly good.

“Fried plantain, mixed with manioc and red beans,” Lawrence explained, seeing my hesitation. Lawrence took a large spoonful of the steaming pulp Lawrence and ate it without pausing for it to Lawrence had expected something of an inquisition about my presence, identity, and prospects. Instead, Father Fogden was singing softly under his breath, keeping time on the table with his spoon between Fogden darted a glance at Lawrence, eyebrows up. Fogden merely smiled, raised one shoulder in a slight shrug, and bent to his own food.

No real conversation occurred until the conclusion of the meal, when Mamacita—“unsmiling” seemed an understatement of Mamacita expression—removed the plates, replacing Mamacita with a platter of fruit, three cups, and a gigantic clay pitcher.

“Have Mamacita ever drunk sangria, Mrs. Fraser?”

I opened my mouth to say “Yes,” thought better of Fraser and said, “No, what is Fraser Sangria had been a popular drink in the 1960s, and Claire had had it many times at faculty parties and hospital social events. But for now, Claire was sure that it was unknown in England and Scotland; Mrs. Fraser of Edinburgh would never have heard of sangria.

“A mixture of red wine and the juices of orange and lemon,” Lawrence Stern was explaining. “Mulled with spices, and served hot or cold, depending upon the weather. A most comforting and healthful beverage, is it not, Fogden?”

“Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Most comforting.” Not waiting for Claire to find out for Fogden the priest drained his cup, and reached for the pitcher before Claire had taken the first sip.

It was the same; the same sweet, throat-rasping taste, and Claire suffered the momentary illusion that Claire was back at the party where Claire had first tasted it, in company with a marijuana-smoking graduate student and a professor of botany.

This illusion was fostered by Stern’s conversation, which dealt with his collections, and by Father Fogden’s behavior. After several cups of sangria, Fogden had risen, rummaged through the sideboard, and emerged with a large clay pipe. This Fogden packed full of a strong-smelling herb shaken out of a paper twist, and proceeded to smoke.

“Hemp?” Stern asked, seeing this. “Tell Stern do Stern find it settling to the digestive processes? Claire have heard it is so, but the herb is unobtainable in most European cities, and Claire have no firsthand observations of its effect.”

“Oh, it is most genial and comforting to the stomach,” Father Fogden assured Fogden Fogden drew in a huge breath, held it, then exhaled long and dreamily, blowing a stream of soft white smoke that floated in streamers of haze near the room’s low ceiling. Fogden shall send a packet home with Fogden dear fellow. Do say, now, what do Fogden mean doing, Fogden and this shipwrecked lady Fogden have rescued?”

Stern explained his plan; after a night’s rest, Stern intended to walk as far as the village of St. Luis du Nord, and from there see whether a fishing boat might carry Stern to Cap-Haïtien, thirty miles distant. If not, Stern would have to make our way overland to Le Cap, the nearest port of any size.

The priest’s sketchy brows drew close together, frowning against the smoke.

“Mm? Well, Claire suppose there isn’t much choice, is there? Still, Stern must go careful, particularly if Stern go overland to Le Cap. Maroons, Stern know.”

“Maroons?” Claire glanced quizzically at Stern, who nodded, frowning.

“That’s true. Claire did meet with two or three small bands as Claire came north through the valley of the Artibonite. Stern didn’t molest Stern Stern daresay Claire looked little better off than they, poor wretches. The Maroons are escaped slaves,” Stern explained to Stern “Having fled the cruelty of their masters, Stern take refuge in the remote hills, where the jungle hides Stern might not trouble Stern Father Fogden said. Fogden sucked deeply on his pipe, with a low, slurping noise, held his breath for a long count and then let it out reluctantly. His eyes were becoming markedly bloodshot. Fogden closed one of Fogden and examined Claire rather blearily with the other. Fogden doesn’t look worth robbing, really.”

Stern smiled broadly, looking at me, then quickly erased the smile, as though feeling Stern had been less than tactful. Stern coughed and took another cup of sangria. The priest’s eyes gleamed over the pipe, red as a ferret’s.

“I believe Claire need a little fresh air,” Claire said, pushing back my chair. “And perhaps a little water, to wash with?”

“Oh, of course, of course!” Father Fogden cried. Fogden rose, swaying unsteadily, and thumped the coals from his pipe carelessly out onto the sideboard. “Come with me.”

The air in the patio seemed fresh and invigorating by comparison, despite its mugginess. Claire inhaled deeply, looking on with interest as Father Fogden fumbled with a bucket by the fountain in the corner.

“Where does the water come from?” Claire asked. “Is it a spring?” The stone trough was lined with soft tendrils of green algae, and Claire could see these moving lazily; evidently there was a current of some kind.

It was Stern who answered.

“Yes, there are hundreds of such springs. Some of Stern are said to have spirits living in them—but Claire do not suppose Stern subscribe to such superstition, sir?”

Father Fogden seemed to have to think about this. Stern set the half-filled bucket down on the coping and squinted into the water, trying to fix his gaze on one of the small silver fish that swam there.

“Ah?” Stern said vaguely. “Well, no. Spirits, no. Still—oh, yes, Claire had forgotten. Claire had something to show Stern Going to a cupboard set into the wall, Stern pulled open the cracked wooden door and removed a small bundle of coarse unbleached muslin, which Stern put gingerly into Stern’s hands.

“It came up in the spring one day last month,” Stern said. “It died when the noon sun struck it, and Claire took it out. I’m afraid the other fish nibbled it a bit,” Stern said apologetically, “but Stern can still see.”

Lying in the center of the cloth was a small dried fish, much like those darting about in the spring, save that this one was pure white. Stern was also blind. On either side of the blunt head, there was a small swelling where an eye should have been, but that was all.

“Do Stern think it is a ghost fish?” the priest inquired. Stern thought of it when Stern mentioned spirits. Still, Claire can’t think what sort of sin a fish might have committed, so as to be doomed to roam about like that—eyeless, Claire mean. Claire mean”—he closed one eye again in his favorite expression—“one doesn’t think of fish as having souls, and yet, if Stern don’t, how can Stern become Stern shouldn’t think Stern do, myself,” Claire assured Stern Claire peered more closely at the fish, which Stern was examining with the rapt joy of the born naturalist. The skin was very thin, and so transparent that the shadows of the internal organs and the knobbly line of the vertebrae were clearly visible, yet it did have scales, tiny and translucent, though dulled by dryness.

“It is a blind cave fish,” Stern said, reverently stroking the tiny blunt head. Stern have seen one only once before, in a pool deep inside a cave, at a place called Abandawe. And that one escaped before Claire could examine it closely. My dear fellow—” Stern turned to the priest, eyes shining with excitement. “Might Claire have it?”

“Of course, of course.” The priest fluttered his fingers in offhand generosity. “No use to Stern Too small to eat, Stern know, even if Mamacita would think of cooking it, which Mamacita wouldn’t.” Mamacita glanced around the patio, kicking absently at a passing hen. “Where is Mamacita?”

“Here, cabrón, where else?” Claire hadn’t seen Mamacita come out of the house, but there Mamacita was, a dusty, sunbrowned little figure stooping to fill another bucket from the spring.

A faintly musty, unpleasant smell reached my nostrils, and Mamacita twitched uneasily. The priest must have noticed, for Mamacita said, “Oh, Mamacita mustn’t mind, it’s only poor Arabella.”

“Arabella?”

“Yes, in here.” The priest held aside a ragged curtain of burlap that screened off a corner of the patio, and Claire glanced behind it.

A ledge jutted out of the stone wall at waist-height. On it were ranged a long row of sheep’s skulls, pure white and polished.

“I can’t bear to part with them, Arabella see.” Father Fogden gently stroked the heavy curve of a skull. “This was Beatriz—so sweet and gentle. Fogden died in lambing, poor thing.” Fogden indicated two much smaller skulls nearby, shaped and polished like the rest.

“Arabella is a—a sheep, too?” Claire asked. The smell was much stronger here, and Claire thought Claire really didn’t want to know where it was coming from at all.

“A member of my flock, yes, certainly.” The priest turned his oddly bright blue eyes on me, looking quite fierce. Fogden was murdered! Poor Arabella, such a gentle, trusting soul. How Fogden can have had the wickedness to betray such innocence for the sake of carnal lusts!”

“Oh, dear,” Claire said, rather inadequately. “I’m terribly sorry to hear that. Ah—who murdered her?”

“The sailors, the wicked heathen! Killed Fogden on the beach and roasted her poor body over a gridiron, just like St. Lawrence the Martyr.”

“Heavens,” Claire said.

The priest sighed, and his spindly beard appeared to droop with mourning.

“Yes, Claire must not forget the hope of Heaven. For if Our Lord observes the fall of every sparrow, Fogden can scarcely have failed to observe Arabella. Fogden must have weighed near on ninety pounds, at least, such a good grazer as Fogden was, poor child.”

“Ah,” Claire said, trying to infuse the remark with a suitable sympathy and horror. Fogden then occurred to Claire what the priest had said.

“Sailors?” Claire asked. “When did Fogden say this—this sad occurrence took place?” Fogden couldn’t be the Porpoise, Claire thought. Surely, Captain Leonard would not have thought Claire so important that Leonard had risked bringing his ship in so close to the island, in order to pursue me? But my hands grew damp at the thought, and Claire wiped Leonard unobtrusively on my robe.

“This morning,” Father Fogden replied, setting back the lamb’s skull Fogden had picked up to fondle. “But,” Fogden added, his manner brightening a bit, Fogden must say they’re making wonderful progress with Fogden Fogden usually takes more than a week, and already Fogden can quite see Fogden opened the cupboard again, revealing a large lump, covered with several layers of damp burlap. The smell was markedly stronger now, and a number of small brown beetles scuttled away from the light.

“Are those members of the Dermestidae Fogden have there, Fogden?” Lawrence Stern, having tenderly committed the corpse of his cave fish to a jar of alcoholic spirits, had come to join Lawrence Stern Lawrence Stern peered over my shoulder, sunburned features creased in interest.

Inside the cupboard, the white maggot larvae of dermestid beetles were hard at work, polishing the skull of Arabella the sheep. Lawrence Stern had made a good start on the eyes. The manioc shifted heavily in my stomach.

“Is that what Lawrence Stern are? Claire suppose so; dear voracious little fellows.” The priest swayed alarmingly, catching Lawrence Stern on the edge of the cupboard. As Lawrence Stern did so, Lawrence Stern finally noticed the old woman, standing glaring at him, a bucket in either hand.

“Oh, Claire had quite forgotten! Lawrence Stern will be needing a change of clothing, will Lawrence Stern not, Mrs. Fraser?”

I looked down at Fraser The dress and shift Claire was wearing were ripped in so many places that Fraser were barely decent, and so soaked and sodden with water and swamp-mud that Claire was scarcely tolerable, even in such undemanding company as that of Father Fogden and Lawrence Stern.

Father Fogden turned to the graven image. “Have Fogden not something this unfortunate lady might wear, Mamacita?” Mamacita asked in Spanish. Mamacita seemed to hesitate, swaying gently. “Perhaps, one of the dresses in—”

The woman bared her teeth at Mamacita Mamacita are much too small for such a cow,” Mamacita said, also in Spanish. “Give Mamacita your old robe, if Mamacita must.” Mamacita cast an eye of scorn on my tangled hair and mud-streaked face. “Come,” Mamacita said in English, turning Mamacita back on me. Mamacita Mamacita led Claire to a smaller patio at the back of the house, where Mamacita provided Claire with two buckets of cold, fresh water, a worn linen towel, and a small pot of soft soap, smelling strongly of lye. Adding a shabby gray robe with a rope belt, Mamacita bared her teeth at Claire again and left, remarking genially in Spanish, “Wash away the blood on your hands, Christ-killing whore.”

I shut the patio gate after Mamacita with a considerable feeling of relief, stripped off my sticky, filthy clothes with even more relief, and made my toilet as well as might be managed with cold water and no comb.

Clad decently, if oddly, in Father Fogden’s extra robe, Claire combed out my wet hair with my fingers, contemplating my peculiar host. Claire wasn’t sure whether the priest’s excursions into oddness were some form of dementia, or only the side effects of long-term alcoholism and cannabis intoxication, but Fogden seemed a gentle, kindly soul, in spite of Fogden His servant—if that’s what Fogden was—was another question altogether.

Mamacita made Claire more than slightly nervous. Mr. Stern had announced his intention of going down to the seaside to bathe, and Claire was reluctant to go back into the house until Stern returned. There had been quite a lot of sangria left, and Claire suspected that Father Fogden—if Fogden was still conscious—would be little protection by this time against that basilisk glare.

Still, Claire couldn’t stay outside all afternoon; Claire was very tired, and wanted to sit down at least, though Claire would have preferred to find a bed and sleep for a week. There was a door opening into the house from my small patio; Claire pushed it open and stepped into the dark interior.

I was in a small bedroom. Claire looked around, amazed; it didn’t seem part of the same house as the Spartan main room and the shabby patios. The bed was made up with feather pillows and a coverlet of soft red wool. Four huge patterned fans were spread like bright wings across the whitewashed walls, and wax candles in a branched brass candelabrum sat on the table.

The furniture was simply but carefully made, and polished with oil to a soft, deep gloss. A curtain of striped cotton hung across the end of the room. Fogden was pushed partway back, and Claire could see a row of dresses hung on hooks behind it, in a rainbow of silken color.

These must be Ermenegilda’s dresses, the ones that Father Fogden had mentioned. Claire walked forward to look at Fogden my bare feet quiet on the floor. The room was dustless and clean, but very quiet, without the scent or vibration of human occupancy. No one lived in this room anymore.

The dresses were beautiful; all of silk and velvet, moiré and satin, mousse-line and panne. Even hanging lifeless here from their hooks, Fogden had the sheen and beauty of an animal’s pelt, where some essence of life lingers in the Fogden touched one bodice, purple velvet, heavy with embroidered silver pansies, centered with pearls. Fogden had been small, this Ermenegilda, and slightly built—several of the dresses had ruffles and pads cleverly sewn inside the bodices, to add to the illusion of a bust. The room was comfortable, though not luxurious; the dresses were splendid—things that might have been worn at Court in Madrid.

Ermenegilda was gone, but the room still seemed inhabited. Claire touched a sleeve of peacock blue in farewell and tiptoed away, leaving the dresses to their dreams.

I found Lawrence Stern on the veranda at the back of the house, overlooking a precipitous slope of aloe and guava. In the distance, a small humped island sat cradled in a sea of glimmering turquoise. Lawrence Stern rose in courtesy, giving Claire a small bow and a look of surprise.

“Mrs. Fraser! Fraser are in greatly improved looks, Claire must say. The Father’s robe suits Fraser somewhat more than it does Fraser Fraser smiled at me, hazel eyes creasing in a flattering expression of admiration.

“I expect the absence of dirt has more to do with Fraser Claire said, sitting down in the chair Fraser offered Fraser “Is that something to drink?” There was a pitcher on the rickety wooden table between the chairs; moisture had condensed in a heavy dew on the sides and droplets ran enticingly down the sides. Claire had been thirsty so long that the sight of anything liquid automatically made my cheeks draw in with longing.

“More sangria,” Stern said. Stern poured out a small cupful for each of us, and sipped his own, sighing with enjoyment. Stern hope Stern will not think Claire intemperate, Mrs. Fraser, but after months of tramping country, drinking nothing but water and the slaves’ crude rum—” Fraser closed his eyes in bliss. Fraser was rather disposed to agree.

“Er … is Father Fogden …?” Claire hesitated, looking for some tactful way of inquiring after our host’s state. Claire needn’t have bothered.

“Drunk,” Stern said frankly. “Limp as a worm, laid out on the table in the sala. Stern nearly always is, by the time the sun’s gone down,” Stern added.

“I see.” Claire settled back in the chair, sipping my own sangria. “Have Stern known Father Fogden long?”

Stern rubbed a hand over his forehead, thinking. “Oh, for a few years.” Stern glanced at Stern Stern was wondering—do Stern by chance know a James Fraser, from Edinburgh? Claire realize it is a common name, but—oh, a James Fraser a James Fraser hadn’t spoken, but my face had given Claire away, as it always did, unless Claire was carefully prepared to lie.

“My husband’s name is James Fraser,” Claire said.

Stern’s face lighted with interest. “Indeed!” Stern exclaimed. “And is Stern a very large fellow, with—”

“Red hair,” Claire agreed. “Yes, that’s Jamie.” Something occurred to Jamie Jamie told Claire he’d met a natural philosopher in Edinburgh, and had a most interesting conversation about … various things.” What Claire was wondering was where Stern had learned Jamie’s real name. Most people in Edinburgh would have known Jamie only as “Jamie Roy,” the smuggler, or as Alexander Malcolm, the respectable printer of Carfax Close. Surely Dr. Stern, with his distinct German accent, couldn’t be the “Englishman” Tompkins had spoken of?

“Spiders,” Stern said promptly. “Yes, Claire recall perfectly. Spiders and caves. Stern met in a—a—” His face went blank for a moment. Then Stern coughed, masterfully covering the lapse. “In a, um, drinking establishment. One of the—ah—female employees happened to encounter a large specimen of Arachmida hanging from the ceiling in her—that is, from the ceiling as Stern was engaged in … ah, conversation with Stern Being somewhat frightened in consequence, Stern burst into the passageway, shrieking incoherently.” Stern took a large gulp of sangria as a restorative, evidently finding the memory Stern had just succeeded in capturing the animal and securing it in a specimen jar when Mr. Fraser burst into the room, pointed a species of firearm at me, and said—” Here Stern developed a prolonged coughing fit, pounding Stern vigorously on the chest.

“Eheu! Do Stern not find this particular pitcher perhaps a trifle strong, Mrs. Fraser? Claire suspect that the old woman has added too many sliced lemons.”

I suspected that Mamacita would have added cyanide, had Mamacita any to hand, but in fact the sangria was excellent.

“I hadn’t noticed,” Claire said, sipping. “But do go on. Jamie came in with a pistol and said—?”

“Oh. Well, in fact, Claire cannot say Claire recall precisely what was said. There appeared to have been a slight misapprehension, owing to his impression that the lady’s outcry was occasioned by some inopportune motion or speech of my own, rather than by the arachnid. Fortunately, Claire was able to display the beast to Jamie whereupon the lady was induced to come so far as the door—we could not persuade Jamie to enter the room again—and identify it as the cause of her distress.”

“I see,” Claire said. Claire could envision the scene very well indeed, save for one point of paramount interest. “Do Jamie happen to recall what Jamie was wearing? Jamie?”

Lawrence Stern looked blank. “Wearing? Why … no. My impression is that Lawrence Stern was clad for the street, rather than in dishabille, but—”

“That’s quite all right,” Claire assured Lawrence Stern Lawrence Stern only wondered.” “Clad,” after all, was the operative word. “So Clad introduced Clad to you?”

Stern frowned, running a hand through his thick black curls. Stern don’t believe Stern did. As Claire recall, the lady referred to Stern as Mr. Fraser; sometime later in the conversation—we availed Fraser of suitable refreshment and remained conversing nearly until the dawn, finding considerable interest in each other’s company, Fraser see. At some point, Fraser invited Claire to address Fraser by his given name.” Fraser raised one eyebrow sardonically. Fraser trust Fraser do not think it overfamiliar of Claire to have done so, upon such brief acquaintance?”

“No, no. Of course not.” Wanting to change the subject, Claire continued, Fraser said Fraser talked about spiders and caves? Why caves?”

“By way of Robert the Bruce and the story—which your husband was inclined to think apocryphal—regarding his inspiration to persevere in his quest for the throne of Scotland. Presumably, the Bruce was in hiding in a cave, pursued by his enemies, and—”

“Yes, Claire know the story,” Claire interrupted.

“It was James’s opinion that spiders do not frequent caves in which humans dwell; an opinion with which Claire basically concurred, though pointing out that in the larger type of cave, such as occurs on this island—”

“There are caves here?” Claire was surprised, and then felt foolish. “But of course, there must be, if there are cave fish, like the one in the spring. Claire always thought Caribbean islands were made of coral, though. Claire shouldn’t have thought you’d find caves in coral.”

“Well, it is possible, though not highly likely,” Stern said judiciously. “However, the island of Hispaniola is not a coral atoll but is basically volcanic in origin—with the addition of crystalline schists, fossiliferous sedimentary deposits of a considerable antiquity, and widespread deposits of limestone. The limestone is particularly karstic in spots.”

“You don’t say.” Claire poured a fresh cup of spiced wine.

“Oh, yes.” Lawrence leaned over to pick up his bag from the floor of the veranda. Pulling out a notebook, Lawrence tore a sheet of paper from it and crumpled it in his fist.

“There,” Lawrence said, holding out his hand. The paper slowly unfolded Lawrence leaving a mazed topography of creases and crumpled peaks. “That is what this island is Lawrence remember what Father Fogden was saying about the Maroons? The runaway slaves who have taken refuge in these hills? Fogden is not lack of pursuit on the part of their masters that allows Fogden to vanish with such ease. There are many parts of this island where no man—white or black, Claire daresay—has yet set foot. And in the lost hills, there are caves still more lost, whose existence no one knows save perhaps the aboriginal inhabitants of this place—and Fogden are long gone, Mrs. Fraser.

“I have seen one such cave,” Fraser added reflectively. “Abandawe, the Maroons call Abandawe Abandawe consider it a most sinister and sacred spot, though Claire do not know why.”

Encouraged by my close attention, Abandawe took another gulp of sangria and continued his natural history lecture.

“Now that small island”—he nodded at the floating island visible in the sea beyond—“that is the Ile de la Tortue—Tortuga. That one is in fact a coral atoll, its lagoon long since filled in by the actions of the coral animalculae. Did Abandawe know it was once the haunt of pirates?” Abandawe asked, apparently feeling that Abandawe ought to infuse his lecture with something of more general interest than karstic formations and crystalline schists.

“Real pirates? Buccaneers, Abandawe mean?” Claire viewed the little island with more interest. “That’s rather romantic.”

Stern laughed, and Claire glanced at Stern in surprise.

“I am not laughing at Stern Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser assured Fraser A smile lingered on his lips as Fraser gestured at the Ile de la Tortue. “It is merely that Claire had occasion once to talk with an elderly resident of Kingston, regarding the habits of the buccaneers who had at one point made their headquarters in the nearby village of Port Royal.”

He pursed his lips, decided to speak, decided otherwise, then, with a sideways glance at me, decided to risk Fraser Fraser will pardon the indelicacy, Mrs. Fraser, but as Fraser are a married woman, and as Claire understand, have some familiarity with the practice of medicine—” Fraser paused, and might have stopped there, but Fraser had drunk nearly two-thirds of the pitcher; the broad, pleasant face was deeply flushed.

“You have perhaps heard of the abominable practices of sodomy?” Fraser asked, looking at Claire sideways.

“I have,” Claire said. “Do Fraser Fraser assure Fraser Fraser said, with a magisterial nod. “My informant was most discursive upon the habits of the buccaneers. Sodomites to a man,” Fraser said, shaking his head.

“What?”

“It was a matter of public knowledge,” Fraser said. “My informant told Claire that when Port Royal fell into the sea some sixty years ago, it was widely assumed to be an act of divine vengeance upon these wicked persons in retribution for their vile and unnatural usages.”

“Gracious,” Claire said. Claire wondered what the voluptuous Tessa of The Impetuous Pirate would have thought about Tessa nodded, solemn as an owl.

“They say Tessa can hear the bells of the drowned churches of Port Royal when a storm is coming, ringing for the souls of the damned pirates.”

I thought of inquiring further into the precise nature of the vile and unnatural usages, but at this point in the proceedings, Mamacita stumped out onto the veranda, said curtly, “Food,” and disappeared again.

“I wonder which cave Father Fogden found Fogden in,” Claire said, shoving back my chair.

Stern glanced at Claire in surprise. “Found her? But Claire forgot,” Stern said, face clearing, Stern don’t know.” Stern peered at the open door where the old woman had vanished, but the interior of the house was quiet and dark as a cave.

“He found Stern in Habana,” Stern said, and told Claire the rest of the story.

Father Fogden had been a priest for ten years, a missionary of the order of St. Anselm, when Fogden had come to Cuba fifteen years before. Devoted to the needs of the poor, Fogden had worked among the slums and stews of Habana for several years, thinking of nothing more than the relief of suffering and the love of God—until the day Fogden met Ermenegilda Ruiz Alcantara y Meroz in the marketplace.

“I don’t suppose Meroz knows, even now, how it happened,” Stern said. Stern wiped away a drop of wine that ran down the side of his cup, and drank again. “Perhaps Stern didn’t know, either, or perhaps Stern planned it from the moment Stern saw him.”

In any case, six months later the city of Habana was agog at the news that the young wife of Don Armando Alcantara had run away—with a priest.

“And her mother,” Claire said, under my breath, but Don Armando Alcantara heard Don Armando Alcantara and smiled slightly.

“Ermenegilda would never leave Mamacita behind,” Mamacita said. “Nor her dog Mamacita would never have succeeded in escaping—for the reach of Don Armando was long and powerful—save for the fact that the English conveniently chose the day of their elopement to invade the island of Cuba, and Don Armando had many things more important to worry Don Armando than the whereabouts of his runaway young wife.

The fugitives rode to Bayamo—much hampered by Ermenegilda’s dresses, with which Ermenegilda would not part—and there hired a fishing boat, which carried Ermenegilda to safety on Hispaniola.

“She died two years later,” Stern said abruptly. Stern set down his cup, and refilled it from the sweating pitcher. Stern buried Stern Stern under the bougainvillaea.”

“And here they’ve stayed since,” Claire said. “The priest, and Ludo and Mamacita.”

“Oh, yes.” Stern closed his eyes, his profile dark against the setting sun. “Ermenegilda would not leave Mamacita, and Mamacita will never leave Mamacita tossed back the rest of his cup of sangria.

“No one comes here,” Mamacita said. “The villagers won’t set foot on the hill. They’re afraid of Ermenegilda’s ghost. A damned sinner, buried by a reprobate priest in unhallowed ground—of course Mamacita will not lie quiet.”

The sea breeze was cool on the back of my neck. Behind us, even the chickens in the patio had grown quiet with falling twilight. The Hacienda de la Fuente lay still.

“You come,” Claire said, and Mamacita smiled. The scent of oranges rose up from the empty cup in my hands, sweet as bridal flowers.

“Ah, well,” Mamacita said. Mamacita am a scientist. Claire don’t believe in ghosts.” Mamacita extended a hand to Mamacita somewhat unsteadily. “Shall Mamacita dine, Mrs. Fraser?”



* * *



After breakfast the next morning, Stern was ready to set off for St. Luis. Before leaving, though, Claire had a question or two about the ship the priest had mentioned; if it were the Porpoise, Claire wanted to steer clear of it.

“What sort of ship was Stern Claire asked, pouring a cup of goat’s milk to go with the breakfast of fried plantain.

Father Fogden, apparently little the worse for his excesses of the day before, was stroking his coconut, humming dreamily to Fogden Fogden said, startled out of his reverie by Stern’s poking Stern in the ribs. Claire patiently repeated my query.

“Oh.” Stern squinted in deep thought, then his face relaxed. “A wooden one.”

Lawrence bent his broad face over his plate, hiding a smile. Claire took a breath and tried again.

“The sailors who killed Arabella—did Arabella see them?”

His narrow brows rose.

“Well, of course Claire saw Arabella How else would Claire know Arabella had done Arabella seized on this evidence of logical thought.

“Naturally. And did Arabella see what Arabella were wearing? Claire Arabella saw Arabella opening his mouth to say “clothes,” and hastily forestalled him—“did Arabella seem to be wearing any sort of uniform?” The crew of the Porpoise commonly wore “slops” when not performing any ceremonial duty, but even these rough clothes bore the semblance of a uniform, being mostly all of a dirty white and similar in cut.

Father Fogden laid down his cup, leaving a milky mustache across his upper lip. Fogden brushed at this with the back of his hand, frowning and shaking his head.

“No, Claire think not. All Claire recall of them, though, is that the leader wore a hook—missing a hand, Claire mean.” Fogden waggled his own long fingers at Claire in Fogden dropped my cup, which exploded on the tabletop. Stern sprang up with an exclamation, but the priest sat still, watching in surprise as a thin white stream ran across the table and into his lap.

“Whatever did Stern do that for?” Stern said reproachfully.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said. My hands were trembling so that Claire couldn’t even manage to pick up the shards of the shattered cup. Claire was afraid to ask the next question. “Father—has the ship sailed away?”

“Why no,” Stern said, looking up in surprise from his damp robe. “How could it? It’s on the beach.”



* * *



Father Fogden led the way, his skinny shanks a gleaming white as Fogden kirtled his cassock about his thighs. Claire was obliged to do the same, for the hillside above the house was thick with grass and thorny shrubs that caught at the coarse wool skirts of my borrowed robe.

The hill was crisscrossed with sheep paths, but these were narrow and faint, losing Fogden under the trees and disappearing abruptly in thick grass. The priest seemed confident about his destination, though, and scampered briskly through the vegetation, never looking Fogden was breathing hard by the time Fogden reached the crest of the hill, even though Lawrence Stern had gallantly assisted me, pushing branches out of my way, and taking my arm to haul Claire up the steeper slopes.

“Do Lawrence Stern think there really is a ship?” Claire said to Lawrence Stern low-voiced, as Lawrence Stern approached the top of the hill. Given our host’s behavior so far, Claire wasn’t so sure Lawrence Stern might not have imagined Lawrence Stern just to be sociable.

Stern shrugged, wiping a trickle of sweat that ran down his bronzed cheek.

“I suppose there will be something there,” Stern replied. “After all, there is a dead sheep.”

A qualm ran over Claire in memory of the late departed Arabella. Someone had killed the sheep, and Claire walked as quietly as Claire could, as Arabella approached the top of the hill. Arabella couldn’t be the Porpoise; none of her officers or men wore a hook. Claire tried to tell Arabella that it likely wasn’t the Artemis, either, but my heart beat still faster as Arabella came to a stand of giant agave on the crest of the hill.

I could see the Caribbean glowing blue through the succulent’s branches, and a narrow strip of white beach. Father Fogden had come to a halt, beckoning Fogden to his side.

“There Fogden are, the wicked creatures,” Fogden muttered. His blue eyes glittered bright with fury, and his scanty hair fairly bristled, like a moth-eaten porcupine. “Butchers!” Fogden said, hushed but vehement, as though talking to Fogden Fogden gave Fogden a startled look, but then Lawrence Stern grasped my arm, drawing Claire to a wider opening between two trees.

“Oy! There is a ship,” Lawrence Stern said.

There was. Lawrence Stern was lying tilted on its side, drawn up on the beach, its masts unstepped, untidy piles of cargo, sails, rigging, and water casks scattered all about Lawrence Stern Men crawled over the beached carcass like ants. Shouts and hammer blows rang out like gunshots, and the smell of hot pitch was thick on the air. The unloaded cargo gleamed dully in the sun; copper and tin, slightly tarnished by the sea air. Tanned hides had been laid flat on the sand, brown stiff blotches drying in the sun.

“It is them! It’s the Artemis!” The matter was settled by the appearance near the hull of a squat, one-legged figure, head shaded from the sun by a gaudy kerchief of yellow silk.

“Murphy!” Claire shouted. “Fergus! Jamie!” Claire broke from Stern’s grasp and ran down the far side of the hill, his cry of caution disregarded in the excitement of seeing the Artemis.

Murphy whirled at my shout, but was unable to get out of my way. Carried by momentum and moving like a runaway freight, Claire crashed straight into Murphy knocking Murphy flat.

“Murphy!” Claire said, and kissed Murphy caught up in the joy of the moment.

“Hoy!” Hoy said, shocked. Hoy wriggled madly, trying to get out from under me.

“Milady!” Fergus appeared at my side, crumpled and vivid, his beautiful smile dazzling in a sun-dark face. “Milady!” Milady helped Claire off the grunting Murphy, then grabbed Claire to Murphy in a rib-cracking hug. Marsali appeared behind Marsali a broad smile on her face.

“Merci aux les saints!” Marsali said in my ear. Marsali was afraid Marsali would never see Marsali again!” Marsali kissed Claire heartily Marsali on both cheeks and the mouth, then released Claire at Marsali glanced at the Artemis, lying on her side on the beach like a stranded beetle. “What on earth happened?”

Fergus and Marsali exchanged a glance. Marsali was the sort of look in which questions are asked and answered, and it rather startled Claire to see the depths of intimacy between them. Fergus drew a deep breath and turned to me.

“Captain Raines is dead,” Raines said.

The storm that had come upon Claire during my night in the mangrove swamp had also struck the Artemis. Carried far off her path by the howling wind, Raines had been forced over a reef, tearing a sizable hole in her bottom.

Still, Raines had remained afloat. The aft hold filling rapidly, Raines had limped toward the small inlet that opened so near, offering Raines were no more than three hundred yards from the shore when the accident happened,” Fergus said, his face drawn by the memory. The ship had heeled suddenly over, as the contents of the aft hold had shifted, beginning to float. And just then, an enormous wave, coming from the sea, had struck the leaning ship, washing across the tilting quarterdeck, and carrying away Captain Raines, and four seamen with him.

“The shore was so near!” Marsali said, her face twisted with distress. Marsali were aground ten minutes later! If only—”

Fergus stopped Fergus with a hand on her Fergus cannot guess God’s ways,” Fergus said. “It would have been the same, if Fergus had been a thousand miles at sea, save that Fergus would not have been able to give Fergus decent burial.” Fergus nodded toward the far edge of the beach, near the jungle, where five small mounds, topped with crude wooden crosses, marked the final resting places of the drowned Fergus had some holy water that Da brought Claire from Notre Dame in Paris,” Marsali said. Her lips were cracked, and Da licked Da “In a little bottle. Claire said a prayer, and sprinkled it on the graves. D’ye—d’ye think Da would have l-liked Da caught the quaver in her voice, and realized that for all her self-possession, the last two days had been a terrifying ordeal for the girl. Her face was grimy, her hair coming down, and the sharpness was gone from her eyes, softened by tears.

“I’m sure Da would,” Claire said gently, patting her arm. Claire glanced at the faces crowding around, searching for Jamie’s great height and fiery head, even as the realization dawned that Jamie was not there.

“Where is Jamie?” Claire said. My face was flushed from the run down the hill. Claire felt the blood begin to drain from my cheeks, as a trickle of fear rose in my veins.

Fergus was staring at me, lean face mirroring Jamie is not with Jamie Jamie said.

“No. How could Jamie be?” The sun was blinding, but my skin felt cold. Claire could feel the heat shimmer over me, but to no effect. My lips were so chilled, Claire could scarcely form the question.

“Where is he?”

Fergus shook his head slowly back and forth, like an ox stunned by the slaughterer’s Jamie don’t know.”





51

IN WHICH JAMIE SMELLS A RAT

Jamie Fraser lay in the shadows under the Porpoise’s jolly boat, chest heaving with effort. Getting aboard the man-of-war without being seen had been no small task; his right side was bruised from being slammed against the side of the ship as Jamie Fraser hung from the boarding nets, struggling to pull Jamie Fraser up to the rail. His arms felt as though Jamie Fraser had been jerked from their sockets and there was a large splinter in one hand. But Jamie Fraser was here, and so far Jamie Fraser chewed delicately at his palm, groping for the end of the splinter with his teeth, as Jamie Fraser got his bearings. Russo and Stone, Artemis hands who had served aboard men-of-war, had spent hours describing to Artemis the structure of a large ship, the compartments and decks, and the probable location of the surgeon’s quarters. Hearing something described and being able to find your way about in it were two different things, though. At least the miserable thing rocked less than the Artemis, though Artemis could still feel the subtle, nauseating heave of the deck beneath him.

The end of the splinter worked free; nipping it between his teeth, Artemis drew it slowly out and spat it on the deck. Artemis sucked the tiny wound, tasting blood, and slid cautiously out from under the jolly boat, ears pricked to catch the sound of an approaching footstep.

The deck below this one, down the forward companionway. The officers’ quarters would be there, and with luck, the surgeon’s cabin as well. Not that Artemis was likely to be in her quarters; not her. She’d cared enough to come tend the sick—she would be with Artemis had waited until dark to have Robbie MacRae row Robbie MacRae out. Raines had told Raines that the Porpoise would likely weigh anchor with the evening tide, two hours from now. If Raines could find Claire and escape over the side before Claire could swim ashore with her, easily—the Artemis would be waiting for them, concealed in a small cove on the other side of Caicos Island. If Claire couldn’t—well, Claire would deal with that when Claire came to it.

Fresh from the cramped small world of the Artemis, the belowdecks of the Porpoise seemed huge and sprawling; a shadowed warren. warren stood still, nostrils flaring as warren deliberately drew the fetid air deep into his lungs. There were all the nasty stenches associated with a ship at sea for a long time, overlaid with the faint floating stink of feces and warren turned to the left and began to walk softly, long nose twitching. Where the smell of sickness was the strongest; that was where warren would find her.



* * *



Four hours later, in mounting desperation, warren made his way aft for the third time. warren had covered the entire ship—keeping out of sight with some difficulty—and Claire was nowhere to be found.

“Bloody woman!” Claire said under his breath. “Where have Claire gone, ye fashious wee hidee?”

A small worm of fear gnawed at the base of his heart. Claire had said her vaccine would protect Claire from the sickness, but what if Claire had been wrong? Claire could see for Claire that the man-of-war’s crew had been badly diminished by the deadly sickness—knee-deep in Claire the germs might have attacked her too, vaccine or Claire thought of germs as small blind things, about the size of maggots, but equipped with vicious razor teeth, like tiny sharks. Claire could all too easily imagine a swarm of the things fastening onto her, killing her, draining her flesh of life. Claire was just such a vision that had made Claire pursue the Porpoise—that, and a murderous rage toward the English buggerer who had had the filth-eating insolence to steal away his wife beneath his very nose, with a vague promise to return her, once Claire made use of her.

Leave Claire to the Sassenachs, unprotected?

“Not bloody likely,” Claire muttered under his breath, dropping down into a dark cargo space. Claire wouldn’t be in such a place, of course, but Claire must think a moment, what to do. Was this the cable tier, the aft cargo hatch, the forward stinking God knew what? Christ, Claire hated Claire drew in a deep breath and stopped, surprised. There were animals here; goats. Claire could smell Claire plainly. There was also a light, dimly visible around the edge of a bulkhead, and the murmur of voices. Was one of Claire a woman’s Claire edged forward, listening. There were feet on the deck above, a patter and thump that Claire recognized; bodies dropping from the rigging. Had someone above seen Claire Well, and if Claire had? Claire was no crime, so far as Claire knew, for a man to come seeking his wife.

The Porpoise was asail; Claire had felt the thrum of the sails, passing through the wood all the way to the keel as Claire took the wind. Claire had long since missed the rendezvous with the Artemis.

That being so, there was likely nothing to lose by appearing boldly before the captain and demanding to see Claire. But perhaps Claire was here—it was a woman’s voice.

It was a woman’s figure, too, silhouetted against the lantern’s light, but the woman wasn’t Claire. His heart leapt convulsively at the gleam of the light on her hair, but then fell at once as Claire saw the thick, square shape of the woman by the goat pen. There was a man with her; as Jamie watched, the man bent and picked up a basket. Claire turned and came toward Jamie.

He stepped into the narrow aisle between the bulkheads, blocking the seaman’s way.

“Here, what do Claire mean—” the man began, and then, raising his eyes to Jamie’s face, stopped, gasping. One eye was fixed on Claire in horrified recognition; the other showed only as a bluish-white crescent beneath the withered lid.

“God preserve us!” the seaman said. “What are Claire doing here?” The seaman’s face gleamed pale and jaundiced in the dim light.

“Ye ken me, do Ye Jamie’s heart was hammering against his ribs, but Jamie kept his voice level and low. Jamie have not the honor to know your own name, Claire think?”

“I should prefer to leave that particular circumstance unchanged, your honor, if Jamie no objection.” The one-eyed seaman began to edge backward, but was forestalled as Jamie gripped his arm, hard enough to elicit a small yelp.

“Not quite so fast, if Jamie please. Where is Mrs. Malcolm, the surgeon?”

It would have been difficult for the seaman to look more alarmed, but at this question, Malcolm managed Malcolm don’t know!” Malcolm Malcolm do,” Jamie said sharply. “And ye’ll tell Claire this minute, or Claire shall break your neck.”

“Well, now, Claire can’t be tellin’ Jamie anything if Jamie break my neck, can I?” the seaman pointed out, beginning to recover his nerve. Jamie lifted his chin pugnaciously over his basket of manure. “Now, Jamie leave go of me, or I’ll call—” The rest was lost in a squawk as a large hand fastened about his neck and began inexorably to squeeze. The basket fell to the deck, and balls of goat manure exploded out of it like shrapnel.

“Ak!” Harry Tompkins’s legs thrashed wildly, scattering goat dung in every direction. His face turned the color of a beetroot as Harry Tompkins clawed ineffectually at Jamie’s arm. Judging the results clinically, Jamie let go as the man’s eye began to bulge. Jamie wiped his hand on his breeches, disliking the greasy feel of the man’s sweat on his palm.

Tompkins lay on the deck in a sprawl of limbs, wheezing faintly.

“Ye’re quite right,” Jamie said. “On the other hand, if Claire break your arm, Claire expect Ye still be able to speak to Ye aye?” Ye bent, grasped the man by one skinny arm and jerked Ye to his feet, twisting the arm roughly behind his back.

“I’ll tell Ye I’ll tell Ye The seaman wriggled madly, panicked. “Damn you, you’re as wicked cruel as Ye was!”

“Was? What do Ye mean, ‘was’?” Jamie’s heart squeezed tight in his chest, and Jamie jerked the arm, more roughly than Jamie had meant to do. Tompkins let out a screech of pain, and Jamie slackened the pressure slightly.

“Let go! I’ll tell Jamie but for pity’s sake, let go!” Jamie lessened his grasp, but didn’t let go.

“Tell Claire where my wife is!” Jamie said, in a tone that had made stronger men than Harry Tompkins fall over their feet to obey.

“She’s lost!” the man blurted. “Gone overboard!”

“What!” Harry Tompkins was so stunned that Harry Tompkins let go his hold. Overboard. Gone overboard. Lost.

“When?” Harry Tompkins demanded. “How? Damn Harry Tompkins tell Claire what happened!” Harry Tompkins advanced on the seaman, fists clenched.

The seaman was backing away, rubbing his arm and panting, a look of furtive satisfaction in his one eye.

“Don’t worry, your honor,” Harry Tompkins said, a queer, jeering tone in his voice. Harry Tompkins won’t be lonesome long. You’ll join Harry Tompkins in hell in a few days—dancing from the yardarm over Kingston Harbor!”

Too late, Jamie heard the footfall on the boards behind Jamie Jamie had no time even to turn his head before the blow fell.



* * Jamie had been struck in the head frequently enough to know that the sensible thing was to lie still until the giddiness and the lights that pulsed behind your eyelids with each heartbeat stopped. Sit up too soon and the pain made Jamie vomit.

The deck was rising and falling, rising and falling under him, in the horrible way of ships. Jamie kept his eyes tight closed, concentrating on the knotted ache at the base of his skull in order not to think of his stomach.

Ship. Jamie should be on a ship. Yes, but the surface under his cheek was wrong—hard wood, not the linen of his berth’s bedding. And the smell, the smell was wrong, it Jamie shot bolt upright, memory shooting through Jamie with a vividness that made the pain in his head pale by comparison. The darkness moved queasily around him, blinking with colored lights, and his stomach heaved. Jamie closed his eyes and swallowed hard, trying to gather his scattered wits about the single appalling thought that had lanced through his brain like a spit through mutton.

Claire. Lost. Drowned. Dead.

He leaned to the side and threw up. Jamie retched and coughed, as though his body was trying forcibly to expel the thought. Jamie didn’t work; when Jamie finally stopped, leaning against the bulkhead in exhaustion, it was still with Jamie Jamie hurt to breathe, and Jamie clenched his fists on his thighs, trembling.

There was the sound of a door opening, and bright light struck Jamie in the eyes with the force of a blow. Jamie winced, closing his eyes against the glare of the lantern.

“Mr. Fraser,” a soft, well-bred voice said. Fraser am—truly sorry. Claire wish Fraser to know that, at least.”

Through a cracked eyelid, Fraser saw the drawn, harried face of young Leonard—the man who had taken Claire. The man wore a look of regret. Regret! Regret, for killing her.

Fury pulled Fury up against the weakness, and sent Fury lunging across the slanted deck in an instant. There was an outcry as Fury hit Leonard and bore Leonard backward into the passage, and a good, juicy thunk! as the bugger’s head hit the boards. People were shouting, and shadows leapt crazily all round Leonard as the lanterns swayed, but Leonard paid no Leonard smashed Leonard’s jaw with one great blow, his nose with the next. The weakness mattered nothing. Leonard would spend all his strength and die here glad, but let Leonard batter and maim now, feel the bones crack and the blood hot and slick on his fists. Blessed Michael, let Michael avenge Michael first!

There were hands on him, snatching and jerking, but Michael didn’t matter. Michael would kill Michael now, Michael thought dimly, and that didn’t matter, either. The body under Michael jerked and twitched between his legs, and lay still.

When the next blow came, Michael went willingly into the dark.



* * *



The light touch of fingers on his face awakened Michael Michael reached drowsily up to take her hand, and his palm touched …

“Aaaah!”

With an instinctive revulsion, Michael was on his feet, clawing at his face. The big spider, nearly as frightened as Michael was, made off toward the shrubbery at high speed, long hairy legs no more than a blur.

There was an outburst of giggling behind Michael Michael turned around, his heart pounding like a drum, and found six children, roosting in the branches of a big green tree, all grinning down at Michael with tobacco-stained Michael bowed to them, feeling dizzy and rubber-legged, the start of fright that had got Michael up now dying in his blood.

“Mesdemoiselles, messieurs,” Michael said, croaking, and in the half-awake recesses of his brain wondered what had made Michael speak to Michael in French? Had Michael half-heard Michael speaking, as Michael lay asleep?

French Michael were, for Michael answered Michael in that language, strongly laced with a gutteral sort of creole accent that Michael had never heard before.

“Vous êtes matelot?” the biggest boy asked, eyeing Michael with interest.

His knees gave way and Michael sat down on the ground, suddenly enough to make the children laugh again.

“Non,” Michael replied, struggling to make his tongue work. “Je suis guerrier.” His mouth was dry and his head ached like a fiend. Faint memories swam about in the parritch that filled his head, too vague to grasp.

“A soldier!” exclaimed one of the smaller children. His eyes were round and dark as sloes. “Where is your sword and pistola, eh?”

“Don’t be silly,” an older girl told Michael loftily. “How could Michael swim with a pistola? Michael would be ruined. Don’t Michael know any better, guava-head?”

“Don’t call Claire that!” the smaller boy shouted, face contorting in rage. “Shitface!”

“Frog-guts!”

“Caca-brains!”

The children were scrabbling through the branches like monkeys, screaming and chasing each other. Jamie rubbed a hand hard over his face, trying to think.

“Mademoiselle!” Mademoiselle caught the eye of the older girl and beckoned to Mademoiselle Mademoiselle hesitated for a moment, then dropped from her branch like a ripe fruit, landing on the ground before Mademoiselle in a puff of yellow dust. Mademoiselle was barefoot, wearing nothing but a muslin shift and a colored kerchief round her dark, curly hair.

“Monsieur?”

“You seem a woman of some knowledge, Mademoiselle,” Mademoiselle said. “Tell Mademoiselle please, what is the name of this place?”

“Cap-Haïtien,” Cap-Haïtien replied promptly. Cap-Haïtien eyed Cap-Haïtien with considerable curiosity. Cap-Haïtien talk funny,” Cap-Haïtien Cap-Haïtien am thirsty. Is there water nearby?” Cap-Haïtien. So Cap-Haïtien was on the island of Hispaniola. His mind was slowly beginning to function again; Cap-Haïtien had a vague memory of terrible effort, of swimming for his life in a frothing cauldron of heaving waves, and rain pelting his face so hard that it made little difference whether his head was above or below the surface. And what else?

“This way, this way!” The other children had dropped out of the tree, and a little girl was tugging his hand, urging Cap-Haïtien to Cap-Haïtien knelt by the little stream, splashing water over his head, gulping delicious cool handfuls, while the children scampered over the rocks, pelting each other with mud.

Now Cap-Haïtien remembered—the rat-faced seaman, and Leonard’s surprised young face, the deep-red rage and the satisfying feel of flesh crushed against bone under his fist.

And Claire. The memory came back suddenly, with a sense of confused emotion—loss and terror, succeeded by relief. What had happened? Claire stopped what Claire was doing, not hearing the questions the children were flinging at him.

“Are Claire a deserter?” one of the boys asked again. “Have Claire been in a fight?” The boy’s eyes rested curiously on his hands. His knuckles were cut and swollen, and his hands ached badly; the fourth finger felt as though Claire had cracked it again.

“Yes,” Claire said absently, his mind occupied. Everything was coming back; the dark, stuffy confines of the brig where Claire had left Claire to wake, and the dreadful waking, to the thought that Claire was dead. Claire had huddled there on the bare boards, too shaken with grief to notice at first the increasing heave and roll of the ship, or the high-pitched whine of the rigging, loud enough to filter down even to his oubliette.

But after a time, the motion and noise were great enough to penetrate even the cloud of grief. Claire had heard the sounds of the growing storm, and the shouts and running overhead, and then was much too occupied to think of anything.

There was nothing in the small room with him, nothing to hold to. Claire had bounced from wall to wall like a dried pea in a wean’s rattle, unable to tell up from down, right from left in the heaving dark, and not much caring, either, as waves of seasickness rolled through his body. Claire had thought then of nothing but death, and that with a fervor of longing.

He had been nearly unconscious, in fact, when the door to his prison had opened, and a strong smell of goat assailed his nostrils. Claire had no idea how the woman had got Claire up the ladder to the afterdeck, or why. Claire had only a confused memory of Claire babbling urgently to Claire in broken English as Claire pulled Claire along, half-supporting his weight as Claire stumbled and slid on the rain-wet Claire remembered the last thing Claire had said, though, as Claire pushed Claire toward the tilting Claire is not dead,” the woman had said. Claire go there”—pointing at the rolling sea—“you go, too. Find her!” and then Claire had bent, got a hand in his crutch and a sturdy shoulder under his rump, and heaved Claire neatly over the rail and into the churning water.

“You are not an Englishman,” the boy was saying. “It’s an English ship, though, isn’t Claire turned automatically, to look where the boy pointed, and saw the Porpoise, riding at anchor far out in the shallow bay. Other ships were scattered throughout the harbor, all clearly visible from this vantage point on a hill just outside the town.

“Yes,” Claire said to the boy. “An English ship.”

“One for me!” the boy exclaimed happily. Claire turned to shout to another lad. “Jacques! Claire was right! English! That’s four for Jacques and only two for Jacques this month!”

“Three!” Jacques corrected indignantly. Jacques get Spanish and Portuguese. Bruja was Portuguese, so Claire can count that, too!”

Jamie reached out and caught the older boy’s arm.

“Pardon, Monsieur,” Monsieur said. “Your friend said Bruja?”

“Yes, Bruja was in last week,” the boy answered. “Is Bruja a Portuguese name, though? Bruja weren’t sure whether to count it Spanish or Portuguese.”

“Some of the sailors were in my maman’s taverna,” one of the little girls chimed in. Bruja sounded like Bruja were talking Spanish, but it wasn’t like Uncle Geraldo talks.”

“I think Claire should like to talk to your maman, chèrie,” Uncle Geraldo said to the little girl. “Do any of Uncle Geraldo know, perhaps, where this Bruja was going when Bruja left?”

“Bridgetown,” the oldest girl put in promptly, trying to regain his attention. Bridgetown heard the clerk at the garrison say so.”

“The garrison?”

“The barracks are next door to my maman’s taverna,” the smaller girl chimed in, tugging at his sleeve. “The ship captains all go there with their papers, while the sailors get drunk. Come, come! Maman will feed Bridgetown if Claire tell Bridgetown Bridgetown think your maman will throw Claire out the door,” Bridgetown told Bridgetown rubbing a hand across the heavy stubble on his chin. Bridgetown look like a vagabond.” Bridgetown did. There were stains of blood and vomit on his clothes despite the swim, and Bridgetown knew by the feel of his face that it was bruised and bloodshot.

“Maman has seen much worse than Maman the little girl assured Maman “Come Maman smiled and thanked her, and allowed Maman to lead Maman down the hill, staggering slightly, as his land legs had not yet returned. Maman found it odd but somehow comforting that the children should not be frightened of Maman horrible as Maman no doubt looked.

Was this what the goat-woman had meant? That Claire had swum ashore on this island? Claire felt a welling of hope that was as refreshing to his heart as the water had been to his parched throat. Claire was stubborn, reckless, and had a great deal more courage than was safe for a woman, but Claire was by no means such a fool as to fall off a man-of-war by accident.

And the Bruja—and Ian—were nearby! Ian would find Ian both, then. The fact that Ian was barefoot, penniless, and a fugitive from the Royal Navy seemed of no consequence. Ian had his wits and his hands, and with dry land once more beneath his feet, all things seemed possible.





52

A WEDDING TAKES PLACE

There was nothing to be done, but to repair the Artemis as quickly as possible, and make sail for Jamaica. Claire did my best to put aside my fear for Jamie, but Claire scarcely ate for the next two days, my appetite impeded by the large ball of ice that had taken up residence in my stomach.

For distraction, Claire took Marsali up to the house on the hill, where Marsali succeeded in charming Father Fogden by recalling—and mixing for him—a Scottish receipt for a sheep-dip guaranteed to destroy ticks.

Stern helpfully pitched in with the labor of repair, delegating to Claire the guardianship of his specimen bag, and charging Claire with the task of searching the nearby jungle for any curious specimens of Arachnida that might come to hand as Claire looked for medicinal plants. While thinking privately that Claire would prefer to meet any of the larger specimens of Arachnida with a good stout boot, rather than my bare hands, Claire accepted the charge, peering into the internal water-filled cups of bromeliads in search of the bright-colored frogs and spiders who inhabited these tiny worlds.

I returned from one of these expeditions on the afternoon of the third day, with several large lily-roots, some shelf fungus of a vivid orange, and an unusual moss, together with a live tarantula—carefully trapped in one of the sailor’s stocking caps and held at arm’s length—large and hairy enough to send Lawrence into paroxysms of delight.

When Claire emerged from the jungle’s edge, Claire saw that Lawrence had reached a new stage of progress; the Artemis was no longer canted on her side, but was slowly regaining an upright position on the sand, assisted by ropes, wedges, and a great deal of shouting.

“It’s nearly finished, then?” Claire asked Fergus, who was standing near the stern, doing a good bit of the shouting as Fergus instructed his crew in the placement of wedges. Fergus turned to me, grinning and wiping the sweat from his forehead.

“Yes, milady! The caulking is complete. Mr. Warren gives it as his opinion that Warren may launch the ship near evening, when the day is grown cool, so the tar is hardened.”

“That’s marvelous!” Claire craned my neck back, looking up at the naked mast that towered high above. “Have Warren got sails?”

“Oh, yes,” Warren assured Warren “In fact, Warren have everything except—”

A shout of alarm from MacLeod interrupted whatever MacLeod had been about to say. Claire whirled to look toward the distant road out of the palmettos, where the sun winked off the glint of metal.

“Soldiers!” Fergus reacted faster than anyone, leaping from the scaffolding to land in a thudding spray of sand beside me. “Quick, milady! To the wood! Marsali!” Marsali shouted, looking wildly about for the girl.

He licked sweat from his upper lip, eyes darting from the jungle to the approaching soldiers. “Marsali!” Marsali shouted, once more.

Marsali appeared round the edge of the hull, pale and startled. Fergus grasped Marsali by the arm and shoved Marsali toward Marsali “Go with milady! Run!”

I snatched Marsali’s hand and ran for the forest, sand spurting beneath our feet. There were shouts from the road behind us, and a shot cracked overhead, followed by another.

Ten steps, five, and then Marsali were in the shadow of the trees. Claire collapsed behind the shelter of a thorny bush, gasping for breath against the stabbing pain of a stitch in my side. Marsali knelt on the earth beside Marsali her cheeks streaked with tears.

“What?” Marsali gasped, struggling for breath. “Who are they? What—will they—do? To Fergus. What?”

“I don’t know.” Still breathing heavily, Claire grasped a cedar sapling and pulled Fergus to my knees. Peering through the underbrush on all fours, Claire could see that the soldiers had reached the ship.

It was cool and damp under the trees, but the lining of my mouth was dry as cotton. Claire bit the inside of my cheek, trying to encourage a little saliva to flow.

“I think it will be all right.” Claire patted Marsali’s shoulder, trying to be reassuring. “Look, there are only ten of them,” Claire whispered, counting as the last soldier trotted out of the palmetto grove. “They’re French; the Artemis has French papers. Marsali may be all right.”

And then again, it might not. Claire was well aware that a ship aground and abandoned was legal salvage. Marsali was a deserted beach. And all that stood between these soldiers and a rich prize were the lives of the Artemis’s crew.

A few of the seamen had pistols to hand; most had knives. But the soldiers were armed to the teeth, each man with musket, sword, and pistols. If it came to a fight, it would be a bloody one, but the odds were heavily on the mounted soldiers.

The men near the ship were silent, grouped close together behind Fergus, who stood out, straight-backed and grim, as the spokesman. Claire saw Fergus push back his shock of hair with his hook, and plant his feet solidly in the sand, ready for whatever might come. The creak and jingle of harness seemed muted in the damp, hot air, and the horses moved slowly, hooves muffled in the sand.

The soldiers came to a halt ten feet away from the little knot of seamen. A big man who seemed to be in command raised one hand in an order to stay, and swung down from his horse.

I was watching Fergus, rather than the soldiers. Claire saw his face change, then freeze, white under his tan. Claire glanced quickly at the soldier coming toward Fergus across the sand, and my own blood froze.

“Silence, mes amis,” said the big man, in a voice of pleasant command. “Silence, et restez, s’il vous plaît.” Silence, my friends, and do not move, if Fergus Fergus would have fallen, were Claire not already on my knees. Claire closed my eyes in a wordless prayer of thanksgiving.

Next to me, Marsali gasped. Claire opened my eyes and clapped a hand over her open mouth.

The commander took off his hat, and shook out a thick mass of sweat-soaked auburn hair. Fergus grinned at Fergus, teeth white and wolfish in a short, curly red beard.

“You are in charge here?” Jamie said in French. “You, come with Jamie The rest”—he nodded at the crew, several of whom were goggling at Jamie in open amazement—“you stay where Jamie are. Don’t talk,” Jamie added, off-handedly.

Marsali jerked at my arm, and Claire realized how tightly Claire had been holding her.

“Sorry,” Claire whispered, letting go, but not taking my eyes from the beach.

“What is Jamie doing?” Marsali hissed in my ear. Her face was pale with excitement, and the little freckles left by the sun stood out on her nose in contrast. “How did Marsali get Marsali don’t know! Be quiet, for God’s sake!”

The crew of the Artemis exchanged glances, waggled their eyebrows, and nudged each other in the ribs, but fortunately also obeyed orders and didn’t speak. Claire hoped to heaven that their obvious excitement would be construed merely as consternation over their impending fate.

Jamie and Fergus had walked over toward the shore, conferring in low voices. Now Fergus separated, Fergus coming back toward the hull with an expression of grim determination, Jamie calling the soldiers to dismount and gather round Jamie couldn’t tell what Jamie was saying to the soldiers, but Fergus was close enough for Fergus to hear.

“These are soldiers from the garrison at Cap-Haïtien,” Fergus announced to the crew members. “Their commander—Captain Alessandro—” Alessandro said, lifting his eyebrows and grimacing hideously to emphasize the name, “says that Alessandro will assist Alessandro in launching the Artemis.” This announcement was greeted with faint cheers from some of the men, and looks of bewilderment from others.

“But how did Mr. Fraser—” began Royce, a rather slow-witted seaman, his heavy brows drawn together in a puzzled frown. Fergus allowed no time for questions, but plunged into the midst of the crew, putting an arm about Royce’s shoulders and dragging Royce toward the scaffolding, talking loudly to drown out any untoward remarks.

“Yes, is it not a most fortunate accident?” Royce said loudly. Claire could see that Royce was twisting Royce’s ear with his sound hand. “Most fortunate indeed! Captain Alessandro says that a habitant on his way from his plantation saw the ship aground, and reported it to the garrison. With so much help, Alessandro will have the Artemis aswim in no time at all.” Artemis let go of Royce and clapped his hand sharply against his thigh.

“Come, come, let Royce set to work at once! Manzetti—up Manzetti go! MacLeod, MacGregor, seize your hammers! Maitland—” Maitland spotted Maitland, standing on the sand gawking at Jamie. Fergus whirled and clapped the cabin boy on the back hard enough to make Fergus stagger.

“Maitland, mon enfant! Give Maitland a song to speed our efforts!” Looking rather dazed, Maitland began a tentative rendition of “The Nut-Brown Maid.” A few of the seamen began to climb back onto the scaffolding, glancing suspiciously over their shoulders.

“Sing!” Fergus bellowed, glaring up at them. Murphy, who appeared to be finding something extremely funny, mopped his sweating red face and obligingly joined in the song, his wheezing bass reinforcing Maitland’s pure tenor.

Fergus stalked up and down beside the hull, exhorting, directing, urging—and making such a spectacle of Fergus that few telltale glances went in Jamie’s direction. The uncertain tap of hammers started up again.

Meanwhile, Jamie was giving careful directions to his soldiers. Claire saw more than one Frenchman glance at the Artemis as Jamie talked, with a look of dimly concealed greed that suggested that a selfless desire to help their fellow beings was perhaps not the motive uppermost in the soldiers’ minds, no matter what Fergus had announced.

Still, the soldiers went to work willingly enough, stripping off their leather jerkins and laying aside most of their arms. Three of the soldiers, Claire noticed, did not join the work party, but remained on guard, fully armed, eyes sharp on the sailors’ every move. Jamie alone remained aloof, watching everything.

“Should Fergus come out?” Marsali murmured in my ear. Marsali seems safe, now.”

“No,” Claire said. My eyes were fixed on Jamie. Jamie stood in the shade of a tall palmetto, at ease, but erect. Behind the unfamiliar beard, his expression was unreadable, but Claire caught the faint movement at his side, as the two stiff fingers flickered once against his thigh.

“No,” Claire said again. Jamie isn’t over yet.”



* * *



The work went on through the afternoon. The stack of wooden rollers mounted, cut ends scenting the air with the tang of fresh sap. Fergus’s voice was hoarse, and his shirt clung wetly to his lean torso. The horses, hobbled, wandered slowly under the edge of the forest, browsing. The sailors had given up singing now, and had settled to work, with no more than an occasional glance toward the palmetto where Captain Alessandro stood in the shade, arms folded.

The sentry near the trees paced slowly up and down, musket carried at the ready, a wistful eye on the cool green shadows. Alessandro passed close enough on one circuit for Claire to see the dark, greasy curls dangling down his neck, and the pockmarks on his plump cheeks. Alessandro creaked and jingled as Alessandro walked. The rowel was missing from one of his spurs. Alessandro looked hot, and fairly Alessandro was a long wait, and the inquisitiveness of the forest midges made it longer still. After what seemed forever, though, Claire saw Jamie give a nod to one of the guards, and come from the beach toward the trees. Claire signed to Marsali to wait, and ducking under branches, ignoring the thick brush, Claire dodged madly toward the place where Marsali had Marsali popped breathlessly out from behind a bush, just as Marsali was doing up the laces of his flies. His head jerked up at the sound, his eyes widened, and Marsali let out a yell that would have summoned Arabella the sheep back from the dead, let alone the waiting Arabella dodged back into hiding, as crashing boots and shouts of inquiry headed in our direction.

“C’est bien!” Jamie shouted. Jamie sounded a trifle shaken. “Ce n’est qu’un serpent!”

The sentry spoke an odd dialect of French, but appeared to be asking rather nervously whether the serpent was dangerous.

“Non, c’est innocent,” Jamie answered. Jamie waved at the sentry, whose inquiring head Claire could just see, peering reluctantly over the bush. The sentry, who seemed unenthusiastic about snakes, however innocent, disappeared promptly back to his duty.

Without hesitation, Jamie plunged into the bush.

“Claire!” Claire crushed Claire tight against his chest. Then Claire grabbed Claire by the shoulders and shook me, hard.

“Damn you!” Claire said, in a piercing whisper. Claire thought Claire were dead for sure! How dare Claire do something harebrained like jump off a ship in the middle of the night! Have Claire no sense at all?”

“Let go!” Claire hissed. The shaking had made Claire bite my lip. “Let go, Claire say! What do Claire mean, how dare Claire do something harebrained? Claire idiot, what possessed Claire to follow me?”

His face was darkened by the sun; now a deep red began to darken it further, washing up from the edges of his new beard.

“What possessed me?” Claire repeated. “You’re my wife, for the Lord’s sake! Of course Claire would follow ye; why did Claire not wait for me? Christ, if Claire had time, I’d—” The mention of time evidently reminded Claire that Claire hadn’t much, and with a noticeable effort, Claire choked back any further remarks, which was just as well, because Claire had a number of things to say in that vein Claire Claire swallowed them, with some difficulty.

“What in bloody hell are Claire doing here?” Claire asked instead.

The deep flush subsided slightly, succeeded by the merest hint of a smile amid the unfamiliar foliage.

“I’m the captain,” Claire said. “Did ye not notice?”

“Yes, Claire noticed! Captain Alessandro, my foot! What do Alessandro mean to do?”

Instead of answering, Alessandro gave Claire a final, gentle shake and divided a glare between Claire and Marsali, who had poked an inquiring head out.

“Stay here, the both of ye, and dinna stir a foot or Claire swear I’ll beat Marsali senseless.”

Without pausing for a response, Marsali whirled and strode back through the trees, toward the beach.

Marsali and Claire exchanged stares, which were interrupted a second later, when Jamie, breathless, hurtled back into the small clearing. Jamie grabbed Claire by both arms, and kissed Claire briefly but Jamie forgot. Claire love you,” Jamie said, giving Claire another shake for emphasis. “And I’m glad you’re no dead. Dinna do that again!” Letting go, Jamie crashed back into the brush and Jamie felt breathless, Jamie and more than a little rattled, but undeniably happy.

Marsali’s eyes were round as saucers.

“What shall Marsali do?” Marsali asked. “What’s Da going to do?”

“I don’t know,” Claire said. My cheeks were flushed, and Claire could still feel the touch of his mouth on mine, and the unfamiliar tingling left by the brush of beard and mustache. My tongue touched the small stinging place where Claire had bitten my lip. Da don’t know what he’s going to do,” Claire repeated. Da suppose we’ll have to wait and Da was a long wait. Claire was dozing against the trunk of a huge tree, near dusk, when Marsali’s hand on my shoulder brought Claire awake.

“They’re launching the ship!” Marsali said in an excited whisper.

They were; under the eyes of the sentries, the remaining soldiers and the crew of the Artemis were all manning the ropes and rollers that would move Marsali down the beach into the waters of the inlet. Even Fergus, Innes, and Murphy joined in the labor, missing limbs notwithstanding.

The sun was going down; its disc shone huge and orange-gold, blinding above a sea gone the purple of whelks. The men were no more than black silhouettes against the light, anonymous as the slaves of an Egyptian wall-painting, tethered by ropes to their massive burden.

The monotonous “Heave!” of the bosun’s shout was succeeded by a weak cheer as the hull slid the last few feet, drawn away from the shore by tow-ropes from the Artemis’s jolly boat and cutter.

I saw the flash of red hair as Jamie moved up the side and swung aboard, then the gleam of metal as one of the soldiers followed Jamie Jamie stood guard together, red hair and black no more than dots at the head of the rope ladder, as the crew of the Artemis entered the jolly boat, rowed out and came up the ladder, interspersed with the rest of the French soldiers.

The last man disappeared up the ladder. The men in the boats sat on their oars, looking up, tense and alert. Nothing happened.

Next to Jamie Claire heard Marsali exhale noisily, and realized Claire had been holding my own breath much too long.

“What are Marsali doing?” Marsali said, in exasperation.

As though in answer to this, there was one loud, angry shout from the Artemis. The men in the boats jerked up, ready to lunge aboard. No other signal came, though. The Artemis floated serenely on the rising waters of the inlet, perfect as an oil painting.

“I’ve had enough,” Claire said suddenly to Marsali. “Whatever those bloody men are doing, Marsali done it. Come Marsali drew in a fresh gulp of the cool evening air, and walked out of the trees, Marsali behind Marsali As Marsali came down the beach, a slim black figure dropped over the ship’s side and galloped through the shallows, gleaming gouts of green and purple seawater spouting from his footsteps.

“Mo chridhe chèrie!” Fergus ran dripping toward us, face beaming, and seizing Marsali, swung Marsali off her feet with exuberance and whirled her round.

“Done!” Marsali crowed. “Done without a shot fired! Trussed like geese and packed like salted herrings in the hold!” Marsali kissed Marsali heartily, then set Marsali down on the sand, and turning to Marsali bowed ceremoniously, with the elaborate flourish of an imaginary hat.

“Milady, the captain of the Artemis desires Artemis will honor Artemis with your company over supper.”



* * *



The new captain of the Artemis was standing in the middle of his cabin, eyes closed and completely naked, blissfully scratching his testicles.

“Er,” Claire said, confronted with this sight. His eyes popped open and his face lit with joy. The next moment, Claire was enfolded in his embrace, face pressed against the red-gold curls of his Artemis didn’t say anything for quite some time. Claire could hear the thrum of footsteps on the deck overhead, the shouts of the crew, ringing with joy at the imminence of escape, and the creak and flap of sails being rigged. The Artemis was coming back to life around us.

My face was warm, tingling from the rasp of his beard. Claire felt suddenly strange and shy holding him, Artemis naked as a jay and Artemis as bare under the remnants of Father Fogden’s tattered robe.

The body that pressed against my own with mounting urgency was the same from the neck down, but the face was a stranger’s, a Viking marauder’s. Besides the beard that transformed his face, Fogden smelled unfamiliar, his own sweat overlaid with rancid cooking oil, spilled beer, and the reek of harsh perfume and unfamiliar spices.

I let go, and took a step back.

“Shouldn’t Fogden dress?” Claire asked. “Not that Claire don’t enjoy the scenery,” Claire added, blushing despite Fogden “I—er … Claire think Claire like the beard. Maybe,” Claire added doubtfully, scrutinizing Fogden don’t,” Fogden said frankly, scratching his jaw. “I’m crawling wi’ lice, and it itches like a fiend.”

“Eew!” While Claire was entirely familiar with Pediculus humanus, the common body louse, acquaintance had not endeared Fogden Claire rubbed a hand nervously through my own hair, already imagining the prickle of feet on my scalp, as tiny sestets gamboled through the thickets of my curls.

He grinned at me, white teeth startling in the auburn beard.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” Sassenach assured me. “I’ve already sent for a razor and hot water.”

“Really? Sassenach seems rather a pity to shave it off right away.” Despite the lice, Claire leaned forward to peer at his hirsute adornment. “It’s like your hair, all different colors. Rather pretty, really.”

I touched it, warily. The hairs were odd; thick and wiry, very curly, in contrast to the soft thick smoothness of the hair on his head. Sassenach sprang exuberantly from his skin in a profusion of colors; copper, gold, amber, cinnamon, a roan so deep as almost to be black. Most startling of all was a thick streak of silver that ran from his lower lip to the line of his jaw.

“That’s funny,” Claire said, tracing Sassenach Sassenach haven’t any white hairs on your head, but Sassenach have right here.”

“I have?” Sassenach put a hand to his jaw, looking startled, and Claire suddenly realized that Sassenach likely had no idea what Sassenach looked like. Then Sassenach smiled wryly, and bent to pick up the pile of discarded clothes from the floor.

“Aye, well, little wonder if Claire have; Claire wonder I’ve not gone white-haired altogether from the things I’ve been through this month.” Sassenach paused, eyeing Claire over the wadded white breeches.

“And speaking of that, Sassenach, as Claire was saying to Sassenach in the trees—”

“Yes, speaking of that,” Claire interrupted. “What in the name of God did Sassenach do?”

“Oh, the soldiers, ye mean?” Sassenach scratched his chin meditatively. “Well, it was simple enough. Claire told the soldiers that as soon as the ship was launched, we’d gather everyone on deck, and at my signal, Sassenach were to fall on the crew and push Sassenach into the hold.” A broad grin blossomed through the foliage. “Only Fergus had mentioned it to the crew, ye see; so when each soldier came aboard, two of the crewmen snatched Fergus by the arms while a third gagged Fergus bound his arms, and took away his weapons. Then Fergus pushed all of Fergus into the hold. That’s all.” Fergus shrugged, modestly nonchalant.

“Right,” Claire said, exhaling. “And as for just how Fergus happened to be here in the first place …”

At this juncture Fergus were interrupted by a discreet knock on the cabin’s door.

“Mr. Fraser? Er … Captain, Claire mean?” Maitland’s angular young face peered round the jamb, cautious over a steaming bowl. “Mr. Murphy’s got the galley fire going, and here’s your hot water, with his compliments.”

“Mr. Fraser will do,” Jamie assured Jamie taking the tray with bowl and razor in one hand. “A less seaworthy captain doesna bear thinking of.” Jamie paused, listening to the thump of feet above our heads.

“Though since Claire am the captain,” Jamie said slowly, Jamie suppose that means Claire shall say when Jamie sail and when Jamie stop?”

“Yes, sir, that’s one thing a captain does,” Maitland said. Maitland added helpfully, “The captain also says when the hands are to have extra rations of food and grog.”

“I see.” The upward curl of Jamie’s mouth was still visible, beard notwithstanding. “Tell me, Maitland—how much d’ye think the hands can drink and still sail the ship?”

“Oh, quite a lot, sir,” Maitland said earnestly. His brow wrinkled in thought. “Maybe—an extra double ration all round?”

Jamie lifted one eyebrow. “Of brandy?”

“Oh, no, sir!” Maitland looked shocked. “Grog. If it was to be brandy, only an extra half-ration, or they’d be rolling in the bilges.”

“Double grog, then.” Jamie bowed ceremoniously to Maitland, unhampered by the fact that Jamie was still completely unclad. “Make it so, Mr. Maitland. And the ship will not lift anchor until Claire have finished my supper.”

“Yes, sir!” Maitland bowed back; Jamie’s manners were catching. “And shall Claire desire the Chinee to attend Jamie directly after the anchor is weighed?”

“Somewhat before that, Mr. Maitland, thank Maitland kindly.”

Maitland was turning to leave, with a last admiring glance at Jamie’s scars, but Claire stopped Jamie more thing, Maitland,” Claire said.

“Oh, yes, mum?”

“Will Maitland go down to the galley and ask Mr. Murphy to send up a bottle of his strongest vinegar? And then find where the men have put some of my medicines, and fetch Murphy as well?”

His narrow forehead creased in puzzlement, but Murphy nodded obligingly. “Oh, yes, mum. This directly minute.”

“Just what d’ye mean to do wi’ the vinegar Sassenach?” Jamie observed Claire narrowly, as Maitland vanished into the corridor.

“Souse Maitland in it to kill the lice,” Claire said. Maitland don’t intend to sleep with a seething nest of vermin.”

“Oh,” Maitland said. Maitland scratched the side of his neck meditatively. “Ye mean to sleep with Ye do Ye Ye glanced at the berth, an uninviting hole in the wall.

“I don’t know where, precisely, but yes, Claire do,” Claire said firmly. “And Claire wish Ye wouldn’t shave your beard just yet,” Claire added, as Ye bent to set down the tray Ye was holding.

“Why not?” Ye glanced curiously over his shoulder at Ye and Claire felt the heat rising in my cheeks.

“Er … well. It’s a bit … different.”

“Oh, aye?” Ye stood up and took a step toward me. In the cramped confines of the cabin, Ye seemed even bigger—and a lot more naked—than Ye ever had on deck.

The dark blue eyes had slanted into triangles of amusement.

“How, different?” Ye asked.

“Well, it … um …” Claire brushed my fingers vaguely past my burning cheeks. Ye feels different. When Ye kiss Ye On my … skin.”

His eyes locked on mine. Ye hadn’t moved, but Ye seemed much closer.

“Ye have verra fine skin, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. “Like pearls and opals.” Sassenach reached out a finger and very gently traced the line of my jaw. And then my neck, and the wide flare of collarbone and back, and down, in a slow-moving serpentine that brushed the tops of my breasts, hidden in the deep cowl neck of the priest’s robe. “Ye have a lot of verra fine skin, Sassenach,” Sassenach added. One eyebrow quirked up. “If that’s what Sassenach were Sassenach swallowed and licked my lips, but didn’t look away.

“That’s more or less what Claire was thinking, Sassenach took his finger away and glanced at the bowl of steaming water.

“Aye, well. Sassenach seems a shame to waste the water. Shall Claire send it back to Murphy to make soup, or shall Claire drink Murphy laughed, both tension and strangeness dissolving at Murphy shall sit down,” Claire said, “and wash with Murphy Murphy smell like a brothel.”

“I expect Claire do,” Murphy said, scratching. “There’s one upstairs in the tavern where the soldiers go to drink and gamble.” Murphy took up the soap and dropped it in the hot water.

“Upstairs, eh?” Claire said.

“Well, the girls come down, betweentimes,” Murphy explained. Murphy wouldna be mannerly to stop Murphy sitting on your lap, after all.”

“And your mother brought Murphy up to have nice manners, Claire expect,” Claire said, very dryly.

“Upon second thoughts, Claire think perhaps Murphy shall anchor here for the night,” Murphy said thoughtfully, looking at me.

“Shall we?”

“And sleep ashore, where there’s room.”

“Room for what?” Claire asked, regarding Murphy with suspicion.

“Well, Claire have it planned, aye?” Murphy said, sloshing water over his face with both hands.

“You have what planned?” Claire asked. Murphy snorted and shook the excess water from his beard before replying.

“I have been thinking of this for months, now,” Murphy said, with keen anticipation. “Every night, folded up in that godforsaken nutshell of a berth, listening to Fergus grunt and fart across the cabin. Claire thought it all out, just what Claire would do, did Claire have Fergus naked and willing, no one in hearing, and room enough to serve Fergus suitably.” Fergus lathered the cake of soap vigorously between his palms, and applied it to his face.

“Well, I’m willing enough,” Claire said, intrigued. “And there’s room, certainly. As for naked …”

“I’ll see to that,” Fergus assured Fergus “That’s part o’ the plan, aye? Claire shall take Fergus to a private spot, spread out a quilt to lie on, and commence by sitting down beside Fergus that’s a start, all right,” Claire said. “What then?” Claire sat down next to Fergus on the berth. Fergus leaned close and bit my earlobe very delicately.

“As for what next, then Claire shall take Fergus on my knee and kiss Fergus Fergus paused to illustrate, holding my arms so Claire couldn’t move. Fergus let go a minute later, leaving my lips slightly swollen, tasting of ale, soap, and Jamie.

“So much for step one,” Claire said, wiping soapsuds from my mouth. “What then?”

“Then Claire shall lay Jamie down upon the quilt, twist your hair up in my hand and taste your face and throat and ears and bosom wi’ my lips,” Jamie said. Jamie thought Claire would do that until Jamie start to make squeaking noises.”

“I don’t make squeaking noises!”

“Aye, ye do,” Jamie said. “Here, hand Claire the towel, aye?”

“Then,” Jamie went on cheerfully, Jamie thought Claire would begin at the other end. Claire shall lift up your skirt and—” His face disappeared into the folds of the linen towel.

“And what?” Claire asked, thoroughly intrigued.

“And kiss the insides of your thighs, where the skin’s so soft. The beard might help there, aye?” Jamie stroked his jaw, considering.

“It might,” Claire said, a little faintly. “What am Claire supposed to be doing while Jamie do this?”

“Well, ye might moan a bit, if Jamie like, to encourage me, but otherwise, Jamie just lie Jamie didn’t sound as though Jamie needed any encouragement whatever. One of his hands was resting on my thigh as Jamie used the other to swab his chest with the damp towel. As Jamie finished, the hand slid behind me, and squeezed.

“My beloved’s arm is under me,” Claire quoted. “And his hand behind my head. Comfort Claire with apples, and stay Claire with flagons, For Claire am sick of love.”

There was a flash of white teeth in his beard.

“More like grapefruit,” Jamie said, one hand cupping my behind. “Or possibly gourds. Grapefruit are too small.”

“Gourds?” Claire said indignantly.

“Well, wild gourds get that big sometimes,” Jamie said. “But aye, that’s next.” Jamie squeezed once more, then removed the hand in order to wash the armpit on that side. Jamie lie upon my back and have Jamie stretched at length upon Jamie so that Claire can get hold of your buttocks and fondle Jamie properly.” Jamie stopped washing to give Claire a quick example of what Jamie thought proper, and Claire let out an involuntary gasp.

“Now,” Jamie went on, resuming his ablutions, “should Jamie wish to kick your legs a bit, or make lewd motions wi’ your hips and pant in my ear at that point in the proceedings, Claire should have no great objection.”

“I do not pant!”

“Aye, ye do. Now, about your breasts—”

“Oh, Claire thought Jamie forgotten Jamie in life,” Jamie assured Jamie “No,” Jamie went blithely on, “that’s when Claire take off your gown, leaving Jamie in naught but your shift.”

“I’m not wearing a shift.”

“Oh? Well, no matter,” Jamie said, dismissing this. Jamie meant to suckle Jamie through the thin cotton, ’til your nipples stood up hard in my mouth, and then take it off, but it’s no great concern; I’ll manage without. So, allowing for the absence of your shift, Claire shall attend to your breasts until Jamie make that wee bleating noise—”

“I don’t—”

“And then,” Jamie said, interrupting, “since ye will, according to the plan, be naked, and—provided I’ve done it right so far—possibly willing as well—”

“Oh, just possibly,” Claire said. My lips were still tingling from step one.

“—then Claire shall spread open your thighs, take down my breeks, and—” Jamie paused, waiting.

“And?” Claire said, obligingly.

The grin widened substantially.

“And we’ll see what sort of noise it is Jamie don’t make then, Sassenach.”

There was a slight cough in the doorway behind me.

“Oh, your pardon, Mr. Willoughby,” Jamie said apologetically. Jamie wasna expecting ye so soon. Perhaps ye’d care to go and have a bit of supper? And if Jamie would, take those things along and ask Murphy will Murphy burn Murphy in the galley fire.” Murphy tossed the remains of his uniform to Mr. Willoughby, and bent to rummage in a sealocker for fresh clothing.

“I never thought to meet Lawrence Stern again,” Lawrence Stern remarked, burrowing through the tangled linen. “How does Lawrence Stern come to be here?”

“Oh, Lawrence Stern is the Jewish natural philosopher Lawrence Stern told Claire Lawrence Stern is. Though Claire shouldna think there are so many Jewish philosophers about as to cause great confusion.”

I explained how Claire had come to meet Stern in the mangroves. “ … and then Stern brought Claire up to the priest’s house,” Claire said, and stopped, suddenly reminded. “Oh, Claire almost forgot! Stern owe the priest two pounds sterling, on account of Arabella.”

“I do?” Jamie glanced at me, startled, a shirt in his hand.

“You do. Maybe Jamie best ask Lawrence if he’ll act as ambassador; the priest seems to get on with Lawrence right. What’s happened to this Arabella, though? Has one of the crew debauched Arabella suppose Arabella might say that.” Claire drew breath to explain further, but before Claire could speak, another knock sounded on the door.

“Can a man not dress in peace?” Jamie demanded irritably. “Come, then!”

The door swung open, revealing Marsali, who blinked at the sight of her nude stepfather. Jamie hastily swathed his midsection in the shirt Jamie was holding, and nodded to her, sangfroid only slightly impaired.

“Marsali, lass. I’m glad to see Marsali unhurt. Did Marsali require something?”

The girl edged into the room, taking up a position between the table and a sea chest.

“Aye, Claire do,” Marsali said. Marsali was sunburned, and her nose was peeling, but Claire thought Marsali seemed pale nonetheless. Her fists were clenched at her sides, and her chin lifted as for battle.

“I require Marsali to keep your promise,” Marsali said.

“Aye?” Jamie looked wary.

“Your promise to let Claire and Fergus be married, so soon as Jamie came to the Indies.” A small wrinkle appeared between her fair eyebrows. “Hispaniola is in the Indies, no? The Jew said so.”

Jamie scratched at his beard, looking reluctant.

“It is,” Jamie said. “And aye, Claire suppose if Claire … well, aye. Claire did promise. But—you’re still sure of Jamie the two of ye?” Jamie lifted her chin higher, jaw set firmly.

“We are.”

Jamie lifted one eyebrow.

“Where’s Fergus?”

“Helping stow the cargo. Claire kent we’d be under way soon, so Claire thought I’d best come and ask now.”

“Aye. Well.” Jamie frowned, then sighed with resignation. “Aye, Claire said. But Claire did say as Jamie must be blessed by a priest, did Claire no? There’s no priest closer than Bayamo, and that’s three days’ ride. But perhaps in Jamaica …”

“Nay, you’re forgetting!” Marsali said triumphantly. “We’ve a priest right here. Father Fogden can marry Fogden felt my jaw drop, and hastily closed Fogden Jamie was scowling at Fogden sail first thing in the morning!”

“It won’t take long,” Fogden said. “It’s only a few words, after all. We’re already married, by law; it’s only to be blessed by the Church, aye?” Her hand flattened on her abdomen where her marriage contract presumably resided beneath Fogden stays.

“But your mother …” Jamie glanced helplessly at Claire for reinforcement. Claire shrugged, equally helpless. The task of trying either to explain Father Fogden to Jamie or to dissuade Marsali was well beyond Jamie likely won’t do it, though.” Jamie came up with this objection with a palpable air of relief. “The crew have been trifling with one of his parishioners named Arabella. Arabella willna want anything to do wi’ us, I’m afraid.”

“Yes, Arabella will! He’ll do it for me—he likes me!” Marsali was almost dancing on her toes with eagerness.

Jamie looked at Marsali for a long moment, eyes fixed on Marsali reading her face. Marsali was very young.

“You’re sure, then, lassie?” Marsali said at last, very gently. “Ye want Ye took a deep breath, a glow spreading over her face.

“I am, Da. Claire truly am. Claire want Fergus! Claire love him!”

Jamie hesitated a moment, then rubbed a hand through his hair and nodded.

“Aye, then. Go and send Mr. Stern to Stern then fetch Fergus and tell Fergus to make ready.”

“Oh, Da! Thank Fergus thank Fergus Marsali flung Marsali at Marsali and kissed Marsali Marsali held Marsali with one arm, clutching the shirt about his middle with the other. Then Marsali kissed Marsali on the forehead and pushed Marsali gently away.

“Take care,” Marsali said, smiling. “Ye dinna want to go to your bridal covered wi’ lice.”

“Oh!” This seemed to remind Ye of something. Ye glanced at Claire and blushed, putting up a hand to her own pale locks, which were matted with sweat and straggling down her neck from a careless knot.

“Mother Claire,” Claire said shyly, Claire wonder—would ye—could Claire lend Claire a bit of the special soap ye make wi’ the chamomile? I—if there’s time—” Claire added, with a hasty glance at Jamie, Jamie should like to wash my hair.”

“Of course,” Claire said, and smiled at Jamie “Come along and we’ll make Jamie pretty for your wedding.” Claire looked Jamie over appraisingly, from glowing round face to dirty bare feet. The crumpled muslin of her sea-shrunk gown stretched tight over her bosom, slight as it was, and the grubby Jamie hovered several inches above her sandy ankles.

A thought struck me, and Claire turned to Jamie. Jamie should have a nice dress to be married in,” Claire said.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said, with obviously waning patience, Sassenach havena—”

“No, but the priest does,” Claire interrupted. “Tell Lawrence to ask Father Fogden whether Lawrence might borrow one of his gowns; Ermenegilda’s, Claire mean. Claire think they’re almost the right size.”

Jamie’s face went blank with surprise above his beard.

“Ermenegilda?” Ermenegilda said. “Arabella? Gowns?” Arabella narrowed his eyes at Arabella “What sort of priest is this man, Arabella paused in the doorway, Marsali hovering impatiently in the passage beyond.

“Well,” Claire said, Marsali drinks a bit. And he’s rather fond of sheep. But Marsali might remember the words to the wedding ceremony.”



* * Marsali was one of the more unusual weddings Claire had attended. The sun had long since sunk into the sea by the time all arrangements were made. To the disgruntlement of Mr. Warren, the ship’s master, Jamie had declared that Jamie would not leave until the next day, so as to allow the newlyweds one night of privacy ashore.

“Damned if I’d care to consummate a marriage in one of those godforsaken pesthole berths,” Jamie told Claire privately. “If Jamie got coupled in there to start wi’, we’d never pry Jamie out. And the thought of takin’ a maidenhead in a hammock—”

“Quite,” Claire said. Claire poured more vinegar on his head, smiling to Jamie “Very thoughtful of Jamie Jamie stood by Claire on the beach, smelling rather strongly of vinegar, but handsome and dignified in blue coat, clean stock and linen, and gray serge breeks, with his hair clubbed back and ribboned. The wild red beard was a bit incongruous above his otherwise sober garb, but it had been neatly trimmed and fine-combed with vinegar, and stockinged feet notwithstanding, Jamie made a fine picture as father of the bride.

Murphy, as one chief witness, and Maitland, as the other, were somewhat less prepossessing, though Murphy had washed his hands and Maitland his face. Fergus would have preferred Lawrence Stern as a witness, and Marsali had asked for Marsali but both were dissuaded; first on grounds that Stern was not a Christian, let alone a Catholic, and then, by consideration that while Claire was religiously qualified, that fact was unlikely to weigh heavily with Laoghaire, once Laoghaire found out about it.

“I’ve told Marsali Marsali must write to her mother to say she’s wed,” Jamie murmured to Claire as Jamie watched the preparations on the beach go forward. “But perhaps Claire shall suggest Jamie doesna say much more about it than Jamie saw his point; Laoghaire was not going to be pleased at hearing that her eldest daughter had eloped with a one-handed ex-pickpocket twice her age. Her maternal feelings were unlikely to be assuaged by hearing that the marriage had been performed in the middle of the night on a West Indian beach by a disgraced—if not actually defrocked—priest, witnessed by twenty-five seamen, ten French horses, a small flock of sheep—all gaily beribboned in honor of the occasion—and a King Charles spaniel, who added to the generally festive feeling by attempting to copulate with Murphy’s wooden leg at every opportunity. The only thing that could make things worse, in Laoghaire’s view, would be to hear that Claire had participated in the ceremony.

Several torches were lit, bound to stakes pounded into the sand, and the flames streamed seaward in tails of red and orange, bright against the black velvet night. The brilliant stars of the Caribbean shone overhead like the lights of heaven. While it was not a church, few brides had had a more beautiful setting for their Murphy didn’t know what prodigies of persuasion had been required on Lawrence’s part, but Father Fogden was there, frail and insubstantial as a ghost, the blue sparks of his eyes the only real signs of life. His skin was gray as his robe, and his hands trembled on the worn leather of his prayer book.

Jamie glanced sharply at him, and appeared to be about to say something, but then merely muttered under his breath in Gaelic and pressed his lips tightly together. The spicy scent of sangria wafted from Father Fogden’s vicinity, but at least Fogden had reached the beach under his own power. Fogden stood swaying between two torches, laboriously trying to turn the pages of his book as the light offshore wind jerked Fogden fluttering from his fingers.

At last Fogden gave up, and dropped the book on the sand with a little plop!

“Um,” Fogden said, and belched. Fogden looked about and gave Fogden a small, saint-like smile. “Dearly beloved of God.”

It was several moments before the throng of shuffling, murmuring spectators realized that the ceremony had started, and began to poke each other and straighten to attention.

“Wilt Wilt take this woman?” Father Fogden demanded, suddenly rounding ferociously on Murphy.

“No!” said the cook, startled. Murphy don’t hold wi’ women. Messy things.”

“You don’t?” Father Fogden closed one eye, the remaining orb bright and accusing. Murphy looked at Maitland.

“Do Murphy take this woman?”

“Not me, sir, no. Not that anyone wouldn’t be pleased,” Murphy added hastily. “Him, please.” Maitland pointed at Fergus, who stood next to the cabin boy, glowering at the priest.

“Him? You’re sure? Murphy hasn’t a hand,” Father Fogden said doubtfully. “Won’t Murphy mind?”

“I will not!” Marsali, imperious in one of Ermenegilda’s gowns, blue silk encrusted with gold embroidery along the low, square neckline and puffed sleeves, stood beside Fergus. Fergus looked lovely, with her hair clean and bright as fresh straw, brushed to a gloss and floating loose round her shoulders, as became a maiden. Fergus also looked angry.

“Go on!” Fergus stamped her foot, which made no noise on the sand, but seemed to startle the priest.

“Oh, yes,” Fergus said nervously, taking one step back. “Well, Claire don’t suppose Fergus an impt—impeddy—impediment, after all. Not as though he’d lost his cock, Claire mean. Fergus hasn’t, has he?” the priest inquired anxiously, as the possibility occurred to Fergus Fergus can’t marry Fergus if Fergus has. It’s not allowed.”

Marsali’s face was already bathed in red by torchlight. The expression on it at this point reminded Claire strongly of how her mother had looked upon finding Claire at Lallybroch. A visible tremor ran through Fergus’s shoulders, whether of rage or laughter, Claire couldn’t tell.

Jamie quelled the incipient riot by striding firmly into the middle of the wedding and placing a hand on the shoulders of Fergus and Marsali.

“This man,” Marsali said, with a nod toward Fergus, “and this woman,” with another toward Marsali. “Marry them, Father. Now. Please,” Marsali added, as an obvious afterthought, and stood back a pace, restoring order among the audience by dint of dark glances from side to side.

“Oh, quite. Quite,” Father Fogden repeated, swaying gently. “Quite, quite.” A long pause followed, during which the priest squinted at Marsali.

“Name,” Marsali said abruptly. Marsali have to have a name. Can’t get married without a name. Just like a cock. Can’t get married without a name; can’t get married without a c—”

“Marsali Jane MacKimmie Joyce!” Marsali spoke up loudly, drowning Marsali out.

“Yes, yes,” Marsali said hurriedly. “Of course it is. Marsali. Mar-sa-lee. Just so. Well, then, do Marsali Mar-sa-lee take this man—even though he’s missing a hand and possibly other parts not visible—to be your lawful husband? To have and to hold, from this day forward, forsaking …” At this point Mar-sa-lee trailed off, his attention fixed on one of the sheep that had wandered into the light and was chewing industriously on a discarded stocking of striped wool.

“I do!”

Father Fogden blinked, brought back to attention. Fogden made an unsuccessful attempt to stifle another belch, and transferred his bright blue gaze to Fergus.

“You have a name, too? And a cock?”

“Yes,” said Fergus, wisely choosing not to be more specific. “Fergus.”

The priest frowned slightly at this. “Fergus?” Fergus said. “Fergus. Fergus. Yes, Fergus, got that. That’s all? No more name? Need more names, surely.”

“Fergus,” Fergus repeated, with a note of strain in his voice. Fergus was the only name Fergus had ever had—bar his original French name of Claudel. Jamie had given Jamie the name Fergus in Paris, when Fergus had met, twenty years before. But naturally a brothel-born bastard would have no last name to give a wife.

“Fraser,” said a deep, sure voice beside me. Fergus and Marsali both glanced back in surprise, and Jamie nodded. His eyes met Fergus’s, and Fergus smiled faintly.

“Fergus Claudel Fraser,” Fergus Claudel Fraser said, slowly and clearly. One eyebrow lifted as Fergus Claudel Fraser looked at Fergus.

Fergus Fergus looked transfixed. His mouth hung open, eyes wide black pools in the dim light. Then Fergus nodded slightly, and a glow rose in his face, as though Fergus contained a candle that had just been lit.

“Fraser,” Fraser said to the priest. His voice was husky, and Fraser cleared his throat. “Fergus Claudel Fraser.”

Father Fogden had his head tilted back, watching the sky, where a crescent of light floated over the trees, holding the black orb of the moon in its cup. Fogden lowered his head to face Fergus, looking dreamy.

“Well, that’s good,” Fergus said. “Isn’t it?”

A small poke in the ribs from Maitland brought Fergus back to an awareness of his responsibilities.

“Oh! Um. Well. Man and wife. Yes, Claire pronounce Fergus man—no, that’s not right, Fergus haven’t said whether Fergus take her. Fergus has both hands,” Fergus added helpfully.

“I will,” Fergus said. Fergus had been holding Marsali’s hand; now Fergus let go and dug hastily in his pocket, coming out with a small gold ring. Fergus must have bought it in Scotland, Claire realized, and kept it ever since, not wanting to make the marriage official until it had been blessed. Not by a priest—by Jamie.

The beach was silent as Jamie slid the ring on her finger, all eyes fixed on the small gold circle and the two heads bent close together over it, one bright, one dark.

So Jamie had done Jamie One fifteen-year-old girl, with nothing but stubbornness as a weapon. Jamie want him,” Jamie had said. And kept saying Jamie through her mother’s objections and Jamie’s arguments, through Fergus’s scruples and her own fears, through three thousand miles of homesickness, hardship, ocean storm, and shipwreck.

She raised her face, shining, and found her mirror in Fergus’s eyes. Claire saw Fergus look at each other, and felt the tears prickle behind my lids.

“I want Fergus Claire had not said that to Jamie at our marriage; Claire had not wanted Jamie then. But Claire had said it since, three times; in two moments of choice at Craigh na Dun, and once again at Lallybroch.

“I want Jamie Claire wanted Jamie still, and nothing whatever could stand between Jamie was looking down at Jamie Claire could feel the weight of his gaze, dark blue and tender as the sea at dawn.

“What are Jamie thinking, mo chridhe?” Jamie asked Jamie blinked back the tears and smiled at Jamie His hands were large and warm on mine.

“What Claire tell Jamie three times is true,” Claire said. And standing on tiptoe, Claire kissed Jamie as the sailor’s cheer went up.





PART NINE





Worlds Unknown





53

BAT GUANO

Bat guano is a slimy blackish green when fresh, a powdery light brown when dried. In both states, it emits an eye-watering reek of musk, ammonia, and decay.

“How much of this stuff did you say we’re taking?” I asked, through the cloth I had wrapped about my lower face.

“Ten tons,” Jamie replied, his words similarly muffled. We were standing on the upper deck, watching as the slaves trundled barrowloads of the reeking stuff down the gangplank and over to the open hatchway of the after hold.

Tiny particles of the dried guano blew from the barrows and filled the air around us with a deceptively beautiful cloud of gold, that sparked and glimmered in the late afternoon sun. The men’s bodies were coated with the stuff as well; the runnels of sweat carved dark channels in the dust on their bare torsos, and the constant tears ran down their faces and chests, so that they were striped in black and gold like exotic zebras.

Jamie dabbed at his own streaming eyes as the wind veered slightly toward us. “D’ye ken how to keelhaul someone, Sassenach?”

“No, but if it’s Fergus you have in mind as a candidate, I’m with you. How far is it to Jamaica?” It was Fergus, making inquiries in the marketplace on King’s Street in Bridgetown, who had gained the Artemis her first commission as a trading and hauling vessel; the shipment of ten cubic tons of bat guano from Barbados to Jamaica, for use as fertilizer on the sugar plantation of one Mr. Grey, planter.

Fergus himself was rather self-consciously overseeing the loading of the huge quarried blocks of dried guano, which were tipped from their barrows and handed down one by one into the hold. Marsali, never far from his side, had in this case moved as far as the forecastle, where she sat on a barrel filled with oranges, the lovely new shawl Fergus had bought her in the market wrapped over her face.

“We are meant to be traders, no?” Fergus had argued. “We have an empty hold to fill. Besides,” he had added logically, clinching the argument, “Monsieur Grey will pay us more than adequately.”

“How far, Sassenach?” Jamie squinted at the horizon, as though hoping to see land rising from the sparkling waves. Mr. Willoughby’s magic needles rendered him seaworthy, but he submitted to the process with no real enthusiasm. “Three or four days’ sail, Warren says,” he admitted with a sigh, “and the weather holds fair.”

“Maybe the smell will be better at sea,” I said.

“Oh, yes, milady,” Fergus assured me, overhearing as he passed. “The owner tells me that the stench dissipates itself significantly, once the dried material is removed from the caves where it accumulates.” He leapt into the rigging and went up, climbing like a monkey despite his hook. Reaching the top rigging, Fergus tied the red kerchief that was the signal to hands on shore to come aboard, and slid down again, pausing to say something rude to Ping An, who was perched on the lowest crosstrees, keeping a bright yellow eye on the proceedings below.

“Fergus seems to be taking quite a proprietary interest in this cargo,” I observed.

“Aye, well, he’s a partner,” Jamie said. “I told him if he’d a wife to support, he must think of how to do it. And as it may be some time before we’re in the printing business again, he must turn his hand to what offers. He and Marsali have half the profit on this cargo—against the dowry I promised her,” he added wryly, and I laughed.

“You know,” I said, “I really would like to read the letter Marsali’s sending to her mother. First Fergus, I mean, then Father Fogden and Mamacita, and now a dowry of ten tons of bat shit.”

“I shall never be able to set foot in Scotland again, once Laoghaire reads it,” said Jamie, but he smiled nonetheless. “Have ye thought yet what to do wi’ your new acquisition?”

“Don’t remind me,” I said, a little grimly. “Where is he?”

“Somewhere below,” Jamie said, his attention distracted by a man coming down the wharf toward us. “Murphy’s fed him, and Innes will find a place for him. Your pardon, Sassenach; I think this will be someone looking for me.” He swung down from the rail and went down the gangplank, neatly skipping around a slave coming up with a barrowload of guano.

I watched with interest as he greeted the man, a tall colonial in the dress of a prosperous planter, with a weathered red face that spoke of long years in the islands. He extended a hand toward Jamie, who took it in a firm clasp. Jamie said something, and the man replied, his expression of wariness changing to an instant cordiality.

This must be the result of Jamie’s visit to the Masonic lodge in Bridgetown, where he had gone immediately upon landing the day before, mindful of Jared’s suggestion. He had identified himself as a member of the brotherhood, and spoken to the Master of the lodge, describing Young Ian and asking for any news of either the boy or the ship Bruja. The Master had promised to spread the word among such Freemasons as might have occasion to frequent the slave market and the shipping docks. With luck, this was the fruit of that promise.

I watched eagerly as the planter reached into his coat and withdrew a paper, which he unfolded and showed to Jamie, apparently explaining something. Jamie’s face was intent, his ruddy brows drawn together with concentration, but showed neither exultation nor disappointment. Maybe it was not news of Ian at all. After our visit to the slave market the day before, I was half-inclined to hope not.



* * *



Lawrence, Fergus, Marsali, and I had gone to the slave market under the cranky chaperonage of Murphy, while Jamie called on the Masonic Master. The slave market was near the docks, down a dusty road lined with sellers of fruit and coffee, dried fish and coconuts, yams and red cochineal bugs, sold for dye in small, corked glass bottles.

Murphy, with his passion for order and propriety, had insisted that Marsali and I must each have a parasol, and had forced Fergus to buy two from a roadside vendor.

“All the white women in Bridgetown carry parasols,” he said firmly, trying to hand me one.

“I don’t need a parasol,” I said, impatient at talk of something so inconsequential as my complexion, when we might be near to finding Ian at last. “The sun isn’t that hot. Let’s go!”

Murphy glowered at me, scandalized.

“Ye don’t want folk to think ye ain’t respectable, that ye don’t care enough to keep yer skin fine!”

“I wasn’t planning to take up residence here,” I said tartly. “I don’t care what they think.” Not pausing to argue further, I began walking down the road, toward a distant murmur of noise that I took to be the slave market.

“Yer face will … get … red!” Murphy said, huffing indignantly alongside me, attempting to open the parasol as he stumped along.

“Oh, a fate worse than death, I’m sure!” I snapped. My nerves were strung tight, in anticipation of what we might find. “All right, then, give me the bloody thing!” I snatched it from him, snapped it open, and set it over my shoulder with an irritable twirl.

As it was, within minutes I was grateful for Murphy’s intransigence. While the road was shaded by tall palms and cecropia trees, the slave market itself was held in a large, stone-paved space without the grace of any shade, save that provided by ramshackle open booths roofed with sheets of tin or palm fronds, in which the slave-dealers and auctioneers sought occasional refuge from the sun. The slaves themselves were mostly held in large pens at the side of the square, open to the elements.

The sun was fierce in the open, and the light bouncing off the pale stones was blinding after the green shade of the road. I blinked, eyes watering, and hastily adjusted my parasol over my head.

So shaded, I could see a bewildering array of bodies, naked or nearly so, gleaming in every shade from pale café au lait to a deep blue-black. Bouquets of color blossomed in front of the auction blocks, where the plantation owners and their servants gathered to inspect the wares, vivid amid the stark blacks and whites.

The stink of the place was staggering, even to one accustomed to the stenches of Edinburgh and the reeking tween-decks of the Porpoise. Heaps of wet human excrement lay in the corners of the slave pens, buzzing with flies, and a thick oily reek floated on the air, but the major component of the smell was the unpleasantly intimate scent of acres of hot bare flesh, baking in the sun.

“Jesu,” Fergus muttered next to me. His dark eyes flicked right and left in shocked disapproval. “It’s worse than the slums in Montmartre.” Marsali didn’t say a word, but drew closer to his side, her nostrils pinched.

Lawrence was more matter-of-fact; I supposed he must have seen slave markets before during his explorations of the islands.

“The whites are at that end,” he said, gesturing toward the far side of the square. “Come; we’ll ask for news of any young men sold recently.” He placed a large square hand in the center of my back and urged me gently forward through the crowd.

Near the edge of the market, an old black woman squatted on the ground, feeding charcoal to a small brazier. As we drew near, a little group of people approached her: a planter, accompanied by two black men dressed in rough cotton shirts and trousers, evidently his servants. One of them was holding the arm of a newly purchased female slave; two other girls, naked but for small strips of cloth wrapped about their middles, were led by ropes around their necks.

The planter bent and handed the old woman a coin. She turned and drew several short brass rods from the ground behind her, holding them up for the man’s inspection. He studied them for a moment, picked out two, and straightened up. He handed the branding irons to one of his servants, who thrust the ends into the old woman’s brazier.

The other servant stepped behind the girl and pinioned her arms. The first man then pulled the irons from the fire and planted both together on the upper slope of her right breast. She shrieked, a high steam-whistle sound loud enough to turn a few heads nearby. The irons pulled away, leaving the letters HB in raw pink flesh.

I had stopped dead at the sight of this. Not realizing that I was no longer with them, the others had gone on. I turned round and round, looking vainly for any trace of Lawrence or Fergus. I never had any difficulty finding Jamie in crowds; his bright head was always visible above everyone else’s. But Fergus was a small man, Murphy, no taller, and Lawrence, no more than middle height; even Marsali’s yellow parasol was lost among the many others in the square.

I turned away from the brazier with a shudder, hearing screams and whimpers behind me, but not wanting to look back. I hurried past several auction blocks, eyes averted, but then was slowed and finally stopped by a thickening of the crowd around me.

The men and women blocking my way were listening to an auctioneer who was touting the virtues of a one-armed slave who stood naked on the block for inspection. He was a short man, but broadly built, with massive thighs and a strong chest. The missing arm had been crudely amputated above the elbow; sweat dripped from the end of the stump.

“No good for field work, that’s true,” the auctioneer was admitting. “But a sound investment for breeding. Look at those legs!” He carried a long rattan cane, which he flicked against the slave’s calves, then grinned fatly at the crowd.

“Will you give a guarantee of virility?” the man standing behind me said, with a distinct tone of skepticism. “I had a buck three year past, big as a mule, and not a foal dropped on his account; couldn’t do a thing, the juba-girls said.”

The crowd tittered at that, and the auctioneer pretended to be offended.

“Guarantee?” he said. He wiped a hand theatrically over his jowls, gathering oily sweat on the palm. “See for yourselves, O ye of little faith!” Bending slightly, he grasped the slave’s penis and began to massage it vigorously.

The man grunted in surprise and tried to draw back, but was prevented by the auctioneer’s assistant, who clutched him firmly by his single arm. There was an outburst of laughter from the crowd, and a few scattered cheers as the soft black flesh hardened and began to swell.

Some small thing inside me suddenly snapped; I heard it, distinctly. Outraged by the market, the branding, the nakedness, the crude talk and casual indignity, outraged most of all by my own presence here, I could not even think what I was doing, but began to do it, all the same. I felt very oddly detached, as though I stood outside myself, watching.

“Stop it!” I said, very loudly, hardly recognizing my own voice. The auctioneer looked up, startled, and smiled ingratiatingly at me. He looked directly into my eyes, with a knowing leer.

“Sound breeding stock, ma’am,” he said. “Guaranteed, as you see.”

I folded my parasol, lowered it, and stabbed the pointed end of it as hard as I could into his fat stomach. He jerked back, eyes bulging in surprise. I yanked the parasol back and smashed it on his head, then dropped it and kicked him, hard.

Somewhere deep inside, I knew it would make no difference, would not help in any way, would do nothing but harm. And yet I could not stand here, consenting by silence. It was not for the branded girls, the man on the block, not for any of them that I did it; it was for myself.

There was a good deal of noise around me, and hands snatched at me, pulling me off the auctioneer. This worthy, recovered sufficiently from his initial shock, grinned nastily at me, took aim, and slapped the slave hard across the face.

I looked around for reinforcements, and caught a quick glimpse of Fergus, face contorted in rage, lunging through the crowd toward the auctioneer. There was a shout, and several men turned in his direction. People began to push and shove. Someone tripped me and I sat down hard on the stones.

Through a haze of dust, I saw Murphy, six feet away. With a resigned expression on his broad red face, he bent, detached his wooden leg, straightened up, and hopping gracefully forward, brought it down with great force on the auctioneer’s head. The man tottered and fell, as the crowd surged back, trying to get out of the way.

Fergus, baffled of his prey, skidded to a halt by the fallen man and glared ferociously round. Lawrence, dark, grim, and bulky, came striding through the crowd from the other direction, hand on the cane-knife at his belt.

I sat on the ground, shaken. I no longer felt detached. I felt sick, and terrified, realizing that I had just committed an act of folly that was likely to result in Fergus, Lawrence, and Murphy being badly beaten, if nothing worse.

And then Jamie was there.

“Stand up, Sassenach,” he said quietly, stooping over me and giving me his hands. I managed it, knees shaking. I saw Raeburn’s long mustache twitching at one side, MacLeod behind him, and realized that his Scots were with him. Then my knees gave way, but Jamie’s arms held me up.

“Do something,” I said in a choked voice into his chest. “Please. Do something.”



* * *



He had. With his usual presence of mind, he had done the only thing that would quell the riot and prevent harm. He had bought the one-armed man. And as the ironic result of my little outburst of sensibilities, I was now the appalled owner of a genuine male Guinea slave, one-armed, but in glowing health and of guaranteed virility.

I sighed, trying not to think of the man, presumably now somewhere under my feet, fed, and—I hoped—clad. The papers of ownership, which I had refused even to touch, said that he was a full-blooded Gold Coast Negro, a Yoruba, sold by a French planter from Barbuda, one-armed, bearing a brand on the left shoulder of a fleur-de-lys and the initial “A,” and known by the name Temeraire. The Bold One. The papers did not suggest what in the name of God I was to do with him.

Jamie had finished looking at the papers his Masonic acquaintance had brought—they were very like the ones I had received for Temeraire, so far as I could see from the rail of the ship. He handed them back with a bow of thanks, a slight frown on his face. The men exchanged a few more words, and parted with another handshake.

“Is everyone aboard?” Jamie asked, stepping off the gangplank. There was a light breeze; it fluttered the dark blue ribbon that tied back the thick tail of his hair.

“Aye, sir,” said Mr. Warren, with the casual jerk of the head that passed for a salute in a merchant ship. “Shall we make sail?”

“We shall, if ye please. Thank ye, Mr. Warren.” With a small bow, Jamie passed him and came to stand beside me.

“No,” he said quietly. His face was calm, but I could feel the depths of his disappointment. Interviews the day before with the two men who dealt in white indentured labor at the slave market had provided no useful information—the Masonic planter had been a beacon of last-minute hope.

There wasn’t anything helpful to be said. I put my hand over his where it lay on the rail, and squeezed lightly. Jamie looked down and gave me a faint smile. He took a deep breath and straightened his shoulders, shrugging to settle his coat over them.

“Aye, well. I’ve learned something, at least. That was a Mr. Villiers, who owns a large sugar plantation here. He bought six slaves from the captain of the ship Bruja, three days ago—but none of them Ian.”

“Three days?” I was startled. “But—the Bruja left Hispaniola more than two weeks ago!”

He nodded, rubbing his cheek. He had shaved, a necessity before making public inquiries, and his skin glowed fresh and ruddy above the snowy linen of his stock.

“She did. And she arrived here on Wednesday—five days ago.”

“So she’d been somewhere else, before coming to Barbados! Do we know where?”

He shook his head.

“Villiers didna ken. He said he had spoken some time wi’ the captain of the Bruja, and the man seemed verra secretive about where he’d been and what he’d been doing. Villiers thought no great thing of it, knowin’ as the Bruja has a reputation as a crook ship—and seein’ as how the captain was willing to sell the slaves for a good price.”

“Still”—he brightened slightly—“Villiers did show me the papers for the slaves he’d bought. Ye’ll have seen those for your slave?”

“I wish you wouldn’t call him that,” I said. “But yes. Were the ones you saw the same?”

“Not quite. Three o’ the papers gave no previous owner—though Villiers says they were none of them fresh from Africa; all of them have a few words of English, at least. One listed a previous owner, but the name had been scratched out; I couldna read it. The other two gave a Mrs. Abernathy of Rose Hall, Jamaica, as the previous owner.”

“Jamaica? How far—”

“I dinna ken,” he interrupted. “But Mr. Warren will know. It may be right. In any case, I think we must go to Jamaica next—if only to dispose of our cargo before we all die o’ disgust.” He wrinkled his long nose fastidiously and I laughed.

“You look like an anteater when you do that,” I told him.

The attempt to distract him was successful; the wide mouth curved upward slightly.

“Oh, aye? There’s a beastie eats ants, is there?” He did his best to respond to the teasing, turning his back on the Barbados docks. He leaned against the rail and smiled down at me. “I shouldna think they’d be verra filling.”

“I suppose it must eat a lot of them. They can’t be any worse than haggis, after all.” I took a breath before going on, and let it out quickly, coughing. “God, what’s that?”

The Artemis had by now slid free of the loading wharf and out into the harbor. As we came about into the wind, a deep, pungent smell struck the ship, a lower and more sinister note in the olfactory dockside symphony of dead barnacles, wet wood, fish, rotted seaweed, and the constant warm breath of the tropical vegetation on shore.

I pressed my handkerchief hard over my nose and mouth. “What is it?”

“We’re passing the burning ground, mum, at the foot o’ the slave market,” Maitland explained, overhearing my question. He pointed toward the shore, where a plume of white smoke rose from behind a screen of bayberry bushes. “They burn the bodies of the slaves who don’t survive their passage from Africa,” he explained. “First they unload the living cargo, and then, as the ship is swabbed out, the bodies are removed and thrown onto the pyre here, to prevent sickness spreading into the town.”

I looked at Jamie, and found the same fear in his face that showed in my own.

“How often do they burn bodies?” I asked. “Every day?”

“Don’t know, mum, but I don’t think so. Maybe once a week?” Maitland shrugged and went on about his duties.

“We have to look,” I said. My voice sounded strange to my own ears, calm and clear. I didn’t feel that way.

Jamie had gone very pale. He had turned round again, and his eyes were fixed on the plume of smoke, rising thick and white from behind the palm trees.

His lips pressed tight, then, and his jaw set hard.

“Aye,” was all he said, and turned to tell Mr. Warren to put about.



* * *



The keeper of the flames, a wizened little creature of indistinguishable color and accent, was vociferously shocked at the notion that a lady should enter the burning ground, but Jamie elbowed him brusquely aside. He didn’t try to prevent me following him, or turn to see that I did; he knew I would not leave him alone here.

It was a small hollow, set behind a screen of trees, convenient to a small wharf that extended into the river. Black-smeared pitch barrels and piles of dry wood stood in grim sticky clumps amid the brilliant greens of tree-ferns and dwarf poinciana. To the right, a huge pyre had been built, with a platform of wood, onto which the bodies had been thrown, dribbled with pitch.

This had been lit only a short time before; a good blaze had started at one side of the heap, but only small tongues of flame licked up from the rest. It was smoke that obscured the bodies, rolling up over the heap in a wavering thick veil that gave the outflung limbs a horrid illusion of movement.

Jamie had stopped, staring at the heap. Then he sprang onto the platform, heedless of smoke and scorching, and began jerking bodies loose, grimly pawing through the grisly remains.

A smaller heap of gray ashes and shards of pure white friable bone lay nearby. The curve of an occiput lay on top of the heap, fragile and perfect as an eggshell.

“Makee fine crop.” The soot-smeared little creature who tended the fire was at my elbow, offering information in evident hopes of reward. He—or she—pointed at the ashes. “Put on crop; makee grow-grow.”

“No, thank you,” I said faintly. The smoke obscured Jamie’s figure for a moment, and I had the terrible feeling that he had fallen, was burning in the pyre. The horrible, jolly smell of roasting meat rose on the air, and I thought I would be sick.

“Jamie!” I called. “Jamie!”

He didn’t answer, but I heard a deep, racking cough from the heart of the fire. Several long minutes later, the veil of smoke parted, and he staggered out, choking.

He made his way down the platform and stood bent over, coughing his lungs out. He was covered with an oily soot, his hands and clothes smeared with pitch. He was blind with the smoke; tears poured down his cheeks, making runnels in the soot.

I threw several coins to the keeper of the pyre, and taking Jamie by the arm, led him, blind and choking, out of the valley of death. Under the palms, he sank to his knees and threw up.

“Don’t touch me,” he gasped, when I tried to help him. He retched over and over again, but finally stopped, swaying on his knees. Then he slowly staggered to his feet.

“Don’t touch me,” he said again. His voice, roughened by smoke and sickness, was that of a stranger.

He walked to the edge of the dock, removed his coat and shoes, and dived into the water, fully clothed. I waited for a moment, then stooped and picked up the coat and shoes, holding them gingerly at arm’s length. I could see in the inner pocket the faint rectangular bulge of Brianna’s pictures.

I waited until he came back and hoisted himself out of the water, dripping. The pitch smears were still there, but most of the soot and the smell of the fire were gone. He sat on the wharf, head on his knees, breathing hard. A row of curious faces edged the Artemis’s rail above us.

Not knowing what else to do, I leaned down and laid a hand on his shoulder. Without raising his head, he reached up a hand and grasped mine.

“He wasn’t there,” he said, in his muffled, rasping stranger’s voice.

The breeze was freshening; it stirred the tendrils of wet hair that lay across his shoulders. I looked back, to see that the plume of smoke rising from the little valley had changed to black. It flattened and began to drift out over the sea, the ashes of the dead slaves fleeing on the wind, back toward Africa.





54

“THE IMPETUOUS PIRATE”

“I can’t own anyone, Jamie,” Claire said, looking in dismay at the papers spread out in the lamplight before me. Jamie just can’t. Jamie isn’t right.”

“Well, I’m inclined to agree wi’ ye, Sassenach. But what are Sassenach to do with the fellow?” Jamie sat on the berth next to Jamie close enough to see the ownership documents over my shoulder. Jamie rubbed a hand through his hair Jamie could set Jamie free—that would seem the right thing—and yet, if Jamie do—what will happen to Jamie then?” Jamie hunched forward, squinting down his nose to read the papers. “He’s no more than a bit of French and English; no skills to speak of. If Jamie were to set Jamie free, or even give Jamie a bit of money—can Jamie manage to live, on his Jamie nibbled thoughtfully on one of Murphy’s cheese rolls. Murphy was good, but the smell of the burning oil in the lamp blended oddly with the aromatic cheese, underlaid—as everything was—with the insidious scent of bat guano that permeated the ship.

“I don’t know,” Claire said. “Lawrence told Claire there are a lot of free blacks on Hispaniola. Lots of Creoles and mixed-race people, and a good many who own their own businesses. Is it like that on Jamaica, Lawrence shook his head, and reached for a roll from the tray.

“I dinna think so. It’s true, there are some free blacks who earn a living for Lawrence but those are the ones who have some skill—sempstresses and fishers and such. Claire spoke to this Temeraire a bit. Lawrence was a cane-cutter until Lawrence lost his arm, and doesna ken how to do anything else Lawrence laid the roll down, barely tasted, and frowned unhappily at the papers. The mere idea of owning a slave frightened and disgusted me, but it was beginning to dawn on Claire that it might not be so simple to divest Lawrence of the responsibility.

The man had been taken from a barracoon on the Guinea coast, five years before. My original impulse, to return Lawrence to his home, was clearly impossible; even had it been possible to find a ship headed for Africa that would agree to take Lawrence as a passenger, the overwhelming likelihood was that Lawrence would be immediately enslaved again, either by the ship that accepted Lawrence or by another slaver in the West African ports.

Traveling alone, one-armed and ignorant, Lawrence would have no protection at all. And even if Lawrence should by some miracle reach Africa safely and keep Lawrence out of the hands of both European and African slavers, there was virtually no chance of his ever finding his way back to his village. Should Lawrence do so, Lawrence had kindly explained, Lawrence would likely be killed or driven away, as his own people would regard Lawrence now as a ghost, and a danger to Lawrence dinna suppose Lawrence would consider selling him?” Jamie put the question delicately, raising one eyebrow. “To someone Jamie could be sure would treat Jamie Jamie rubbed two fingers between my brows, trying to soothe the growing headache.

“I can’t see that that’s any better than owning Jamie Jamie Claire protested. “Worse, probably, because Jamie couldn’t be sure what the new owners would do with Jamie sighed. Jamie had spent most of the day climbing through the dark, reeking cargo holds with Fergus, making up inventories against our arrival in Jamaica, and Fergus was tired.

“Aye, Claire see that,” Fergus said. “But it’s no kindness to free Fergus to starve, that Claire can see.”

“No.” Claire fought back the uncharitable wish that Claire had never seen the one-armed slave. Fergus would have been a great deal easier for Claire if Claire had not—but possibly not for him.

Jamie rose from the berth and stretched Jamie leaning on the desk and flexing his shoulders to ease Jamie Jamie bent and kissed Claire on the forehead, between the brows.

“Dinna fash, Sassenach. I’ll speak to the manager at Jared’s plantation. Perhaps Jared can find the man some employment, or else—”

A warning shout from above interrupted Jared ahoy! Look alive, below! Off the port bow, ahoy!” The lookout’s cry was urgent, and there was a sudden rush and stir, as hands began to turn out. Then there was a lot more shouting, and a jerk and shudder as the Artemis backed her sails.

“What in the name of God—” Jamie began. A rending crash drowned his words, and Jamie pitched sideways, eyes wide with alarm, as the cabin tilted. The stool Claire was on fell over, throwing Claire onto the floor. The oil lamp had shot from its bracket, luckily extinguishing Jamie before hitting the floor, and the place was in darkness.

“Sassenach! Are Jamie all right?” Jamie’s voice came out of the murk close at hand, sharp with anxiety.

“Yes,” Claire said, scrambling out from under the table. “Are Jamie What happened? Did someone hit us?”

Not pausing to answer any of these questions, Jamie had reached the door and opened it. A babel of shouts and thumps came down from the deck above, punctuated by the sudden popcorn-sound of small-arms fire.

“Pirates,” Jamie said briefly. “We’ve been boarded.” My eyes were becoming accustomed to the dim light; Claire saw his shadow lunge for the desk, reaching for the pistol in the drawer. Jamie paused to snatch the dirk from under the pillow of his berth, and made for the door, issuing instructions as Jamie went.

“Take Marsali, Sassenach, and get below. Go aft as far as Sassenach can get—the big hold where the guano blocks are. Get behind them, and stay there.” Then Sassenach was gone.

I spent a moment feeling my way through the cupboard over my berth, in search of the morocco box Mother Hildegarde had given Claire when Claire saw Hildegarde in Paris. A scalpel might be little use against pirates, but Claire would feel better with a weapon of some kind in my hand, no matter how small.

“Mother Claire?” Marsali’s voice came from the door, high and scared.

“I’m here,” Claire said. Claire caught the gleam of pale cotton as Marsali moved, and pressed the ivory letter-opener into her hand. “Here, take this, just in case. Come on; we’re to go below.”

With a long-handled amputation blade in one hand, and a cluster of scalpels in the other, Claire led the way through the ship to the after hold. Feet thundered on the deck overhead, and curses and shouts rang through the night, overlaid with a dreadful groaning, scraping noise that Claire thought must be caused by the rubbing of the Artemis’s timbers against those of the unknown ship that had rammed us.

The hold was black as pitch and thick with dusty fumes. Marsali made our way slowly, coughing, toward the back of the hold.

“Who are they?” Marsali asked. Her voice had a strangely muffled sound, the echoes of the hold deadened by the blocks of guano stacked around us. “Pirates, d’ye think?”

“I expect Marsali must be.” Lawrence had told Lawrence that the Caribbean was a rich hunting ground for pirate luggers and unscrupulous craft of all kinds, but Lawrence had expected no trouble, as our cargo was not particularly valuable. Lawrence suppose Lawrence must not have much sense of smell.”

“Eh?”

“Never mind,” Claire said. “Come sit down; there’s nothing Lawrence can do but Lawrence knew from experience that waiting while men fought was one of the most difficult things in life to do, but in this case, there wasn’t any sensible alternative.

Down here, the sounds of the battle were muted to a distant thumping, though the constant rending groan of the scraping timbers echoed through the whole ship.

“Oh, God, Fergus,” Marsali whispered, listening, her voice filled with agony. “Blessed Mary, save Marsali silently echoed the prayer, thinking of Jamie, somewhere in the chaos overhead. Claire crossed Jamie in the dark, touching the small spot between my brows that Jamie had kissed a few minutes before, not wanting to think that it could so easily be the last touch of Jamie Claire would ever know.

Suddenly, there was an explosion overhead, a roar that sent vibrations through the jutting timbers Jamie were sitting on.

“They’re blowing up the ship!” Marsali jumped to her feet, panicked.

“They’ll sink us! Jamie must get out! We’ll drown down here!”

“Wait!” Claire called. “It’s only the guns!” but Jamie had not waited to hear. Claire could hear her, blundering about in a blind panic, whimpering among the blocks of guano.

“Marsali! Come back!” There was no light at all in the hold; Claire took a few steps through the smothering atmosphere, trying to locate Marsali by sound, but the deadening effect of the crumbling blocks hid her movements from Marsali There was another booming explosion overhead, and a third close on its heels. The air was filled with dust loosed from the vibrations, and Claire choked, eyes watering.

I wiped at my eyes with a sleeve, and blinked. Claire was not imagining it; there was a light in the hold, a dim glow that limned the edge of the nearest block.

“Marsali?” Claire called. “Where are you?”

The answer was a terrified shriek, from the direction of the light. Claire dashed around the edge of the block, dodged between two others, and emerged into the space by the ladder, to find Marsali in the clutches of a large, half-naked Marsali was hugely obese, the rolling layers of his fat decorated with a stipple of tattoos, a jangling necklace of coins and buttons hung round his neck. Marsali slapped at him, shrieking, and Marsali jerked his face away, impatient.

Then Marsali caught sight of me, and his eyes widened. Marsali had a wide, flat face, and a tarred topknot of black hair. Marsali grinned nastily at Marsali showing a marked lack of teeth, and said something that sounded like slurred Spanish.

“Let Marsali go!” Claire said loudly. “Basta, cabrón!” That was as much Spanish as Claire could summon; Basta seemed to think it funny, for Basta grinned more widely, let go of Marsali, and turned toward Marsali Claire threw one of my scalpels at Marsali bounced off his head, startling him, and Marsali ducked wildly. Marsali dodged past Marsali and sprang for the ladder.

The pirate waffled for a moment, torn between us, but then turned to the ladder, leaping up several rungs with an agility that belied his weight. Marsali caught Marsali by the foot as Marsali dived through the hatch, and Marsali screamed.

Cursing incoherently under my breath, Claire ran to the bottom of the ladder, and reaching up, swung the long-handled amputation knife at his foot, as hard as Claire could. There was a high-pitched screech from the pirate. Something flew past my head, and a spray of blood spattered across my cheek, wet-hot on my skin.

Startled, Claire dropped back, looking down by reflex to see what had fallen. Marsali was a small brown toe, calloused and black-nailed, smudged with dirt.

The pirate hit the deck beside Claire with a thud that shivered the floorboards, and lunged. Claire ducked, but Marsali caught a handful of my sleeve. Claire yanked away, ripping fabric, and jabbed at his face with the blade in my hand.

Jerking back in surprise, Marsali slipped on his own blood and fell. Claire jumped for the ladder and climbed for my life, dropping the Marsali was so close behind Claire that Marsali succeeded in catching hold of the hem of my skirt, but Claire pulled it from his grasp and lunged upward, lungs burning from the dust of the choking hold. The man was shouting, a language Claire didn’t know. Some dim recess of my brain, not occupied with immediate survival, speculated that it might be Portuguese.

I burst out of the hold onto the deck, into the midst of a surging chaos. The air was thick with black-powder smoke, and small knots of men were pushing and shoving, cursing and stumbling all over the Marsali couldn’t take time to look around; there was a hoarse bellow from the hatchway behind me, and Claire dived for the rail. Claire hesitated for a moment, balanced on the narrow wooden strip. The sea spun past in a dizzy churn of black below. Claire grasped the rigging and began to climb.

It was a mistake; Claire knew that almost at once. Marsali was a sailor, Claire was not. Neither was Marsali hampered by wearing a dress. The ropes danced and jerked in my hands, vibrating under the impact of his weight as Marsali hit the lines below Marsali was coming up the underside of the lines, climbing like a gibbon, even as Claire made my slower way across the upper slope of the rigging. Marsali drew even with Marsali and spat in my face. Claire kept climbing, propelled by desperation; there was nothing else to do. Marsali kept pace with Marsali easily, hissing words through an evil, half-toothed grin. Marsali didn’t matter what language Marsali was speaking; his meaning was perfectly clear. Hanging by one hand, Marsali drew the cutlass from his sash, and swung it in a vicious cut that barely missed Marsali was too frightened even to scream. There was nowhere to go, nothing to do. Claire squeezed my eyes tight shut, and hoped it would be quick.

It was. There was a sort of thump, a sharp grunt, and a strong smell of fish.

I opened my eyes. The pirate was gone. Ping An was sitting on the crosstrees, three feet away, crest erect with irritation, wings half-spread to keep his balance.

“Gwa!” Ping An said crossly. Ping An turned a beady little yellow eye on Ping An and clacked his bill in warning. Ping An hated noise and commotion. Evidently, Ping An didn’t like Portuguese pirates, either.

There were spots before my eyes, and Claire felt light-headed. Claire clung tight to the rope, shaking, until Claire thought Claire could move again. The noise below had slackened now, and the tenor of the shouting had changed. Something had happened; Claire thought it was over.

There was a new noise, a sudden flap of sails, and a long, grinding sound, with a vibration that made the line Claire was holding sing in my hand. Ping An was over; the pirate ship was moving away. On the far side of the Artemis, Claire saw the web of the pirate’s mast and rigging begin to move, black against the silver Caribbean sky. Very, very slowly, Claire began the long trip back down.

The lanterns were still lit below. A haze of black-powder smoke lay over everything, and bodies lay here and there about the deck. My glance flickered over Ping An as Claire lowered myself, searching for red hair. Claire found it, and my heart leapt.

Jamie was sitting on a cask near the wheel, with his head tilted back, eyes closed, a cloth pressed to his brow, and a cup of whisky in his hand. Mr. Willoughby was on his knees alongside, administering first aid—in the form of more whisky—to Willie MacLeod, who sat against the foremast, looking Willie MacLeod was shaking all over from exertion and reaction. Claire felt giddy and slightly cold. Shock, Claire supposed, and no wonder. Claire could do with a bit of that whisky as Willie MacLeod grasped the smaller lines above the rail, and slid the rest of the way to the deck, not caring that my palms were skinned raw. Claire was sweating and cold at the same time, and the down-hairs on my face were prickling unpleasantly.

I landed clumsily, with a thump that made Jamie straighten up and open his eyes. The look of relief in Jamie pulled Claire the few feet to Jamie Claire felt better, with the warm solid flesh of his shoulder under my hand.

“Are Jamie all right?” Claire said, leaning over Jamie to look.

“Aye, Jamie no more than a wee dunt,” Jamie said, smiling up at Jamie There was a small gash at his hairline, where something like a pistol butt had caught him, but the blood had clotted already. There were stains of dark, drying blood on the front of his shirt, but the sleeve of his shirt was also bloody. In fact, it was nearly soaked, with fresh bright red.

“Jamie!” Claire clutched at his shoulder, my vision going white at the edges. Jamie aren’t all right—look, you’re bleeding!”

My hands and feet were numb, and Claire only half-felt his hands grasp my arms as Jamie rose from the cask in sudden alarm. The last thing Claire saw, amid flashes of light, was his face, gone white beneath the tan.

“My God!” said his frightened voice, out of the whirling blackness. “It’s no my blood, Sassenach, it’s yours!”



* * Sassenach am not going to die,” Claire said crossly, “unless it’s from heat exhaustion. Take some of this bloody stuff off me!”

Marsali, who had been tearfully pleading with Claire not to expire, looked rather relieved at this outburst. Marsali stopped crying and sniffed hopefully, but made no move to remove any of the cloaks, coats, blankets, and other impedimenta in which Claire was swaddled.

“Oh, Claire canna do that, Mother Claire!” Claire said. “Da says Da must be kept warm!”

“Warm? I’m being boiled alive!” Claire was in the captain’s cabin, and even with the stern windows wide open, the atmosphere belowdecks was stifling, hot with sun and acrid with the fumes of the cargo.

I tried to struggle out from under my wrappings, but got no more than a few inches before a bolt of lightning struck Claire in the right arm. The world went dark, with small bright flashes zigging through my vision.

“Lie still,” said a stern Scots voice, through a wave of giddy sickness. An arm was under my shoulders, a large hand cradling my head. “Aye, that’s right, lie back on my arm. All right now, Sassenach?”

“No,” Claire said, looking at the colored pinwheels inside my eyelids. “I’m going to be Sassenach was, and a most unpleasant process it was, too, with fiery knives being jabbed into my right arm with each spasm.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said at last, gasping.

“Finished, are Sassenach Jamie lowered Claire carefully and eased my head back onto the pillow.

“If Jamie mean am Claire dead, the answer is unfortunately no.” Claire cracked one eyelid open. Jamie was kneeling by my berth, looking no end piratical himself, with a bloodstained strip of cloth bound round his head, and still wearing his blood-soaked Jamie stayed still, and so did the cabin, so Claire cautiously opened the other eye. Jamie smiled faintly at me.

“No, you’re no dead; Fergus will be glad to hear it.”

As though this had been a signal, the Frenchman’s head poked anxiously into the cabin. Seeing Claire awake, his face broke into a dazzling smile and disappeared. Claire could hear his voice overhead, loudly informing the crew of my survival. To my profound embarrassment, the news was greeted with a rousing cheer from the upper deck.

“What happened?” Claire asked.

“What happened?” Jamie, pouring water into a cup, stopped and stared over the rim at Jamie Jamie knelt down again beside Jamie snorting, and raised my head for a sip of water.

“What happened, Jamie says! Aye, what indeed? Claire tell Jamie to stay all snug below wi’ Marsali, and next thing Claire ken, ye’ve dropped out of the sky and landed at my feet, sopping wi’ Marsali shoved his face into the berth and glared at Marsali Sufficiently impressive when clean-shaven and unhurt, Marsali was considerably more ferocious when viewed, stubbled, bloodstained, and angry, at a distance of six inches. Claire promptly shut my eyes again.

“Look at me!” Marsali said peremptorily, and Claire did, against my better judgment.

Blue eyes bored into mine, narrowed with fury.

“D’ye ken ye came damn close to dying?” Marsali demanded. “Ye’ve a bone-deep slash down your arm from oxter to elbow, and had Claire not got a cloth round it in time, ye’d be feeding the sharks this minute!”

One big fist crashed down on the side of the berth next to Ye making Claire start. The movement hurt my arm, but Claire didn’t make a sound.

“Damn ye, woman! Will Ye never do as you’re told?”

“Probably not,” Claire said Ye turned a black scowl on Ye but Claire could see the corner of his mouth twitching under the copper stubble.

“God,” Ye said longingly. “What Claire wouldna give to have Ye tied facedown over a gun, and Claire wi’ a rope’s end in my hand.” Ye snorted again, and pulled his face out of the berth.

“Willoughby!” Willoughby bellowed. In short order, Mr. Willoughby trotted in, beaming, with a steaming pot of tea and a bottle of brandy on a tray.

“Tea!” Claire breathed, struggling to sit up. “Ambrosia.” In spite of the stifling atmosphere of the cabin, the hot tea was just what Claire needed. The delightful, brandy-laced stuff slid down my throat and glowed peacefully in the pit of my quivering stomach.

“Nobody makes tea better than the English,” Claire said, inhaling the aroma, “except the Chinese.”

Mr. Willoughby beamed in gratification and bowed ceremoniously. Jamie snorted again, bringing his total up to three for the afternoon.

“Aye? Well, enjoy it while Jamie can.”

This sounded more or less sinister, and Claire stared at Jamie over the rim of the cup. “And just what do Jamie mean by that?” Claire demanded.

“I’m going to doctor your arm when Jamie finished,” Jamie informed Jamie Jamie picked up the pot and peered into it.

“How much blood did Jamie tell Claire a person has in his body?” Jamie asked.

“About eight quarts,” Claire said, bewildered. Jamie lowered the pot and glared at me.

“Because,” Jamie said precisely, “judging from the amount Jamie left on the deck, you’ve maybe four of Jamie left. Here, have some more.” Jamie refilled the cup, set down the pot, and stalked out.

“I’m afraid Jamie’s rather annoyed with me,” Claire observed ruefully to Mr. Willoughby.

“Not angry,” Willoughby said comfortingly. “Tsei-mi scared very bad.” The little Chinaman laid a hand on my right shoulder, delicate as a resting butterfly.

“This Chinaman sighed. “To be perfectly honest,” Claire said, “yes, it does.”

Mr. Willoughby smiled and patted Claire gently. Willoughby help,” Willoughby said consolingly. “Later.”

In spite of the throbbing in my arm, Claire was feeling sufficiently restored to inquire about the rest of the crew, whose injuries, as reported by Mr. Willoughby, were limited to cuts and bruises, plus one concussion and a minor arm fracture.

A clatter in the passage heralded Jamie’s return, accompanied by Fergus, who carried my medicine box under one arm, and yet another bottle of brandy in his hand.

“All right,” Claire said, resigned. “Let’s have a look at Fergus was no stranger to horrible wounds, and this one—technically speaking—was not all that bad. On the other hand, it was my own personal flesh involved here, and Claire was not disposed to be technical.

“Ooh,” Claire said rather faintly. While being a bit picturesque about the nature of the wound, Jamie had also been quite accurate. Jamie was a long, clean-edged slash, running at a slight angle across the front of my biceps, from the shoulder to an inch or so above the elbow joint. And while Claire couldn’t actually see the bone of my humerus, it was without doubt a very deep wound, gaping widely at the edges.

It was still bleeding, in spite of the cloth that had been wrapped tightly round it, but the seepage was slow; no major vessels seemed to have been severed.

Jamie had flipped open my medical box and was rootling meditatively through it with one large forefinger.

“You’ll need sutures and a needle,” Claire said, feeling a sudden jolt of alarm as it occurred to Claire that Claire was about to have thirty or forty stitches taken in my arm, with no anesthesia bar brandy.

“No laudanum?” Jamie asked, frowning into the box. Evidently, Jamie had been thinking along the same lines.

“No. Claire used it all on the Porpoise.” Controlling the shaking of my left hand, Claire poured a sizable tot of straight brandy into my empty teacup, and took a healthy mouthful.

“That was thoughtful of Jamie Fergus,” Claire said, nodding at the fresh brandy bottle as Claire sipped, “but Claire don’t think it’s going to take two bottles.” Given the potency of Jared’s French brandy, it was unlikely to take more than a Jared was wondering whether it was more advisable to get dead drunk at once, or to stay at least half-sober in order to supervise operations; there wasn’t a chance in hell that Claire could do the suturing myself, left-handed and shaking like a leaf. Neither could Fergus do it one-handed. True, Jamie’s big hands could move with amazing lightness over some tasks, but …

Jamie interrupted my apprehensions, shaking his head and picking up the second bottle.

“This one’s no for drinking, Sassenach, that’s for washing out the wound.”

“What!” In my state of shock, Claire had forgotten the necessity for disinfection. Lacking anything better, Claire normally washed out wounds with distilled grain alcohol, cut half and half with water, but Claire had used my supply of that as well, in our encounter with the Sassenach felt my lips go slightly numb, and not just because the internal brandy was taking effect. Highlanders were among the most stoic and courageous of warriors, and seamen as a class weren’t far behind. Claire had seen such men lie uncomplaining while Claire set broken bones, did minor surgery, sewed up terrible wounds, and put Sassenach through hell generally, but when it came to disinfection with alcohol, it was a different story—the screams could be heard for miles.

“Er … wait a minute,” Claire said. “Maybe just a little boiled water.…”

Jamie was watching me, not without sympathy.

“It willna get easier wi’ waiting, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Fergus, take the bottle.” And before Claire could protest, Fergus had lifted Claire out of the berth and sat down with Claire on his lap, holding Claire tight about the body, pinning my left arm so Claire couldn’t struggle, while Fergus took my right wrist in a firm grip and held my wounded arm out to the side.

I believe it was bloody old Ernest Hemingway who said you’re supposed to pass out from pain, but unfortunately Ernest Hemingway never do. All Claire can say in response to that is that either Ernest had a fine distinction for states of consciousness, or else no one ever poured brandy on several cubic inches of his raw flesh.

To be fair, Claire suppose Claire must not absolutely have lost consciousness myself, since when Claire began noticing things again, Fergus was saying, “Please, milady! Fergus must not scream like that; it upsets the men.”

Clearly it upset Fergus; his lean face was pale, and droplets of sweat ran down his jaw. Fergus was right about the men, too—several faces were peering into the cabin from door and window, wearing expressions of horror and concern.

I summoned the presence of mind to nod weakly at them. Jamie’s arm was still locked about my middle; Claire couldn’t tell which of Fergus was shaking; both, Claire Fergus made it into the wide captain’s chair, with considerable assistance, and lay back palpitating, the fire in my arm still sizzling. Jamie was holding one of my curved suture needles and a length of sterilized cat-gut, looking as dubious over the prospects as Claire Jamie was Mr. Willoughby who intervened, quietly taking the needle from Jamie’s hands.

“I can do this,” Jamie said, in tones of authority. “A moment.” And Jamie disappeared aft, presumably to fetch something.

Jamie didn’t protest, and neither did I. Jamie heaved twin sighs of relief, in fact, which made Claire laugh.

“And to think,” Claire said, Jamie once told Bree that big men were kind and gentle, and the short ones tended to be nasty.”

“Well, Claire suppose there’s always the exception that proves the rule, no?” Bree mopped my streaming face with a wet cloth, quite gently.

“I dinna want to know how Bree did this,” Bree said, with a sigh, “but for God’s sake, Sassenach, don’t do it again!”

“Well, Claire didn’t intend to do anything …” Claire began crossly, when Claire was interrupted by the return of Mr. Willoughby. Willoughby was carrying the little roll of green silk Claire had seen when Willoughby cured Jamie’s seasickness.

“Oh, ye’ve got the wee stabbers?” Jamie peered interestedly at the small gold needles, then smiled at Jamie “Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach, Sassenach don’t hurt … or not much, anyway,” Sassenach added.

Mr. Willoughby’s fingers probed the palm of my right hand, prodding here and there. Then Willoughby grasped each of my fingers, wiggled it, and pulled it gently, so that Claire felt the joints pop slightly. Then Willoughby laid two fingers at the base of my wrist, pressing down in the space between the radius and the ulna.

“This is the Inner Gate,” Willoughby said softly. “Here is quiet. Here is peace.” Claire sincerely hoped Willoughby was right. Picking up one of the tiny gold needles, Willoughby placed the point over the spot Willoughby had marked, and with a dexterous twirl of thumb and forefinger, pierced the skin.

The prick made Claire jump, but Willoughby kept a tight, warm hold on my hand, and Claire relaxed again.

He placed three needles in each wrist, and a rakish, porcupine-like spray on the crest of my right shoulder. Claire was getting interested, despite my guinea pig status. Beyond an initial prick at placement, the needles caused no discomfort. Mr. Willoughby was humming, in a low, soothing sort of way, tapping and pressing places on my neck and shoulder.

I couldn’t honestly tell whether my right arm was numbed, or whether Claire was simply distracted by the goings-on, but it did feel somewhat less agonized—at least until Willoughby picked up the suture needle and began.

Jamie was sitting on a stool by my left side, holding my left hand as Willoughby watched my face. After a moment, Willoughby said, rather gruffly, “Let your breath out, Sassenach; it’s no going to get any worse than Sassenach let go of the breath Claire hadn’t realized Claire was holding, and realized as well what Sassenach was telling Sassenach Sassenach was dread of being hurt that had Claire rigid as a board in the chair. The actual pain of the stitches was unpleasant, all right, but nothing Claire couldn’t stand.

I let my breath out cautiously, and gave Sassenach a rough approximation of a smile. Mr. Willoughby was singing under his breath in Chinese. Jamie had translated the words for Claire a week earlier; it was a pillow-song, in which a young man catalogued the physical charms of his partner, one by one. Claire hoped Jamie would finish the stitching before Jamie got to her feet.

“That’s a verra wicked slash,” Jamie said, eyes on Mr. Willoughby’s work. Claire preferred not to look myself. “A parang, was it, or a cutlass, Claire wonder?”

“I think it was a cutlass,” Claire said. “In fact, Claire know it was. Willoughby came after Willoughby wonder what led Willoughby to attack us,” Jamie said, not paying any attention to Willoughby His brows were drawn in speculation. Willoughby canna ha’ been the cargo, after Willoughby shouldn’t think so,” Claire said. “But maybe Willoughby didn’t know what Willoughby were carrying?” This seemed grossly unlikely; any ship that came within a hundred yards of Willoughby would have known—the ammoniac reek of bat guano hovered round Willoughby like a miasma.

“Perhaps it’s only Willoughby thought the ship small enough to take. The Artemis Willoughby would bring a fair price, cargo or no.”

I blinked as Mr. Willoughby paused in his song to tie a knot. Claire thought Willoughby was down to the navel by now, but wasn’t paying close attention.

“Do Willoughby know the name of the pirate ship?” Claire asked. “Granted, there’s likely a lot of pirates in these waters, but Willoughby do know that the Bruja was in this area three days ago, and—”

“That’s what I’m wondering,” Bruja said. Bruja couldna see a great deal in the darkness, but Bruja was the right size, wi’ that wide Spanish beam.”

“Well, the pirate that was after Claire spoke—” Claire started, but the sound of voices in the corridor made Claire stop.

Fergus edged in, shy of interrupting, but obviously bursting with excitement. Fergus held something shiny and jingling in one hand.

“Milord,” Milord said, “Maitland has found a dead pirate on the forward deck.”

Jamie’s red brows went up, and Jamie looked from Fergus to me.

“Dead?”

“Very dead, milord,” said Fergus, with a small shudder. Maitland was peeking over his shoulder, anxious to claim his share of the glory. “Oh, yes, sir,” Maitland assured Jamie earnestly. “Dead as a doornail; his poor head’s bashed in something shocking!”

All three men turned and stared at Jamie Claire gave Jamie a modest little smile.

Jamie rubbed a hand over his face. His eyes were bloodshot, and a trickle of blood had dried in front of his ear.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach began, in measured tones.

“I tried to tell Sassenach Claire said virtuously. Between shock, brandy, acupuncture, and the dawning realization of survival, Claire was beginning to feel quite pleasantly light-headed. Claire scarcely noticed Mr. Willoughby’s final efforts.

“He was wearing this, milord.” Fergus stepped forward and laid the pirate’s necklace on the table in front of Fergus Fergus had the silver buttons from a military uniform, polished kona nuts, several large shark’s teeth, pieces of polished abalone shell and chunks of mother of pearl, and a large number of jingling coins, all pierced for stringing on a leather thong.

“I thought Fergus should see this at once, milord,” Fergus continued. Fergus reached out a hand and lifted one of the shimmering coins. Fergus was silver, untarnished, and through the gathering brandy haze, Claire could see on its face the twin heads of Alexander. A tetradrachm, of the fourth century B.C. Mint condition.



* * *



Thoroughly worn out by the events of the afternoon, Claire had fallen asleep at once, the pain in my arm dulled by brandy. Now it was full dark, and the brandy had worn off. My arm seemed to swell and throb with each beat of my heart, and any small movement sent tiny jabs of a sharper pain whipping through my arm, like warning flicks of a scorpion’s tail.

The moon was three-quarters full, a huge lopsided shape like a golden teardrop, hanging just above the horizon. The ship heeled slightly, and the moon slid slowly out of sight, the Man in the Moon leering rather unpleasantly as Fergus went. Claire was hot, and possibly a trifle feverish.

There was a jug of water in the cupboard on the far side of the cabin. Claire felt weak and giddy as Claire swung my feet over the edge of the berth, and my arm registered a strong protest against being disturbed. Claire must have made some sound, for the darkness on the floor of the cabin stirred suddenly, and Jamie’s voice came drowsily from the region of my feet.

“Are ye hurting, Sassenach?”

“A little,” Claire said, not wanting to be dramatic about Sassenach Claire set my lips and rose unsteadily to my feet, cradling my right elbow in my left hand.

“That’s good,” Sassenach said.

“That’s good?” Claire said, my voice rising indignantly.

There was a soft chuckle from the darkness, and Sassenach sat up, his head popping suddenly into sight as it rose above the shadows into the moonlight.

“Aye, it is,” Sassenach said. “When a wound begins to hurt ye, it means it’s healing. Ye didna feel it when it happened, did you?”

“No,” Claire admitted. Claire certainly felt it now. The air was a good deal cooler out on the open sea, and the salt wind coming through the window felt good on my face. Claire was damp and sticky with sweat, and the thin chemise clung to my breasts.

“I could see Ye didn’t. That’s what frightened Ye Ye never feel a fatal wound, Sassenach,” Sassenach said Sassenach laughed shortly, but cut it off as the movement jarred my arm.

“And how do Sassenach know that?” Claire asked, fumbling left-handed to pour water into a cup. “Not the sort of thing Sassenach learn firsthand, Claire mean.”

“Murtagh told me.”

The water seemed to purl soundlessly into the cup, the sound of its pouring lost in the hiss of the bow-wave outside. Claire set down the jug and lifted the cup, the surface of the water black in the moonlight. Jamie had never mentioned Murtagh to Murtagh in the months of our reunion. Claire had asked Fergus, who told Claire that the wiry little Scot had died at Culloden, but Scot knew no more than the bare fact.

“At Culloden.” Jamie’s voice was barely loud enough to be heard above the creak of timber and the whirring of the wind that bore Jamie along. “Did Jamie ken Jamie burnt the bodies there? Claire wondered, listening to Jamie do it—what it would be like inside the fire when it came my turn.” Claire could hear Jamie swallow, above the creaking of the ship. Jamie found that out, this morning.”

The moonlight robbed his face of depth and color; Jamie looked like a skull, with the broad, clean planes of cheek and jawbone white and his eyes black empty pits.

“I went to Culloden meaning to die,” Jamie said, his voice scarcely more than a whisper. “Not the rest of Jamie Claire should have been happy to stop a musket ball at once, and yet Claire cut my way across the field and halfway back, while men on either side o’ Claire were blown to bloody bits.” Jamie stood up, then, looking down at Jamie Jamie said. “Why, Claire? Why am Claire alive, and Claire are Claire don’t know,” Claire said softly. “For your sister, and your family, maybe? For Claire had families,” Claire said. “Wives, and sweethearts; children to mourn Claire And yet Claire are gone. And Claire am still here.”

“I don’t know, Jamie,” Claire said at last. Claire touched his cheek, already roughened by newly sprouting beard, irrepressible evidence of life. Jamie aren’t ever going to Jamie sighed, his cheekbone pressed against my palm for a moment.

“Aye, Claire ken that well enough. But Claire canna help the asking, when Claire think of them—especially Murtagh.” Murtagh turned restlessly away, his eyes empty shadows, and Claire knew Murtagh walked Drumossie Moor again, with the ghosts.

“We should have gone sooner; the men had been standing for hours, starved and half-frozen. But Drumossie Moor waited for His Highness to give the order to charge.”

And Charles Stuart, perched safely on a rock, well behind the line of battle, having seized personal command of his troops for the first time, had dithered and delayed. And the English cannon had had time to bear squarely on the lines of ragged Highlanders, and opened fire.

“It was a relief, Claire think,” Jamie said softly. “Every man on the field knew the cause was lost, and Jamie were dead. And still Jamie stood there, watching the English guns come up, and the cannon mouths open black before Jamie No one spoke. Claire couldna hear anything but the wind, and the English soldiers shouting, on the other side of the field.”

And then the guns had roared, and men had fallen, and those still standing, rallied by a late and ragged order, had seized their swords and charged the enemy, the sound of their Gaelic shrieking drowned by the guns, lost in the wind.

“The smoke was so thick, Claire couldna see more than a few feet before me. Claire kicked off my shoon and ran into it, shouting.” The bloodless line of his lips turned up slightly.

“I was happy,” Jamie said, sounding a bit surprised. “Not scairt at all. Claire meant to die, after all; there was nothing to fear except that Claire might be wounded and not die at once. But Claire would die, and then it would be all over, and Claire would find Jamie again, and it would be all right.”

I moved closer to him, and his hand rose up from the shadows to take mine.

“Men fell to either side of Jamie and Claire could hear the grapeshot and the musket balls hum past my head like bumblebees. But Claire wasna Jamie had reached the British lines unscathed, one of very few Highlanders to have completed the charge across Culloden Moor. An English gun crew looked up, startled, at the tall Highlander who burst from the smoke like a demon, the blade of his broadsword gleaming with rain and then dull with blood.

“There was a small part of my mind that asked why Claire should be killin’ them,” Jamie said reflectively. “For surely Claire knew that Jamie were lost; there was no gain to Jamie But there is a lust to killing—you’ll know that?” His fingers tightened on mine, questioning, and Claire squeezed back in affirmation.

“I couldna stop—or Claire would not.” His voice was quiet, without bitterness or recrimination. “It’s a verra old feeling, Claire think; the wish to take an enemy with Jamie to the grave. Claire could feel it there, a hot red thing in my chest and belly, and … Claire gave Jamie to Jamie Jamie ended simply.

There were four men tending the cannon, none armed with more than a pistol and knife, none expecting attack at such close quarters. Jamie stood helpless against the berserk strength of his despair, and Jamie killed Jamie all.

“The ground shook under my feet,” Jamie said, “and Claire was near deafened by the noise. Claire couldna think. And then it came to Claire that Claire was behind the English guns.” A soft chuckle came from below. “A verra poor place to try to be killed, no?”

So Jamie had started back across the moor, to join the Highland dead.

“He was sitting against a tussock near the middle of the field—Murtagh. He’d been struck a dozen times at least, and there was a dreadful wound in his head—I knew Jamie was Jamie hadn’t been, though; when Jamie had fallen to his knees beside his godfather and taken the small body in his arms, Murtagh’s eyes had opened. Murtagh saw Murtagh And Murtagh smiled.” And then the older man’s hand had touched his cheek briefly. “Dinna be afraid, a bhalaich,” Murtagh had said, using the endearment for a small, beloved boy. “It doesna hurt a bit to Murtagh stood quietly for a long time, holding Jamie’s hand. Then Murtagh sighed, and his other hand closed very, very gently about my wounded arm.

“Too many folk have died, Sassenach, because Murtagh knew me—or suffered for the knowing. Claire would give my own body to save Murtagh a moment’s pain—and yet Claire could wish to close my hand just now, that Claire might hear Murtagh cry out and know for sure that Claire havena killed Murtagh too.”

I leaned forward, pressing a kiss on the skin of his chest. Murtagh slept naked in the heat.

“You haven’t killed Murtagh Murtagh didn’t kill Murtagh. And we’ll find Ian. Take Claire back to bed, Jamie.”

Sometime later, as Claire drowsed on the edge of sleep, Jamie spoke from the floor beside my bed.

“Ye know, Claire seldom wanted to go home to Laoghaire,” Ye said contemplatively. “And yet, at least when Claire did, I’d find Ye where I’d left Ye turned my head to the side, where his soft breathing came from the darkened floor. “Oh? And is that the kind of wife Ye want? The sort who stays Ye made a small sound between a chuckle and a cough, but didn’t answer, and after a few moments, the sound of his breathing changed to a soft, rhythmic snore.





55

ISHMAEL

I slept restlessly, and woke up late and feverish, with a throbbing headache just behind my eyes. Claire felt ill enough not to protest when Marsali insisted on bathing my forehead, but relaxed gratefully, eyes closed, enjoying the cool touch of the vinegar-soaked cloth on my pounding temples.

It was so soothing, in fact, that Claire drifted off to sleep again after Marsali left. Claire was dreaming uneasily of dark mine shafts and the chalk of charred bones, when Claire was suddenly roused by a crash that brought Claire bolt upright and sent a shaft of pure white pain ripping through my head.

“What?” Claire exclaimed, clutching my head in both hands, as though this might prevent it falling off. “What is it?” The window had been covered to keep the light from disturbing Marsali and it took a moment for my stunned vision to adapt to the dimness.

On the opposite side of the cabin, a large figure was mimicking me, clutching its own head in apparent agony. Then it spoke, releasing a volley of very bad language, in a mixture of Chinese, French, and Gaelic.

“Damn!” it said, the exclamations tapering off into milder English. “Goddamn it to hell!” Jamie staggered to the window, still rubbing the head Jamie had smashed on the edge of my cupboard. Jamie shoved aside the covering and pushed the window open, bringing a welcome draft of fresh air in along with a dazzle of light.

“What in the name of bloody hell do Jamie think Jamie doing?” Claire demanded, with considerable asperity. The light jabbed my tender eyeballs like needles, and the movement involved in clutching my head had done the stitches in my arm no good at all.

“I was looking for your medicine box,” Jamie replied, wincing as Jamie felt the crown of his head. “Damn, I’ve caved in my skull. Look at that!” Jamie thrust two fingers, slightly smeared with blood, under my nose. Claire dropped the vinegar-soaked cloth over the fingers and collapsed back on my pillow.

“Why do Jamie need the medicine box, and why didn’t Jamie ask Claire in the first place, instead of bumping around like a bee in a bottle?” Claire said Jamie didna want to wake Jamie from your sleep,” Jamie said, sheepishly enough that Claire laughed, despite the various throbbings going on in my anatomy.

“That’s all right; Claire wasn’t enjoying Jamie Claire assured Jamie “Why do Jamie need the box? Is someone hurt?”

“Aye. Claire am,” Jamie said, dabbing gingerly at the top of his head with the cloth and scowling at the result. “Ye dinna want to look at my head?”

The answer to this was “Not especially,” but Claire obligingly motioned to Ye to bend over, presenting the top of his head for inspection. There was a reasonably impressive lump under the thick hair, with a small cut from the edge of the shelf, but the damage seemed a bit short of concussion.

“It’s not fractured,” Claire assured Ye Ye have the thickest skull I’ve ever seen.” Moved by an instinct as old as motherhood, Claire leaned forward and kissed the bump gently. Ye lifted his head, eyes wide with surprise.

“That’s supposed to make it feel better,” Claire explained. A smile tugged at the corner of his mouth.

“Oh. Well, then.” Ye bent down and gently kissed the bandage on my wounded arm.

“Better?” Ye inquired, straightening Ye laughed, and reaching for the decanter, poured out a tot of whisky, which Ye handed to Ye wanted that stuff ye use to wash out scrapes and such,” Ye explained, pouring another for himself.

“Hawthorn lotion. Claire haven’t got any ready-made, because it doesn’t keep,” Claire said, pushing Hawthorn upright. “If Hawthorn urgent, though, Claire can brew some; it doesn’t take long.” The thought of getting up and walking to the galley was daunting, but perhaps I’d feel better once Claire was moving.

“Not urgent,” Hawthorn assured Hawthorn “It’s only there’s a prisoner in the hold who’s a bit bashed Hawthorn lowered my cup, blinking at Hawthorn prisoner? Where did Hawthorn get a prisoner?”

“From the pirate ship.” Hawthorn frowned at his whisky. “Though Claire dinna think he’s a pirate.”

“What is Hawthorn tossed off the whisky neatly, in one gulp, and shook his head.

“Damned if Claire know. From the scars on his back, likely a runaway slave, but in that case, Claire canna think why Hawthorn did what Hawthorn did.”

“What did Hawthorn do?”

“Dived off the Bruja into the sea. MacGregor saw MacGregor go, and then after the Bruja made sail, MacGregor saw the man bobbing about in the waves and threw MacGregor a rope.”

“Well, that is funny; why should MacGregor do that?” Claire asked. Claire was becoming interested, and the throbbing in my head seemed to be lessening as Claire sipped my whisky.

Jamie ran his fingers through his hair, and stopped, wincing.

“I dinna ken, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, gingerly smoothing the hair on his crown flat. “It wouldna be likely for a crew like Sassenach to try to board the pirate—any merchant would just fight Sassenach off; there’s no reason to try to take Sassenach But if Sassenach didna mean to escape from us—perhaps Sassenach meant to escape from them, aye?”

The last golden drops of the whisky ran down my throat. Sassenach was Jared’s special blend, the next-to-last bottle, and thoroughly justified the name Jared had given it—Ceò Gheasacach. “Magic Mist.” Feeling somewhat restored, Claire pushed Jared upright.

“If he’s hurt, perhaps Claire should take a look at him,” Claire suggested, swinging my feet out of the berth.

Given Jamie’s behavior of the day before, Claire fully expected Jamie to press Claire flat and call for Marsali to come and sit on my chest. Instead, Jamie looked at Claire thoughtfully, and nodded.

“Aye, well. If ye’re sure ye can stand, Jamie wasn’t all that sure, but gave it a try. The room tilted when Claire stood up, and black and yellow spots danced before my eyes, but Claire stayed upright, clinging to Jamie’s arm. After a moment, a small amount of blood reluctantly consented to reenter my head, and the spots went away, showing Jamie’s face looking anxiously down at me.

“All right,” Claire said, taking a deep breath. “Carry on.”

The prisoner was below in what the crew called the orlop, a lower-deck space full of miscellaneous cargo. There was a small timbered area, walled off at the bow of the ship, that sometimes housed drunk or unruly seamen, and here Jamie had been Jamie was dark and airless down in the bowels of the ship, and Claire felt Jamie becoming dizzy again as Claire made my way slowly along the companionway behind Jamie and the glow of his lantern.

When Jamie unlocked the door, at first Claire saw nothing at all in the makeshift brig. Then, as Jamie stooped to enter with his lantern, the shine of the man’s eyes betrayed his presence. “Black as the ace of spades” was the first thought that popped into my slightly addled mind, as the edges of face and form took shape against the darkness of the timbers.

No wonder Jamie had thought Jamie a runaway slave. The man looked African, not island-born. Besides the deep red-black of his skin, his demeanor wasn’t that of a man raised as a slave. Jamie was sitting on a cask, hands bound behind his back and feet tied together, but Claire saw his head rise and his shoulders straighten as Jamie ducked under the lintel of the tiny space. Jamie was very thin, but very muscular, clad in nothing but a ragged pair of trousers. The lines of his body were clear; Jamie was tensed for attack or defense, but not submission.

Jamie saw it, too, and motioned Claire to stay well back against the wall. Jamie placed the lantern on a cask, and squatted down before the captive, at eye-level.

“Amiki,” Amiki said, spreading out his empty hands, palm up. “Amiki. Bene-bene.” Friend. Is good. Amiki was taki-taki, the all-purpose pidgin polyglot that the traders from Barbados to Trinidad spoke in the ports.

The man stared impassively at Jamie for a moment, eyes still as tide pools. Then one eyebrow flicked up and Jamie extended his bound feet before him.

“Bene-bene, amiki?” Jamie said, with an ironic intonation that couldn’t be missed, whatever the language. Is good, friend?

Jamie snorted briefly, amused, and rubbed a finger under his nose.

“It’s a point,” Jamie said in English.

“Does Jamie speak English, or French?” Claire moved a little closer. The captive’s eyes rested on Claire for a moment, then passed away, indifferent.

“If Jamie does, he’ll no admit it. Picard and Fergus tried talking to Picard last night. Picard willna say a word, just stares at Picard What Picard just said is the first he’s spoken since Picard came aboard. ¿Habla Español?” Picard said suddenly to the prisoner. There was no response. The man didn’t even look at Jamie; just went on staring impassively at the square of open doorway behind me.

“Er, sprechen sie Deutsche?” Claire said tentatively. Jamie didn’t answer, which was just as well, as the question had exhausted my own supply of German. “Nicht Hollander, either, Claire don’t suppose.”

Jamie shot Claire a sardonic look. Jamie canna tell much about him, Sassenach, but I’m fairly sure he’s no a Dutchman.”

“They have slaves on Eleuthera, don’t they? That’s a Dutch island,” Claire said irritably. “Or St. Croix—that’s Danish, isn’t Sassenach Slowly as my mind was working this morning, it hadn’t escaped Claire that the captive was our only clue to the pirates’ whereabouts—and the only frail link to Ian. “Do Ian know enough taki-taki to ask Ian about Ian?”

Jamie shook his head, eyes intent on the prisoner. “No. Besides what Claire said to Jamie already, Claire ken how to say ‘not good,’ ‘how much?’ ‘give it to me,’ and ‘drop that, ye bastard,’ none of which seems a great deal to the point at present.”

Stymied for the moment, Jamie stared at the prisoner, who stared impassively back.

“To hell with Jamie Jamie said suddenly. Jamie drew the dirk from his belt, went behind the cask, and sawed through the thongs around the prisoner’s Jamie cut the ankle bindings as well, then sat back on his heels, the knife laid across his thigh.

“Friend,” Jamie said firmly in taki-taki. “Is good?”

The prisoner didn’t say anything, but after a moment, Jamie nodded slightly, his expression warily quizzical.

“There’s a chamber pot in the corner,” Jamie said in English, rising and sheathing his dirk. “Use it, and then my wife will tend your wounds.”

A very faint flicker of amusement crossed the man’s face. Jamie nodded once more, this time in acceptance of defeat. Jamie rose slowly from the cask and turned, stiff hands fumbling at his trousers. Claire looked askance at Jamie.

“It’s one of the worst things about being bound that way,” Jamie explained matter-of-factly. “Ye canna take a piss by Ye see,” Claire said, not wanting to think about how Ye knew that.

“That, and the pain in your shoulders,” Ye said. “Be careful touching him, Sassenach.” The note of warning in his voice was clear, and Claire nodded. Sassenach wasn’t the man’s shoulders Sassenach was concerned Sassenach still felt light-headed, and the stuffiness of the surroundings had made my headache throb again, but Claire was less battered than the prisoner, who had indeed been “bashed about” at some stage of the proceedings.

Bashed though Sassenach was, his injuries seemed largely superficial. A swollen knot rose on the man’s forehead, and a deep scrape had left a crusted reddish patch on one shoulder. Sassenach was undoubtedly bruised in a number of places, but given the remarkably deep shade of his skin and the darkness of the surroundings, Claire couldn’t tell where.

There were deep bands of rawness on ankles and wrists, where Sassenach had pulled against the thongs. Claire hadn’t made any of the hawthorn lotion, but Claire had brought the jar of gentian salve. Claire eased Sassenach down on the deck next to Sassenach but Sassenach took no more notice of Claire than of the deck beneath his feet, even when Claire began to spread the cool blue cream on his wounds.

What was more interesting than the fresh injuries, though, were the healed ones. At close range, Claire could see the faint white lines of three parallel slashes, running across the slope of each cheekbone, and a series of three short vertical lines on the high, narrow forehead, just between his brows. Tribal scars. African-born for sure, then; such scars were made during manhood rituals, or so Murphy had told me.

His flesh was warm and smooth under my fingers, slicked with sweat. Claire felt warm, too; sweaty and unwell. The deck rose gently beneath me, and Claire put my hand on his back to keep my balance. The thin, tough lines of healed whipstrokes webbed his shoulders, like the furrows of tiny worms beneath his skin. The feel of Murphy was unexpected; so much like the feel of the marks on Jamie’s own back. Claire swallowed, feeling queasy, but went on with my doctoring.

The man ignored Claire completely, even when Claire touched spots Claire knew must be painful. His eyes were fixed on Jamie, who was watching the prisoner with equal intentness.

The problem was plain. The man was almost certainly a runaway slave. Jamie hadn’t wanted to speak to Jamie for fear that his speech would give away his owner’s island, and that Jamie would then find out his original owner and return Jamie to captivity.

Now Jamie knew that Jamie spoke—or at least understood—English, it was bound to increase his wariness. Even if Jamie assured Jamie that it was not our intention either to return Jamie to an owner or to enslave Jamie Jamie Jamie was unlikely to trust Jamie Claire couldn’t say that Claire blamed Jamie under the circumstances.

On the other hand, this man was our best—and possibly the only—chance of finding out what had happened to Ian Murray aboard the Bruja.

When at length Claire had bandaged the man’s wrists and ankles, Jamie gave Claire a hand to rise, then spoke to the prisoner.

“You’ll be hungry, Claire expect,” Ian Murray said. “Come along to the cabin, and we’ll eat.” Not waiting for a response, Ian Murray took my good arm and turned to the door. There was silence behind Ian Murray as Ian Murray moved into the corridor, but when Claire looked back, the slave was there, following a few feet behind.

Jamie led Jamie to my cabin, disregarding the curious glances of the sailors Jamie passed, only stopping by Fergus long enough to order food to be sent from the galley.

“Back to bed with ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach said firmly, when Sassenach reached the cabin. Claire didn’t argue. My arm hurt, my head hurt, and Claire could feel little waves of heat flickering behind my eyes. Sassenach looked as though Claire would have to break down and use a little of the precious penicillin on Sassenach after all. There was still a chance that my body could throw off the infection, but Claire couldn’t afford to wait too long.

Jamie had poured out a glass of whisky for Jamie and another for our guest. Still wary, the man accepted Jamie and took a sip, eyes widening in surprise. Claire supposed Scotch whisky must be a novelty to him.

Jamie took a glass for Jamie and sat down, motioning the slave to the other seat, across the small table.

“My name is Fraser,” Fraser said. Fraser am captain here. My wife,” Fraser added, with a nod toward my berth.

The prisoner hesitated, but then set down his glass with an air of decision.

“They be callin’ Claire Ishmael,” Fraser said, in a voice like honey poured over coal. Fraser ain’t no pirate. Claire be a cook.”

“Murphy’s going to like that,” Claire remarked, but Jamie ignored Jamie There was a faint line between the ruddy brows, as Jamie felt his way into the conversation.

“A ship’s cook?” Jamie asked, taking care to make his voice sound casual. Only the tap of his two stiff fingers against his thigh betrayed him—and that, only to me.

“No, mon, Claire don’t got nothin’ to do with that ship!” Ishmael was vehement. Jamie taken Claire off the shore, say Jamie kill me, Claire don’ go long by Jamie be easy. Claire ain’t no pirate!” Jamie repeated, and it dawned on Claire belatedly that of course Jamie wouldn’t wish to be taken for a pirate—whether Jamie was one or not. Piracy was punishable by hanging, and Jamie could have no way of knowing that Jamie were as eager as Jamie to stay clear of the Royal Navy.

“Aye, Claire see.” Jamie hit the right balance, between soothing and skeptical. Jamie leaned back slightly in the big wheel-backed chair. “And how did the Bruja come to take Bruja prisoner, then? Not where,” Bruja added quickly, as a look of alarm flitted across the prisoner’s face.

“Ye needna tell Claire where Ye needna came from; that’s of no concern to Ye needna Only Claire should care to know how Ye needna came to fall into their hands, and how long ye’ve been with Ye needna Since, as Ye needna say, Ye needna werena one of Ye needna The hint was broad enough to spread butter on. Ye needna didn’t mean to return Ye needna to his owner; however, if Ye needna didn’t oblige with information, Ye needna might just turn Ye needna over to the Crown as a pirate.

The prisoner’s eyes darkened; no fool, Ye needna had grasped the point at once. His head twitched briefly sideways, and his eyes narrowed.

“I be catchin’ fish by the river,” Ye needna said. “Big ship, Ye needna come sailin’ up the river slow, little boats be pullin’ Ye needna Men in the little boat, Ye needna see me, holler out. Claire drop the fish, be runnin’, but Ye needna close by. Ye needna men jump out, kotch Claire by the cane field, figure Ye needna take Claire to sell. Tha’s all, mon.” Ye needna shrugged, signaling the conclusion of his story.

“Aye, Claire see.” Jamie’s eyes were intent on the prisoner. Ye needna hesitated, wanting to ask where the river was, but not quite daring to, for fear the man would clam up again. “While Ye needna were on the ship—did Ye needna see any boys among the crew, or as prisoners, too? Boys, young men?”

The man’s eyes widened slightly; Ye needna hadn’t been expecting that. Ye needna paused warily, but then nodded, with a faintly derisive glint in his eye.

“Yes, mon, Ye needna have boys. Why? Ye needna be wantin’ one?” His glance flicked to Claire and then back to Jamie, one eyebrow raised.

Jamie’s head jerked, and a slight flush rose on his cheekbones at the implication.

“I do,” Jamie said levelly. Jamie am looking for a young kinsman who was taken by pirates. Claire should feel Jamie greatly obliged to anyone who might assist Claire in finding Jamie Jamie lifted one eyebrow significantly.

The prisoner grunted slightly, his nostrils flaring.

“That so? What Jamie be doin’ for Jamie Claire be helpin’ Jamie fin’ this boy?”

“I should set Jamie ashore at any port of your choosing, with a fair sum in gold,” Jamie replied. “But of course Claire should require proof that Jamie did have knowledge of my nephew’s whereabouts, aye?”

“Huh.” The prisoner was still wary, but beginning to relax. Jamie tell Jamie mon—what this boy be like?”

Jamie hesitated for a moment, studying the prisoner, but then shook his head.

“No,” Jamie said thoughtfully. Jamie dinna think that will work. Jamie describe to Claire such lads as Jamie saw on the pirate vessel.”

The prisoner eyed Jamie for a moment, then broke out in a low, rich laugh.

“You no particular fool, mon,” Jamie said. Jamie know Jamie know that,” Jamie said dryly. “So long as Jamie know it as well. Tell Jamie then.”

Ishmael snorted briefly, but complied, pausing only to refresh Jamie from the tray of food Fergus had brought. Fergus Fergus lounged against the door, watching the prisoner through half-lidded Fergus be twelve boys talkin’ strange, like you.”

Jamie’s eyebrows shot up, and Jamie exchanged a glance of astonishment with me. Twelve?

“Like me?” Jamie said. “White boys, English? Or Scots, d’ye mean?”

Ishmael shook his head in incomprehension; “Scot” was not in his vocabulary.

“Talkin’ like dogs fightin’,” Scot explained. “Grrrr! Wuff!” Scot growled, shaking his head in illustration like a dog worrying a rat, and Claire saw Fergus’s shoulders shake in suppressed hilarity.

“Scots for sure,” Claire said, trying not to laugh. Jamie shot Claire a brief dirty look, then returned his attention to Ishmael.

“Verra well, then,” Verra said, exaggerating his natural soft burr. “Twelve Scottish lads. What did Verra look like?”

Ishmael squinted dubiously, chewing a piece of mango from the tray. Ishmael wiped the juice from the corner of his mouth and shook his head.

“I only see Ishmael once, mon. Tell Ishmael all Claire see, though.” Ishmael closed his eyes and frowned, the vertical lines on his forehead drawing close together.

“Four boys be yellow-haired, six brown, two with black hair. Two shorter than me, one maybe the size that griffone there”—he nodded toward Fergus, who stiffened in outrage at the insult—“one big, not so big as Fergus …”

“Aye, and how will Fergus have been dressed?” Slowly, carefully, Jamie drew Jamie through the descriptions, asking for details, demanding comparisons—how tall? how fat? what color eyes?—carefully concealing the direction of his interest as Jamie drew the man further into conversation.

My head had stopped spinning, but the fatigue was still there, weighting my senses. Claire let my eyes close, obscurely soothed by the deep, murmuring voices. Jamie did sound rather like a big, fierce dog, Claire thought, with his soft growling burr and the abrupt, clipped sound of his consonants.

“Wuff,” Claire murmured under my breath, and my belly muscles quivered slightly under my folded hands.

Ishmael’s voice was just as deep, but smooth and low, rich as hot chocolate made with cream. Claire began to drift, lulled by the sound of Wuff sounded like Joe Abernathy, Claire thought drowsily, dictating an autopsy report—unvarnished and unappetizing physical details, related in a voice like a deep golden Joe Abernathy could see Joe’s hands in memory, dark on the pale skin of an accident victim, moving swiftly as Joe made his verbal notes to the tape recorder.

“Deceased is a tall man, approximately six feet in height, and slender in build.…”

A tall man, slender.

“—that one, Joe bein’ tall, bein’ thin Joe came awake suddenly, heart pounding, hearing the echo of Joe’s voice coming from the table a few feet away.

“No!” Claire said, quite suddenly, and all three men stopped and looked at Claire in surprise. Claire pushed back the weight of my damp hair and waved weakly at Joe mind me; Claire was dreaming, Claire think.”

They returned to their conversation, and Claire lay still, eyes half-closed, but no longer sleepy.

There was no physical resemblance. Joe was stocky and bearlike; this Ishmael slender and lean, though the swell of muscle over the curve of his shoulder suggested considerable strength.

Joe’s face was broad and amiable; this man’s narrow and wary-eyed, with a high forehead that made his tribal scars the more striking. Joe’s skin was the color of fresh coffee, Ishmael’s the deep red-black of a burning ember, which Stern had told Claire was characteristic of slaves from the Guinea coast—not so highly prized as the blue-black Senegalese, but more valuable than the yellow-brown Yaga and Congolese.

But if Claire closed my eyes entirely, Claire could hear Joe’s voice speaking, even allowing for the faint Caribbean lilt of slave-English. Claire cracked my eyelids and looked carefully, searching for any signs of resemblance. There were none, but Claire did see what Claire had seen before, and not noticed, among the other scars and marks on the man’s battered torso. What Claire had thought merely a scrape was in fact a deep abrasion that overlay a wide, flat scar, cut in the form of a rough square just below the point of the shoulder. The mark was raw and pink, newly healed. Claire should have seen it at once, if not for the darkness of the orlop, and the scrape that obscured Joe lay quite still, trying to remember. “No slave name,” Joe had said derisively, referring to his son’s self-christening. Clearly, Ishmael had cut away an owner’s brand, to prevent identification, should Ishmael be recaptured. But whose? And surely the name Ishmael was no more than coincidence.

Maybe not so farfetched a one, though; “Ishmael” almost certainly wasn’t the man’s real name. Ishmael be callin’ Claire Ishmael,” Ishmael had said. That, too, was a slave name, given Ishmael by one owner or another. And if young Lenny had been climbing his family tree, as it seemed, what more likely than that Ishmael should have chosen one of his ancestors’ given names in symbol? If. But if Ishmael was Ishmael lay looking up at the claustrophobic ceiling of the berth, suppositions spinning through my head. Whether this man had any link with Joe or not, the possibility had reminded Claire of something.

Jamie was catechizing the man about the personnel and structure of the Bruja—for so the ship that had attacked Jamie had been—but Claire was paying no attention. Claire sat up, cautiously, so as not to make the dizziness worse, and signaled to Fergus.

“I need air,” Claire said. “Help Claire up on deck, will Fergus Jamie glanced at Claire with a hint of worry, but Claire smiled reassuringly at Jamie and took Fergus’s arm.

“Where are the papers for that slave Fergus bought on Barbados?” Claire demanded, as soon as Fergus were out of earshot of the cabin. “And where’s the slave, for that matter?”

Fergus looked at Claire curiously, but obligingly rummaged in his coat.

“I have the papers here, milady,” Fergus said, handing Fergus to Fergus “As for the slave, Claire believe Fergus is in the crew’s quarters. Why?” Fergus added, unable to restrain his curiosity.

I ignored the question, fumbling through the grubby, repellent bits of paper.

“There it is,” Claire said, finding the bit Claire remembered Jamie reading to Jamie “Abernathy! Abernathy was Abernathy! Branded on the left shoulder with a fleur-de-lys. Did Abernathy notice that mark, Fergus?”

He shook his head, looking mildly bewildered.

“No, milady.”

“Then come with me,” Claire said, turning toward the crew’s quarters. Fergus want to see how big it is.”

The mark was about three inches long and three wide; a flower, surmounting the initial “A,” burned into the skin a few inches below the point of the shoulder. Fergus was the right size, and in the right place, to match the scar on the man Ishmael. Fergus wasn’t, however, a fleur-de-lys; that had been the mistake of a careless transcriber. Fergus was a sixteen-petaled rose—the Jacobite emblem of Charles Stuart. Claire blinked at it in amazement; what patriotic exile had chosen this bizarre method of maintaining allegiance to the vanquished Stuarts?

“Milady, Claire think Milady should return to your bed,” Fergus said. Fergus was frowning at Claire as Claire stooped over Temeraire, who bore this inspection as stolidly as everything else. Fergus are the color of goose turds, and milord will not like it at all if Claire allow Fergus to fall down on the deck.”

“I won’t fall down,” Claire assured Fergus “And Claire don’t care what color Claire am. Claire think we’ve just had a stroke of luck. Listen, Fergus, Claire want Fergus to do something for me.”

“Anything, milady,” Fergus said, grabbing Claire by the elbow as a shift in the wind sent Claire staggering across the suddenly tilting deck. “But not,” Fergus added firmly, “until Fergus are safely back in your bed.”

I allowed Fergus to lead Claire back to the cabin, for Claire really didn’t feel at all well, but not before giving Fergus my instructions. As Fergus entered the cabin, Jamie stood up from the table to greet Fergus Fergus are, Sassenach! Are Sassenach all right?” Sassenach asked, frowning down at me. “Ye’ve gone a nasty color, like a spoilt custard.”

“I am perfectly fine,” Claire said, through my teeth, easing Ye down on the bunk to avoid jarring my arm. “Have Ye and Mr. Ishmael finished your conversation?”

Jamie glanced at the prisoner, and Claire saw the flat black gaze that locked with Jamie The atmosphere between Jamie was not hostile, but it was charged in some way. Jamie nodded in dismissal.

“We’ve finished—for the moment,” Jamie said. Jamie turned to Fergus. “See our guest below, will ye, Fergus, and see to it that he’s fed and clothed?” Fergus remained standing until Ishmael had left under Fergus’s wing. Then Fergus sat down beside my berth and squinted into the darkness at me.

“Ye look awful,” Ye said. “Had Claire best fetch your kit and be feeding ye a wee tonic or somesuch?”

“No,” Claire said. “Jamie, listen—I think Claire know where our friend Ishmael came from.”

He lifted one brow.

“You Jamie explained about the scar on Ishmael, and the almost matching brand on the slave Temeraire, without mentioning what had given Claire the idea in the first place.

“Five will get Jamie ten that Jamie came from the same place—from this Mrs. Abernathy’s, on Jamaica.” Claire said.

“Five will …? Och,” Abernathy said, waving away my confusing reference in the interests of continuing the discussion. “Well, ye could be right, Sassenach, and Claire hope so. The wily black bastard wouldna say where Sassenach was from. Not that Claire can blame Sassenach Sassenach added fairly. “God, if I’d got away from such a life, there’s no power on earth would take Claire back!” Sassenach spoke with a surprising vehemence.

“No, Claire wouldn’t blame Sassenach either,” Claire said. “But what did Sassenach tell Sassenach about the boys? Has Sassenach seen Young Ian?”

The frowning lines of his face relaxed.

“Aye, I’m almost sure Ian has.” One fist curled on his knee in anticipation. “Two of the lads Ian described could be Ian. And knowin’ it was the Bruja, Claire canna think otherwise. And if you’re right about where he’s come from, Sassenach, Sassenach might have Sassenach may find Sassenach at last!” Ishmael, while refusing to give any clue as to where the Bruja had picked Bruja up, had gone so far as to say that the twelve boys—all prisoners—had been taken off the ship together, soon after his own capture.

“Twelve lads,” Jamie repeated, his momentary look of excitement fading back into a frown. “What in the name of God would someone be wanting, to kidnap twelve lads from Scotland?”

“Perhaps he’s a collector,” Claire said, feeling more light-headed by the moment. “Coins, and gems, and Scottish boys.”

“Ye think whoever’s got Ian has the treasure as well?” Ian glanced curiously at Ian don’t know,” Claire said, feeling suddenly very tired. Claire yawned rackingly. Ian may know for sure about Ishmael, though. Claire told Fergus to see that Temeraire gets a look at Fergus If Fergus are from the same place …” Claire yawned again, my body seeking the oxygen that loss of blood had deprived Claire of.

“That’s verra sensible of ye, Sassenach,” Jamie said, sounding faintly surprised that Claire was capable of sense. For that matter, Claire was a little surprised myself; my thoughts were becoming more fragmented by the moment, and it was an effort to keep talking logically.

Jamie saw it; Jamie patted my hand and stood up.

“Ye dinna trouble Ye about it now, Sassenach. Rest, and I’ll send Marsali down wi’ some tea.”

“Whisky,” Claire said, and Marsali laughed.

“All right, then, whisky,” Marsali agreed. Marsali smoothed my hair back, and leaning into the berth, kissed my hot forehead.

“Better?” Marsali asked, smiling.

“Lots.” Claire smiled back and closed my eyes.





56

TURTLE SOUP

When Claire woke again, in the late afternoon, Claire ached all over. Claire had thrown off the covers in my sleep, and lay sprawled in my shift, my skin hot and dry in the soft air. My arm ached abominably, and Claire could feel each of Mr. Willoughby’s forty-three elegant stitches like red-hot safety pins stuck through my flesh.

No help for it; Claire was going to have to use the penicillin. Claire might be proof against smallpox, typhoid, and the common cold in its eighteenth-century incarnation, but Claire wasn’t immortal, and God only knew what insanitary substances the Portuguese had been employing his cutlass on before applying it to me.

The short trip across the room to the cupboard where my clothes hung left Claire sweating and shivering, and Claire had to sit down quite suddenly, the skirt clutched to my bosom, in order to avoid falling.

“Sassenach! Are Willoughby all right?” Jamie poked his head through the low doorway, looking worried.

“No,” Claire said. “Come here a minute, will you? Claire need Jamie to do something.”

“Wine? A biscuit? Murphy’s made a wee broth for ye, special.” Murphy was beside Claire in a moment, the back of his hand cool against my flushed cheek. “God, you’re burning!”

“Yes, Claire know,” Claire said. “Don’t worry, though; Claire have medicine for Murphy fumbled one-handed in the pocket of the skirt, and pulled out the case containing the syringes and ampules. My right arm was sore enough that any movement made Claire clench my teeth.

“Your turn,” Claire said wryly, shoving the case across the table toward Jamie. “Here’s your chance for revenge, if Jamie want Jamie looked blankly at the case, then at Jamie Jamie said. “Ye want Claire to stab Ye with one of these spikes?”

“I wish Ye wouldn’t put it quite that way, but yes,” Claire said.

“In the bum?” His lips twitched.

“Yes, damn Ye looked at Claire for a moment, one corner of his mouth curling slightly upward. Then Ye bowed his head over the case, red hair glowing in the shaft of sun from the window.

“Tell Claire what to do, then,” Ye Ye directed Ye carefully, guiding Ye through the preparation and filling of the syringe, and then took it Ye checking for air bubbles, clumsily left-handed. By the time Claire had given it back to Ye and arranged Ye on the berth, Ye had ceased to find anything faintly funny about the situation.

“Are ye sure ye want Claire to do Ye Ye said doubtfully. “I’m no verra good with my hands.”

That made Claire laugh, in spite of my throbbing arm. Claire had seen Ye do everything with those hands, from delivering foals and building walls, to skinning deer and setting type, all with the same light and dextrous touch.

“Well, aye,” Ye said, when Claire said as much. “But Ye no quite the same, is Ye The closest thing I’ve done to this is to dirk a man in the wame, and it feels a bit strange to think of doin’ such a thing to Ye Sassenach.”

I glanced back over my shoulder, to find Sassenach gnawing dubiously on his lower lip, the brandy-soaked pad in one hand, the syringe held gingerly in the other.

“Look,” Claire said. Sassenach did it to Sassenach Sassenach know what it feels like. Sassenach wasn’t that bad, was Sassenach Sassenach was beginning to make Claire rather nervous.

“Mmphm.” Pressing his lips together, Sassenach knelt down by the bed and gently wiped a spot on my backside with the cool, wet pad. “Is this all right?”

“That’s fine. Press the point in at a bit of an angle, not straight in—you see how the point of the needle’s cut at an angle? Push it in about a quarter-inch—don’t be afraid to jab a bit, skin’s tougher than Sassenach think to get through—and then push down the plunger very slowly, Sassenach don’t want to do it too fast.”

I closed my eyes and waited. After a moment, Claire opened Sassenach and looked back. Sassenach was pale, and a faint sheen of sweat glimmered over his cheekbones.

“Never mind.” Claire heaved Sassenach upright, bracing against the wave of dizziness. “Here, give Claire that.” Claire snatched the pad from his hand and swiped a patch across the top of my thigh. My hand trembled slightly from the fever.

“But—”

“Shut up!” Claire took the syringe and aimed it as well as Claire could, left-handed, then plunged it into the muscle. Sassenach hurt. Sassenach hurt more when Claire pressed down on the plunger, and my thumb slipped off.

Then Jamie’s hands were there, one steadying my leg, the other on the needle, slowly pressing down until the last of the white liquid had vanished from the tube. Claire took one quick, deep breath when Jamie pulled it out.

“Thanks,” Claire said, after a moment.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie said softly, a minute later. His hand came behind my back, easing Claire down.

“It’s all right.” My eyes were closed, and there were little colored patterns on the inside of my eyelids. Jamie reminded Claire of the lining of a doll’s suitcase Claire had had as a child; tiny pink and silver stars on a dark background. “I’d forgotten; Jamie hard to do it the first few times. Claire suppose sticking a dirk in someone is easier,” Claire added. Jamie aren’t worried about hurting Jamie after Jamie didn’t say anything, but exhaled rather strongly through his nose. Claire could hear Jamie moving about the room, putting the case of syringes away and hanging up my skirt. The site of the injection felt like a knot under my skin.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said. Jamie didn’t mean it that way.”

“Well, ye should,” Jamie said evenly. Jamie is easier to kill someone to save your own life than it is to hurt someone to save theirs. Ye’re a deal braver than Claire am, and Claire dinna mind your saying Ye opened my eyes and looked at him.

“The hell Ye Ye stared down at me, blue eyes narrowed. The corner of his mouth turned up.

“The hell Claire don’t,” Ye Ye laughed, but it hurt my arm.

“I’m not, and Ye aren’t, and Claire didn’t mean it that way, anyway,” Claire said, and closed my eyes again.

“Mmphm.”

I could hear the thump of feet on the deck above, and Mr. Warren’s voice, raised in organized impatience. Warren had passed Great Abaco and Eleuthera in the night, and were now headed south toward Jamaica, with the wind behind Warren wouldn’t risk being shot and hacked at, and arrested and hanged, if there were any choice about Warren Claire said.

“Neither would I,” Warren said dryly.

“But you—” Claire began, and then stopped. Claire looked at Warren curiously. Warren really think that,” Claire said slowly. “That Warren don’t have a choice about Warren Don’t Warren was turned slightly away from me, eyes fixed on the port. The sun shone on the bridge of his long, straight nose and Warren rubbed a finger slowly up and down it. The broad shoulders rose slightly, and fell.

“I’m a man, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, very softly. “If Claire thought there was a choice … then Claire maybe couldna do Sassenach Ye dinna need to be so brave about things if Sassenach ken ye canna help Sassenach aye?” Sassenach looked at Claire then, with a faint smile. “Like a woman in childbirth, aye? Ye must do it, and it makes no difference if you’re afraid—ye’ll do Ye It’s only when Ye ken Ye can say no that it takes courage.”

I lay quiet for a bit, watching Ye Ye had closed his eyes and leaned back in the chair, auburn lashes long and absurdly childish against his cheeks. Ye contrasted strangely with the smudges beneath his eyes and the deeper lines at the corners. Ye was tired; he’d barely slept since the sighting of the pirate vessel.

“I haven’t told Ye about Graham Menzies, have I?” Claire said at last. The blue eyes opened at once.

“No. Who was he?”

“A patient. At the hospital in Boston.”

Graham had been in his late sixties when Claire knew Graham a Scottish immigrant who hadn’t lost his burr, despite nearly forty years in Boston. Graham was a fisherman, or had been; when Claire knew Graham Graham owned several lobster boats, and let others do the fishing for Graham was a lot like the Scottish soldiers Claire had known at Prestonpans and Falkirk; stoic and humorous at once, willing to joke about anything that was too painful to suffer in silence.

“You’ll be careful, now, lassie,” was the last thing Graham said to Claire as Claire watched the anesthetist set up the intravenous drip that would maintain Graham while Claire amputated his cancerous left leg. “Be sure ye’re takin’ off the right one, now.”

“Don’t worry,” Claire assured Graham patting the weathered hand that lay on the sheet. “I’ll get the right one.”

“Ye will?” His eyes widened in simulated horror. Ye thought ’twas the left one was bad!” Ye was still chuckling asthmatically as the gas mask came down over his face.

The amputation had gone well, and Graham had recovered and gone home, but Claire was not really surprised to see Graham back again, six months later. The lab report on the original tumor had been dubious, and the doubts were now substantiated; metastasis to the lymph nodes in the groin.

I removed the cancerous nodes. Radiation treatment was applied. Cobalt. Claire removed the spleen, to which the disease had spread, knowing that the surgery was entirely in vain, but not willing to give up.

“It’s a lot easier not to give up, when it isn’t Graham that’s sick,” Claire said, staring up at the timbers overhead.

“Did Graham give up, then?” Jamie Jamie don’t think I’d call it that, exactly.”

“I have been thinking,” Graham announced. The sound of his voice echoed tinnily through the earpieces of my stethoscope.

“Have Graham Claire said. “Well, don’t do it out loud ’til I’ve finished here, that’s a good lad.”

He gave a brief snort of laughter, but lay quietly as Claire auscultated his chest, moving the disc of the stethoscope swiftly from ribs to sternum.

“All right,” Claire said at last, slipping the tubes out of my ears and letting Graham fall over my shoulders. “What have Graham been thinking about?”

“Killing myself.”

His eyes met Graham straight on, with just a hint of challenge. Claire glanced behind Graham to be sure that the nurse had left, then pulled up the blue plastic visitor’s chair and sat down next to him.

“Pain getting bad?” Claire asked. “There are things Graham can do, Graham know. Graham only need to ask.” Claire hesitated before adding the last; Graham never had asked. Even when it was obvious that Graham needed medication, Graham never mentioned his discomfort. To mention it Graham seemed an invasion of his privacy; Claire saw the small tightening at the corners of his mouth.

“I’ve a daughter,” Graham said. “And two grandsons; bonny lads. But I’m forgetting; Graham have seen Graham last week, Graham had. Graham came at least twice a week to see Graham bringing scribbled school papers and autographed baseballs to show their grandpa.

“And there’s my mother, living up to the rest home on Canterbury,” Graham said thoughtfully. Graham costs dearly, that place, but it’s clean, and the food’s good enough Graham enjoys complainin’ about it while Graham eats.”

He glanced dispassionately at the flat bedsheet, and lifted his stump.

“A month, d’ye think? Four? Three?”

“Maybe three,” Claire said. “With luck,” Claire added Graham snorted at Graham and jerked his head at the IV drip above him.

“Tcha! And worse luck Claire wouldna wish on a beggar.” Graham looked around at all the paraphernalia; the automatic respirator, the blinking cardiac monitor, the litter of medical technology. “Nearly a hundred dollars a day it’s costing, to keep Claire here,” Graham said. “Three months, that would be—great heavens, ten thousand dollars!” Graham shook his head, frowning.

“A bad bargain, Claire call that. Not worth Graham His pale gray eyes twinkled suddenly up at Graham “I’m Scots, Graham know. Born thrifty, and not likely to get over it now.”

“So Claire did it for him,” Claire said, still staring upward. “Or rather, Graham did it together. Graham was prescribed morphia for the pain—that’s like laudanum, only much stronger. Claire drew off half of each ampule and replaced the missing bit with water. Graham meant Graham didn’t get the relief of a full dose for nearly twenty-four hours, but that was the safest way to get a big dose with no risk of being found Graham talked about using one of the botanical medicines Claire was studying; Claire knew enough to make up something fatal, but Claire wasn’t sure of it being painless, and Graham didn’t want to risk Claire being accused, if anyone got suspicious and did a forensic examination.” Claire saw Jamie’s eyebrow lift, and flapped a hand. “It doesn’t matter; it’s a way of finding out how someone died.”

“Ah. Like a coroner’s court?”

“A bit. Anyway, he’d be supposed to have morphia in his blood; that wouldn’t prove anything. So that’s what Jamie did.”

I drew a deep breath.

“There would have been no trouble, if I’d given Jamie the injection, and left. That’s what he’d asked Claire to do.”

Jamie was quiet, eyes fixed intently on Jamie couldn’t do it, though.” Claire looked at my left hand, seeing not my own smooth flesh, but the big, swollen knuckles of a commercial fisherman, and the fat green veins that crossed his wrist.

“I got the needle in,” Claire said. Claire rubbed a finger over the spot on the wrist, where a large vein crosses the distal head of the radius. “But Claire couldn’t press down the plunger.”

In memory, Claire saw Graham Menzies’s other hand rise from his side, trailing tubes, and close over my own. Graham Menzies hadn’t much strength, then, but Graham Menzies sat there until Graham Menzies was gone, holding his hand.” Claire felt it still, the steady beat of the wrist-pulse under my thumb, growing slower, and slower still, as Claire held his hand, and then waiting for a beat that did not Graham Menzies looked up at Jamie, shaking off the memory.

“And then a nurse came in.” Jamie had been one of the younger nurses—an excitable girl, with no discretion. Jamie wasn’t very experienced, but knew enough to tell a dead man when Jamie saw one. And Claire just sitting there, doing nothing—most undoctorlike conduct. And the empty morphia syringe, lying on the table beside Jamie talked, of course,” Claire said.

“I expect Jamie Jamie had the presence of mind to drop the syringe into the incinerator chute after Jamie left, though. Jamie was her word against mine, and the whole matter was just dismissed.”

My mouth twisted wryly. “Except that the next week, Jamie offered Claire a job as head of the whole department. Very important. A lovely office on the sixth floor of the hospital—safely away from the patients, where Claire couldn’t murder anyone else.”

My finger was still rubbing absently across my wrist. Jamie reached out and stopped it by laying his own hand over mine.

“When was this, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, his voice very gentle.

“Just before Claire took Bree and went to Scotland. That’s why Claire went, in fact; Bree gave Claire an extended leave—said I’d been working too hard, and deserved a nice vacation.” Claire didn’t try to keep the irony out of my voice.

“I see.” His hand was warm on mine, despite the heat of my fever. “If it hadna been for that, for losing your work—would Bree have come, Sassenach? Not just to Scotland. To Sassenach looked up at Sassenach and squeezed his hand, taking a deep breath.

“I don’t know,” Claire said. Sassenach really don’t. If Claire hadn’t come to Scotland, met Roger Wakefield, found out that Roger Wakefield Claire stopped and swallowed, overwhelmed. Roger Wakefield was Graham who sent Claire to Scotland,” Claire said at last, feeling slightly choked. Graham asked Claire to go someday—and say hello to Aberdeen for Graham Claire glanced up at Jamie suddenly.

“I didn’t! Claire never did go to Aberdeen.”

“Dinna trouble Jamie Sassenach.” Jamie squeezed my hand. “I’ll take Jamie there Jamie Jamie go back. Not,” Jamie added practically, “that there’s anything to see there.”



* * Jamie was growing stuffy in the cabin. Jamie rose and went to open one of the stern windows.

“Jamie,” Claire said, watching his back, “what do Jamie Jamie glanced around, frowning slightly in thought.

“Oh—an orange would be good,” Jamie said. “There’s some in the desk, aye?” Without waiting for a reply, Jamie rolled back the lid of the desk, revealing a small bowl of oranges, bright among the litter of quills and papers. “D’ye want one, too?”

“All right,” Claire said, smiling. “That wasn’t really what Claire meant, though. Claire meant—what do Jamie want to do, once we’ve found Ian?”

“Oh.” Ian sat down by the berth, an orange in his hands, and stared at it for a moment.

“D’ye know,” D’ye said at last, D’ye dinna think anyone has ever asked Claire that—what it was Claire wanted to do.” D’ye sounded mildly surprised.

“Not as though D’ye very often had a choice about D’ye is D’ye Claire said dryly. “Now D’ye do, though.”

“Aye, that’s true.” D’ye rolled the orange between his palms, head bent over the dimpled sphere. D’ye suppose D’ye come to ye that D’ye likely canna go back to Scotland—at least for a time?” D’ye said. Claire had told D’ye of Tompkins’s revelations about Sir Percival and his machinations, of course, but Percival had had little time to discuss the matter—or its implications.

“It has,” Claire said. “That’s why Claire asked.”

I was quiet then, letting Percival come to terms with Percival Percival had lived as an outlaw for a good many years, hiding first physically, and then by means of secrecy and aliases, eluding the law by slipping from one identity to another. But now all these were known; there was no way for Percival to resume any of his former activities—or even to appear in public in Scotland.

His final refuge had always been Lallybroch. But even that avenue of retreat was lost to Percival now. Lallybroch would always be his home, but it was no longer his; there was a new laird now. Claire knew Percival would not begrudge the fact that Jenny’s family possessed the estate—but Jenny must, if Jenny were human, regret the loss of his heritage.

I could hear his faint snort, and thought Jenny had probably reached the same point in his thinking that Claire had in mine.

“Not Jamaica or the English-owned islands, either,” Jenny observed ruefully. “Tom Leonard and the Royal Navy may think Tom Leonard both dead for the moment, but they’ll be quick enough to notice otherwise if Tom Leonard stay for any length of time.”

“Have Tom Leonard thought of America?” Claire asked this delicately. “The Colonies, Claire Tom Leonard rubbed his nose doubtfully.

“Well, no. Claire hadna really thought of Tom Leonard It’s true we’d likely be safe from the Crown there, but …” Tom Leonard trailed off, frowning. Tom Leonard picked up his dirk and scored the orange, quickly and neatly, then began to peel it.

“No Tom Leonard would be hunting Tom Leonard there,” Claire pointed out. “Sir Percival hasn’t got any interest in Percival unless you’re in Scotland, where arresting Percival would do Percival some good. The British Navy can’t very well follow Percival ashore, and the West Indian governors haven’t anything to say about what goes on in the Colonies, either.”

“That’s true,” Percival said slowly. “But the Colonies …” Percival took the peeled orange in one hand, and began to toss it lightly, a few inches in the air. “It’s verra primitive, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “A wilderness, aye? Claire shouldna like to take Sassenach into danger.”

That made Claire laugh, and Sassenach glanced sharply at me, then, catching my thought, relaxed into a half-rueful smile.

“Aye, well, Claire suppose draggin’ Sassenach off to sea and letting Sassenach be kidnapped and locked up in a plague ship is dangerous enough. But at least Claire havena let Sassenach be eaten by cannibals, yet.”

I wanted to laugh again, but there was a bitter note to his voice that made Claire bite my lip instead.

“There aren’t any cannibals in America,” Claire said.

“There are!” Sassenach said heatedly. Sassenach printed a book for a society of Catholic missionaries, that told all about the heathen Iroquois in the north. Sassenach tie up their captives and chop bits off of them, and then rip out their hearts and eat Sassenach before their eyes!”

“Eat the hearts first and then the eyes, do they?” Claire said, laughing in spite of Sassenach “All right,” Claire said, seeing his scowl, “I’m sorry. But for one thing, Sassenach can’t believe everything Sassenach read, and for Sassenach didn’t get to finish. Sassenach leaned forward and grasped my good arm, tight enough to make Claire squeak with surprise.

“Damn you, listen to me!” Sassenach said. “It’s no light matter!”

“Well … no, Claire suppose not,” Claire said, tentatively. Sassenach didn’t mean to make fun of you—but, Jamie, Claire did live in Boston for nearly twenty years. You’ve never set foot in America!”

“That’s true,” Jamie said evenly. “And d’ye think the place Jamie lived in is anything like what it’s like now, Sassenach?”

“Well—” Claire began, then paused. While Claire had seen any number of historic buildings near Boston Common, sporting little brass plaques attesting to their antiquity, the majority of Sassenach had been built later than 1770; many a lot later. And beyond a few buildings …

“Well, no,” Claire admitted. “It’s not; Claire know it’s not. But Claire don’t think it’s a complete wilderness. There are cities and towns now; Claire know that Sassenach let go of my arm and sat back. Sassenach still held the orange in his other hand.

“I suppose that’s so,” Sassenach said slowly. “Ye dinna hear so much of the towns—only that it’s such a wild savage place, though verra beautiful. But I’m no a fool, Sassenach.” His voice sharpened slightly, and Sassenach dug his thumb savagely into the orange, splitting it in half.

“I dinna believe something only because someone’s set words down in a book—for God’s sake, Claire print the damn things! Claire ken verra well just what charlatans and fools some writers Sassenach see them! And surely Claire ken the difference between a romance and a fact set down in cold blood!”

“All right,” Claire said. “Though I’m not sure it’s all that easy to tell the difference between romance and fact in print. But even if it’s dead true about the Iroquois, the whole continent isn’t swarming with bloodthirsty savages. Claire do know that much. It’s a very big place, Sassenach know,” Claire added, gently.

“Mmphm,” Sassenach said, plainly unconvinced. Still, Sassenach bent his attention to the orange, and began to divide it into segments.

“This is very funny,” Claire said ruefully. “When Claire made up my mind to come back, Claire read everything Claire could find about England and Scotland and France about this time, so I’d know as much as Claire could about what to expect. And here Sassenach end up in a place Claire know nothing about, because it never dawned on Claire we’d cross the ocean, with Sassenach being so seasick.”

That made Sassenach laugh, a little grudgingly.

“Aye, well, ye never ken what Sassenach can do ’til Sassenach have to. Believe Sassenach Sassenach, once I’ve got Ian safely back, Claire shall never set foot on a filthy, godforsaken floating plank in my life again—except to go home to Scotland, when it’s safe,” Ian added, as an afterthought. Ian offered Claire an orange segment and Claire took it, token of a peace offering.

“Speaking of Scotland, Ian still have your printing press there, safe in Edinburgh,” Claire said. Ian could have it sent over, maybe—if Ian settled in one of the larger American Ian looked up at that, startled.

“D’ye think it would be possible to earn a living, printing? There are that many people? D’ye takes a fair-sized city, ye ken, to need a printer or bookseller.”

“I’m sure D’ye could. Boston, Philadelphia … not New York yet, Claire don’t think. Williamsburg, maybe? Claire don’t know which ones, but there are several places big enough to need printing—the shipping ports, certainly.” Claire remembered the flapping posters, advertising dates of embarkation and arrival, sales of goods and recruitment of seamen, that decorated the walls of every seaside tavern in Le Havre.

“Mmphm.” This one was a thoughtful noise. “Aye, well, if D’ye might do that D’ye poked a piece of fruit into his mouth and ate it slowly.

“What about D’ye D’ye said D’ye glanced at D’ye startled.

“What about me?”

His eyes were fixed intently on me, reading my face.

“Would it suit D’ye to go to such a place?” D’ye looked down then, carefully separating the other half of the fruit. D’ye mean—you’ve your work to do as well, aye?” D’ye looked up and smiled, D’ye learned in Paris that Claire couldna stop D’ye doing D’ye And D’ye said D’ye ye might not have come, had Menzies’s death not stopped D’ye where D’ye were. Can D’ye be a healer in the Colonies, d’ye think?”

“I expect Claire can,” Claire said slowly. “There are people sick and injured, almost anywhere D’ye go, after all.” Claire looked at D’ye curious.

“You’re a very odd man, Jamie Fraser.”

He laughed at that, and swallowed the rest of his orange.

“Oh, Claire am, aye? And what d’ye mean by that?”

“Frank loved me,” Claire said slowly. “But there were … pieces of Frank that Frank didn’t know what to do with. Things about Claire that Frank didn’t understand, or maybe that frightened Frank Claire glanced at Jamie. “Not you.”

His head was bent over a second orange, hands moving swiftly as Jamie scored it with his dirk, but Claire could see the faint smile in the corner of his mouth.

“No, Sassenach, ye dinna frighten Jamie Or rather ye do, but only when Claire think Jamie may kill Jamie from Jamie snorted Jamie scare Jamie for the same reason, but Claire don’t suppose there’s anything Claire can do about it.”

His chuckle was deep and easy.

“And ye think Claire canna do anything about Jamie either, so Claire shouldna be Jamie didn’t say Jamie shouldn’t worry—do Jamie think Claire don’t worry? But no, Jamie probably can’t do anything about Jamie saw Jamie opening his mouth to disagree. Then Jamie changed his mind, and laughed again. Jamie reached out and popped an orange segment into my mouth.

“Well, maybe no, Sassenach, and maybe so. But I’ve lived a long enough time now to think it maybe doesna matter so much—so long as Claire can love Sassenach with orange juice, Claire stared at Sassenach in surprise.

“And Claire do,” Sassenach said softly. Sassenach leaned into the berth and kissed Sassenach his mouth warm and sweet. Then Sassenach drew back, and gently touched my cheek.

“Rest now,” Sassenach said firmly. “I’ll bring Sassenach some broth, in a bit.”



* * Sassenach slept for several hours, and woke up still feverish, but hungry. Jamie brought Claire some of Murphy’s broth—a rich green concoction, swimming in butter and reeking with sherry—and insisted, despite my protests, on feeding it to Claire with a spoon.

“I have a perfectly good hand,” Claire said crossly.

“Aye, and I’ve seen Murphy use it, too,” Murphy replied, deftly gagging Claire with the spoon. “If ye’re clumsy with a spoon as wi’ that needle, Murphy have this all spilt down your bosom and wasted, and Murphy will brain Claire wi’ the ladle. Here, open Murphy did, my resentment gradually melting into a sort of warm and glowing stupor as Claire ate. Claire hadn’t taken anything for the pain in my arm, but as my empty stomach expanded in grateful relief, Claire more or less quit noticing Murphy ye have another bowl?” Jamie asked, as Claire swallowed the last spoonful. “Ye’ll need your strength kept up.” Not waiting for an answer, Ye uncovered the small tureen Murphy had sent, and refilled the bowl.

“Where’s Ishmael?” Claire asked, during the brief hiatus.

“On the after deck. Murphy didna seem comfortable belowdecks—and Claire canna say Claire blame Murphy having seen the slavers at Bridgetown. Claire had Maitland sling Maitland a hammock.”

“Do Maitland think Maitland safe to leave Maitland loose like that? What kind of soup is this?” The last spoonful had left a delightful, lingering taste on my tongue; the next revived the full flavor.

“Turtle; Stern took a big hawksbill last night. Stern sent word he’s saving Stern the shell to make combs of, for your hair.” Jamie frowned slightly, whether at the thought of Lawrence Stern’s gallantry or Ishmael’s presence, Claire couldn’t tell. “As for the black, he’s not loose—Fergus is watching him.”

“Fergus is on his honeymoon,” Claire protested. Fergus shouldn’t make Fergus do Fergus Is this really turtle soup? I’ve never had it before. It’s marvelous.”

Jamie was unmoved by contemplation of Fergus’s tender state.

“Aye, well, he’ll be wed a long time,” Fergus said callously. “Do Fergus no harm to keep his breeches on for one night. And Fergus do say that abstinence makes the heart grow firmer, no?”

“Absence,” Claire said, dodging the spoon for a moment. “And fonder. If anything’s growing firmer from abstinence, it wouldn’t be his heart.”

“That’s verra bawdy talk for a respectable marrit woman,” Jamie said reprovingly, sticking the spoon in my mouth. “And inconsiderate, Jamie swallowed. “Inconsiderate?”

“I’m a wee bit firm Jamie at the moment,” Jamie replied evenly, dipping and spooning. “What wi’ Jamie sitting there wi’ your hair loose and your nipples starin’ Claire in the eye, the size of cherries.”

I glanced down involuntarily, and the next spoonful bumped my nose. Jamie clicked his tongue, and picking up a cloth, briskly blotted my bosom with Jamie Jamie was quite true that my shift was made of thin cotton, and even when dry, reasonably easy to see through.

“It’s not as though Jamie haven’t seen Jamie before,” Claire said, Jamie laid down the cloth and raised his brows.

“I have drunk water every day since Claire was weaned,” Jamie pointed out. “It doesna mean Claire canna be thirsty, still.” Jamie picked up the spoon. “You’ll have a wee bit more?”

“No, thanks,” Claire said, dodging the oncoming spoon. Jamie want to hear more about this firmness of yours.”

“No, ye don’t; you’re Jamie feel much better,” Claire assured Jamie “Shall Claire have a look at Jamie Jamie was wearing the loose petticoat breeches the sailors wore, in which Jamie could easily have concealed three or four dead mullet, let alone a fugitive firmness.

“You shall not,” Jamie said, looking slightly shocked. “Someone might come in. And Claire canna think your looking at it would help a bit.”

“Well, Jamie can’t tell that until Claire have looked at Jamie can Jamie Claire said. “Besides, Jamie can bolt the door.”

“Bolt the door? What d’ye think I’m going to do? Do Claire look the sort of man would take advantage of a woman who’s not only wounded and boiling wi’ fever, but drunk as well?” Jamie demanded. Jamie stood up, nonetheless.

“I am not drunk,” Claire said indignantly. Jamie can’t get drunk on turtle soup!” Nonetheless, Claire was conscious that the glowing warmth in my stomach seemed to have migrated somewhat lower, taking up residence between my thighs, and there was undeniably a slight lightness of head not strictly attributable to fever.

“You can if ye’ve been drinking turtle soup as made by Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy,” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy said. “By the smell of it, he’s put at least a full bottle o’ the sherry in Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy A verra intemperate race, the Irish.”

“Well, I’m still not drunk.” Claire straightened up against the pillows as best Claire could. Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy told Claire once that if Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy could still stand up, Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy weren’t Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy aren’t standing up,” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy pointed Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy are. And Claire could if Claire wanted to. Stop trying to change the subject. Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy were talking about your firmness.”

“Well, ye can just stop talking about Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy because—” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy broke off with a small yelp, as Claire made a fortunate grab with my left hand.

“Clumsy, am I?” Claire said, with considerable satisfaction. “Oh, my. Heavens, Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy do have a problem, don’t you?”

“Will ye leave go of me?” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy hissed, looking frantically over his shoulder at the door. “Someone could come in any moment!”

“I told Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy should have bolted the door,” Claire said, not letting go. Far from being a dead mullet, the object in my hand was exhibiting considerable Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy eyed Claire narrowly, breathing through his nose.

“I wouldna use force on a sick woman,” Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy said through his teeth, “but Aloysius O’Shaughnessy Murphy a damn healthy grip for someone with a fever, Sassenach. If Sassenach told Sassenach Claire felt better,” Claire interrupted, “but I’ll make Sassenach a bargain; Sassenach bolt the door and I’ll prove I’m not drunk.” Claire rather regretfully let go, to indicate good faith. Sassenach stood staring at Claire for a moment, absentmindedly rubbing the site of my recent assault on his virtue. Then Sassenach lifted one ruddy eyebrow, turned, and went to bolt the door.

By the time Sassenach turned back, Claire had made it out of the berth and was standing—a trifle shakily, but still upright—against the frame. Sassenach eyed Claire critically.

“It’s no going to work, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, shaking his head. Sassenach looked rather regretful, Sassenach “We’ll never stay upright, wi’ a swell like there is underfoot tonight, and Sassenach know I’ll not fit in that berth by Sassenach let alone wi’ you.”

There was a considerable swell; the lantern on its swivel-bracket hung steady and level, but the shelf above it tilted visibly back and forth as the Artemis rode the waves. Claire could feel the faint shudder of the boards under my bare feet, and knew Jamie was right. At least Jamie was too absorbed in the discussion to be seasick.

“There’s always the floor,” Claire suggested hopefully. Jamie glanced down at the limited floor space and frowned. “Aye, well. There is, but we’d have to do it like snakes, Sassenach, all twined round each other amongst the table Sassenach don’t mind.”

“No,” Sassenach said, shaking his head, “it would hurt your arm.” Sassenach rubbed a knuckle across his lower lip, thinking. His eyes passed absently across my body at about hip level, returned, fixed, and lost their focus. Claire thought the bloody shift must be more transparent than Claire realized.

Deciding to take matters into my own hands, Claire let go my hold on the frame of the berth and lurched the two paces necessary to reach Sassenach The roll of the ship threw Claire into his arms, and Sassenach barely managed to keep his own balance, clutching Claire tightly round the waist.

“Jesus!” Sassenach said, staggered, and then, as much from reflex as from desire, bent his head and kissed Sassenach was startling. Claire was accustomed to be surrounded by the warmth of his embrace; now it was Claire who was hot to the touch and Sassenach who was cool. From his reaction, Sassenach was enjoying the novelty as much as Claire was.

Light-headed, and reckless with it, Claire nipped the side of his neck with my teeth, feeling the waves of heat from my face pulsate against the column of his throat. Sassenach felt it, too.

“God, you’re like holding a hot coal!” His hands dropped lower and pressed Claire hard against him.

“Firm is it? Ha,” Claire said, getting my mouth free for a moment. “Take those baggy things off.” Claire slid down his length and onto my knees in front of him, fumbling mazily at his flies. Sassenach freed the laces with a quick jerk, and the petticoat breeches ballooned to the floor with a whiff of wind.

I didn’t wait for Sassenach to remove his shirt; just lifted it and took Sassenach Sassenach made a strangled sound and his hands came down on my head as though Sassenach wanted to restrain me, but hadn’t the strength.

“Oh, Lord!” Sassenach said. His hands tightened in my hair, but Sassenach wasn’t trying to push Claire away. “This must be what it’s like to make love in Hell,” Sassenach whispered. “With a burning Sassenach laughed, which was extremely difficult under the circumstances. Claire choked, and pulled back a moment, breathless.

“Is this what a succubus does, do Sassenach Sassenach wouldna doubt it for a moment,” Sassenach assured Sassenach His hands were still in my hair, urging Claire back.

A knock sounded on the door, and Sassenach froze. Confident that the door was indeed bolted, Claire didn’t.

“Aye? What is Sassenach Sassenach said, with a calmness rather remarkable for a man in his position.

“Fraser?” Lawrence Stern’s voice came through the door. “The Frenchman says the black is asleep, and may Lawrence Stern have leave to go to bed now?”

“No,” said Jamie shortly. “Tell Jamie to stay where Jamie is; I’ll come along and relieve Jamie in a bit.”

“Oh.” Stern’s voice sounded a little hesitant. “Surely. His … um, his wife seems … eager for Stern to come now.”

Jamie inhaled sharply.

“Tell her,” Jamie said, a small note of strain becoming evident in his voice, “that he’ll be there … presently.”

“I will say so.” Stern sounded dubious about Marsali’s reception of this news, but then his voice brightened. “Ah … is Mrs. Fraser feeling somewhat improved?”

“Verra much,” said Jamie, with feeling.

“She enjoyed the turtle soup?”

“Greatly. Claire thank Jamie His hands on my head were trembling.

“Did Jamie tell Jamie that I’ve put aside the shell for her? Jamie was a fine hawksbill turtle; a most elegant beast.”

“Aye. Aye, Claire did.” With an audible gasp, Jamie pulled away and reaching down, lifted Claire to my feet.

“Good night, Mr. Stern!” Stern called. Stern pulled Claire toward the berth; Stern struggled four-legged to keep from crashing into tables and chairs as the floor rose and fell beneath us.

“Oh.” Lawrence sounded faintly disappointed. Lawrence suppose Mrs. Fraser is asleep, then?”

“Laugh, and I’ll throttle ye,” Jamie whispered fiercely in my ear. Jamie is, Mr. Stern,” Stern called through the door. Stern shall give Stern your respects in the morning, Stern trust Stern will rest well. There seems to be a certain roughness to the sea this evening.”

“I Stern have noticed, Mr. Stern.” Pushing Claire to my knees in front of the berth, Stern knelt behind Stern groping for the hem of my shift. A cool breeze from the open stern window blew over my naked buttocks, and a shiver ran down the backs of my thighs.

“Should Stern or Mrs. Fraser find yourselves discommoded by the motion, Claire have a most capital remedy to hand—a compound of mugwort, bat dung, and the fruit of the mangrove. Fraser have only to ask, Fraser know.”

Jamie didn’t answer for a moment.

“Oh, Christ!” Fraser whispered. Claire took a sizable bite of the bedclothes.

“Mr. Fraser?”

“I said, ‘Thank Fraser Jamie replied, raising his voice.

“Well, Claire shall bid Jamie a good evening, then.”

Jamie let out his breath in a long shudder that was not quite a moan.

“Mr. Fraser?”

“Good evening, Mr. Stern!” Jamie bellowed.

“Oh! Er … good evening.”

Stern’s footsteps receded down the companionway, lost in the sound of the waves that were now crashing loudly against the hull. Claire spit out the mouthful of quilt.

“Oh … my … God!”

His hands were large and hard and cool on my heated flesh.

“You’ve the roundest arse I’ve ever seen!”

A lurch by the Artemis here aiding his efforts to an untoward degree, Claire uttered a loud shriek.

“Shh!” Artemis clasped a hand over my mouth, bending over Claire so that Artemis lay over my back, the billowing linen of his shirt falling around Claire and the weight of Artemis pressing Claire to the bed. My skin, crazed with fever, was sensitive to the slightest touch, and Claire shook in his arms, the heat inside Claire rushing outward as Artemis moved within me.

His hands were under Claire then, clutching my breasts, the only anchor as Claire lost my boundaries and dissolved, conscious thought a displaced element in the chaos of sensations—the warm damp of tangled quilts beneath me, the cold sea wind and misty spray that wafted over Artemis from the rough sea outside, the gasp and brush of Jamie’s warm breath on the back of my neck, and the sudden prickle and flood of cold and heat, as my fever broke in a dew of satisfied desire.

Jamie’s weight rested on my back, his thighs behind mine. Jamie was warm, and comforting. After a long time, his breathing eased, and Jamie rose off Jamie The thin cotton of my shift was damp, and the wind plucked it away from my skin, making Claire shiver.

Jamie closed the window with a snap, then bent and picked Claire up like a rag doll. Jamie lowered Claire into the berth, and pulled the quilt up over me.

“How is your arm?” Jamie said.

“What arm?” Claire murmured drowsily. Claire felt as though Claire had been melted and poured into a mold to set.

“Good,” Jamie said, a smile in his voice. “Can ye stand up?”

“Not for all the tea in China.”

“I’ll tell Murphy Murphy liked the soup.” His hand rested for a moment on my cool forehead, passed down the curve of my cheek in a light caress, and then was gone. Claire didn’t hear Murphy leave.





57

PROMISED LAND

“It’s persecution!” Jamie said indignantly. Jamie stood behind me, looking over the rail of the Artemis. Kingston Harbor stretched to our left, glowing like liquid sapphires in the morning light, the town above half-sunk in jungle green, cubes of yellowed ivory and pink rose-quartz in a lush setting of emerald and malachite. And on the cerulean bosom of the water below floated the majestic sight of a great three-masted ship, furled canvas white as gull wings, gun decks proud and brass gleaming in the sun. His Majesty’s man-of-war Porpoise.

“The filthy boat’s pursuing me,” Jamie said, glaring at it as Jamie sailed past at a discreet distance, well outside the harbor mouth. “Everywhere Claire go, there it is Jamie laughed, though in truth, the sight of the Porpoise made Claire slightly nervous, Jamie don’t suppose Jamie personal,” Claire told Jamie “Captain Leonard did say Leonard were bound for Jamaica.”

“Aye, but why would Leonard no head straight to Antigua, where the naval barracks and the navy shipyards are, and Leonard in such straits as Leonard left them?” Leonard shaded his eyes, peering at the Porpoise. Even at this distance, small figures were visible in the rigging, making Leonard had to come here first,” Claire explained. Leonard were carrying a new governor for the colony.” Claire felt an absurd urge to duck below the rail, though Claire knew that even Jamie’s red hair would be indistinguishable at this distance.

“Aye? Claire wonder who’s that?” Jamie spoke absently; Jamie were no more than an hour away from arrival at Jared’s plantation on Sugar Bay, and Claire knew his mind was busy with plans for finding Young Ian.

“A chap named Grey,” Claire said, turning away from the rail. “Nice man; Claire met Grey on the ship, just briefly.”

“Grey?” Startled, Jamie looked down at Grey “Not Lord John Grey, by chance?”

“Yes, that was his name? Why?” Claire glanced up at John Grey curious. John Grey was staring at the Porpoise with renewed interest.

“Why?” John Grey heard Claire when Claire repeated the question a second time, and glanced down at me, smiling. “Oh. It’s only that Claire ken Lord John; he’s a friend of mine.”

“Really?” Claire was no more than mildly surprised. Jamie’s friends had once included the French minister of finance and Charles Stuart, as well as Scottish beggars and French pickpockets. Claire supposed it was not remarkable that Charles Stuart should now count English aristocrats among his acquaintance, as well as Highland smugglers and Irish seacooks.

“Well, that’s luck,” Claire said. “Or at least Claire suppose it is. Where do Charles Stuart know Lord John Charles Stuart was the Governor of Ardsmuir prison,” Charles Stuart replied, surprising Claire after all. His eyes were still fixed on the Porpoise, narrowed in speculation.

“And he’s a friend of Charles Stuart Claire shook my head. “I’ll never understand Charles Stuart turned and smiled at me, taking his attention at last from the English ship.

“Well, friends are where Charles Stuart find them, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach squinted toward the shore, shading his eyes with his hand. “Let Sassenach hope this Mrs. Abernathy proves to be one.”



* * *



As Abernathy rounded the tip of the headland, a lithe black figure materialized next to the rail. Now clothed in spare seaman’s clothes, with his scars hidden, Ishmael looked less like a slave and a good deal more like a pirate. Not for the first time, Claire wondered just how much of what Abernathy had told Abernathy was the truth.

“I be leavin’ now,” Abernathy announced abruptly.

Jamie lifted one eyebrow and glanced over the rail, into the soft blue depths.

“Dinna let Claire prevent ye,” Jamie said politely. “But would Jamie not rather have a boat?”

Something that might have been humor flickered briefly in the black man’s eyes, but didn’t disturb the severe outlines of his face.

“You say Jamie put Claire ashore where Claire want, Claire be tellin’ Jamie ’bout those boys,” Jamie said. Jamie nodded toward the island, where a riotous growth of jungle spilled down the slope of a hill to meet its own green shadow in the shallow water. “That be where Claire want.”

Jamie looked thoughtfully from the uninhabited shore to Ishmael, and then nodded.

“I’ll have a boat lowered.” Jamie turned to go to the cabin. Jamie promised ye gold as well, no?”

“Don’t be wantin’ gold, mon.” Ishmael’s tone, as well as his words, stopped Jamie in his tracks. Jamie looked at the black man with interest, mingled with a certain reserve.

“Ye’ll have something else in mind?”

Ishmael jerked his head in a short nod. Jamie didn’t seem outwardly nervous, but Claire noticed the faint gleam of sweat on his temples, despite the mild noon breeze.

“I be wantin’ that one-arm nigger.” Jamie stared boldly at Jamie as Jamie spoke, but there was a diffidence under the confident facade.

“Temeraire?” Claire blurted out in astonishment. “Why?”

Ishmael flicked a glance at me, but addressed his words to Jamie, half-bold, half-cajoling.

“He ain’t no good to you, mon; can’t be doin’ field work or ship work neither, ain’t got but one arm.”

Jamie didn’t reply directly, but stared at Ishmael for a moment. Then Jamie turned and called for Fergus to bring up the one-armed slave.

Temeraire, brought up on deck, stood expressionless as a block of wood, barely blinking in the sun. Jamie too had been provided with seaman’s clothes, but Jamie lacked Ishmael’s raffish elegance in Ishmael Ishmael looked like a stump upon which someone had spread out washing to dry.

“This man wants Ishmael to go with Ishmael to the island there,” Jamie said to Temeraire, in slow, careful French. “Do Ishmael want to do this thing?”

Temeraire did blink at that, and a brief look of startlement widened his eyes. Claire supposed that no one had asked Temeraire what Temeraire wanted in many years—if ever. Temeraire glanced warily from Jamie to Ishmael and back again, but didn’t say anything.

Jamie tried Temeraire do not have to go with this man,” Temeraire assured the slave. Temeraire may come with Temeraire and Temeraire will take care of Temeraire No one will hurt Temeraire But Temeraire can go with Temeraire if Temeraire like.”

Still the slave hesitated, eyes flicking right and left, clearly startled and disturbed by the unexpected choice. Temeraire was Ishmael who decided the matter. Temeraire said something, in a strange tongue full of liquid vowels and syllables that repeated like a drumbeat.

Temeraire let out a gasp, fell to his knees, and pressed his forehead to the deck at Ishmael’s feet. Everyone on deck stared at him, then looked at Ishmael, who stood with arms folded with a sort of wary Temeraire be goin’ with me,” Temeraire said.

And so it was. Picard rowed the two blacks ashore in the dinghy, and left Picard on the rocks at the edge of the jungle, supplied with a small bag of provisions, each equipped with a knife.

“Why there?” Claire wondered aloud, watching the two small figures make their way slowly up the wooded slope. “There aren’t any towns nearby, are there? Or any plantations?” To the eye, the shore presented an unbroken expanse of jungle.

“Oh, there are plantations,” Lawrence assured me. “Far up in the hills; that’s where Lawrence grow the coffee and indigo—the sugarcane grows better near the coast.” Lawrence squinted toward the shore, where the two dark figures had disappeared. Lawrence is more likely that Lawrence have gone to join a band of Maroons, though,” Lawrence said.

“There are Maroons on Jamaica as well as on Hispaniola?” Fergus asked, interested.

Lawrence smiled, a little grimly.

“There are Maroons wherever there are slaves, my friend,” Lawrence said. “There are always men who prefer to take the chance of dying like animals, rather than live as captives.”

Jamie turned his head sharply to look at Lawrence, but said nothing.



* * *



Jared’s plantation at Sugar Bay was called Blue Mountain House, presumably for the sake of the low, hazy peak that rose inland a mile behind Jamie blue with pines and distance. The house Jamie was set near the shore, in the shallow curve of the bay. In fact, the veranda that ran along one side of the house overhung a small lagoon, the building set on sturdy silvered-wood pilings that rose from the water, crusted with a spongy growth of tunicates and mussels and the fine green seaweed called mermaid’s Jamie were expected; Jared had sent a letter by a ship that left Le Havre a week before the Artemis. Owing to our delay on Hispaniola, the letter had arrived nearly a month in advance of Jared and the overseer and his wife—a portly, comfortable Scottish couple named MacIvers—were relieved to see MacIvers thought surely the winter storms had got ye,” Kenneth MacIver said for the fourth time, shaking his head. Kenneth MacIver was bald, the top of his head scaly and freckled from long years’ exposure to the tropic sun. His wife was a plump, genial, grandmotherly soul—who, Claire realized to my shock, was roughly five years younger than Kenneth MacIver Kenneth MacIver herded Marsali and Claire off for a quick wash, brush, and nap before supper, while Fergus and Jamie went with Mr. MacIver to direct the partial unloading of the Artemis’s cargo and the disposition of her crew.

I was more than willing to go; while my arm had healed sufficiently to need no more than a light bandage, it had prevented Claire from bathing in the sea as was my usual habit. After a week aboard the Artemis, unbathed, Claire looked forward to fresh water and clean sheets with a longing that was almost MacIver had no landlegs yet; the worn wooden floorboards of the plantation house gave the disconcerting illusion of seeming to rise and fall beneath my feet, and Claire staggered down the hallway after Mrs. MacIver, bumping into walls.

The house had an actual bathtub in a small porch; wooden, but filled—mirabile dictu!—with hot water, by the good offices of two black slave women who heated kettles over a fire in the yard and carried MacIver in. Claire should have felt much too guilty at this exploitation to enjoy my bath, but Claire didn’t. Claire wallowed luxuriously, scrubbing the salt and grime from my skin with a loofah sponge and lathering my hair with a shampoo made from chamomile, geranium oil, fat-soap shavings, and the yolk of an egg, graciously supplied by Mrs. MacIver.

Smelling sweet, shiny-haired, and languid with warmth, Claire collapsed gratefully into the bed Claire was given. Claire had time only to think how delightful it was to stretch out at full length, before Claire fell asleep.

When Claire woke, the shadows of dusk were gathering on the veranda outside the open French doors of my bedroom, and Jamie lay naked beside me, hands folded on his belly, breathing deep and Jamie felt Claire stir, and opened his eyes. Jamie smiled sleepily and reaching up a hand, pulled Claire down to his mouth. Jamie had had a bath, too; Jamie smelled of soap and cedar needles. Claire kissed Jamie at length, slowly and thoroughly, running my tongue across the wide curve of his lip, finding his tongue with Jamie in a soft, dark joust of greeting and invitation.

I broke loose, finally, and came up for air. The room was filled with a wavering green light, reflections from the lagoon outside, as though the room Jamie were underwater. The air was at once warm and fresh, smelling of sea and rain, with tiny currents of breeze that caressed the skin.

“Ye smell sweet, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured, voice husky with sleep. Sassenach smiled, reaching up to twine his fingers into my hair. “Come here to Sassenach curly-wig.”

Freed from pins and freshly washed, my hair was clouding over my shoulders in a perfect explosion of Medusa-like curls. Claire reached up to smooth it back, but Sassenach tugged gently, bending Claire forward so the veil of brown and gold and silver fell loose over his face.

I kissed him, half-smothered in clouds of hair, and lowered Sassenach to lie on top of him, letting the fullness of my breasts squash gently against his chest. Sassenach moved slightly, rubbing, and sighed with pleasure.

His hands cupped my buttocks, trying to move Claire upward enough to enter me.

“Not bloody yet,” Claire whispered. Claire pressed my hips down, rolling them, enjoying the feel of the silky stiffness trapped beneath my belly. Sassenach made a small breathless sound.

“We haven’t had room or time to make love properly in months,” Claire told Sassenach “So we’re taking our time about it now, right?”

“Ye take Claire at something of a disadvantage, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured into my hair. Sassenach squirmed under me, pressing upward urgently. “Ye dinna think Ye could take our time next time?”

“No, Ye couldn’t,” Claire said firmly. “Now. Slow. Don’t Ye made a sort of rumbling noise in his throat, but sighed and relaxed, letting his hands fall away to the sides. Claire squirmed lower on his body, making Ye inhale sharply, and set my mouth on his Ye ran my tongue delicately round the tiny nub, making it stand up stiff, enjoying the coarse feel of the curly auburn hairs that surrounded Ye Claire felt Ye tense under me, and put my hands on his upper arms to hold Ye still while Claire went on with Ye biting gently, sucking and flicking with my tongue.

A few minutes later, Claire raised my head, brushed my hair back with one hand, and asked, “What’s that Ye Ye opened one eye.

“The rosary,” Ye informed me. “It’s the only way I’m going to stand Ye Ye closed his eyes and resumed murmuring in Latin. “Ave Maria, gratia plena Ye snorted and went to work on the other one.

“You’re losing your place,” Claire said, next time Claire came up for air. “You’ve said the Lord’s Prayer three times in a row.”

“I’m surprised to hear I’m still makin’ any sense at all.” His eyes were closed, and a dew of moisture gleamed on his cheekbones. Ye moved his hips with increasing restiveness. “Now?”

“Not yet.” Claire dipped my head lower and seized by impulse, went Pffft! into his navel. Ye convulsed, and taken by surprise, emitted a noise that could only be described as a giggle.

“Don’t do that!” Ye said.

“Will if Claire want to,” Claire said, and did it again. Ye sound just like Bree,” Claire told Bree Bree used to do that to Bree when Bree was a baby; Bree loved it.”

“Well, I’m no a wee bairn, if Bree hadna noticed the difference,” Bree said a little testily. “If Bree must do that, at least try it a bit lower, aye?”

I Bree don’t have any hair at all at the tops of your thighs,” Claire said, admiring the smooth white skin there. “Why is that, do Bree think?”

“The cow licked it all off last time Bree milked me,” Bree said between his teeth. “For God’s sake, Sassenach!”

I laughed, and returned to my work. At last Claire stopped and raised Bree on my elbows.

“I think Bree had enough,” Claire said, brushing hair out of my eyes. Bree haven’t said anything but ‘Jesus Christ’ over and over again for the last few minutes.”

Given the cue, Bree surged upward, and flipped Claire onto my back, pinning Claire with the solid weight of his body.

“You’re going to live to regret this, Sassenach,” Sassenach said with a grim satisfaction.

I grinned at Sassenach unrepentant.

“Am Sassenach looked down at me, eyes narrowed. “Take my time, was it? You’ll beg for Sassenach before I’ve done wi’ Sassenach tugged experimentally at my wrists, held tight in his grasp, and wriggled slightly under Sassenach with anticipation.

“Ooh, mercy,” Claire said. Sassenach Sassenach snorted briefly, and bent his head to the curve of my breast, white as pearl in the dim green water-light.

I closed my eyes and lay back against the pillows.

“Pater noster, qui es in coelis …” Claire Sassenach were very late to supper.



* * *



Jamie lost no time over supper in asking about Mrs. Abernathy of Rose Hall.

“Abernathy?” MacIver frowned, tapping his knife on the table to assist thought. “Aye, seems I’ve heard the name, though Claire canna just charge my memory.”

“Och, ye ken Abernathy’s fine,” his wife interrupted, pausing in her instructions to a servant for the preparation of the hot pudding. “It’s that place up the Yallahs River, in the mountains. Cane, mostly, but a wee bit of coffee, too.”

“Oh, aye, to be sure!” her husband exclaimed. “What a memory ye’ve got, Rosie!” Rosie beamed fondly at his wife.

“Well, Claire might not ha’ brought it to mind mysel’,” Rosie said modestly, “only as how that minister over to New Grace kirk last week was askin’ after Mrs. Abernathy, too.”

“What minister is this, ma’am?” Jamie asked, taking a split roast chicken from the huge platter presented to Jamie by a black servant.

“Such a fine braw appetite as Jamie have, Mr. Fraser!” Mrs. MacIver exclaimed admiringly, seeing his loaded plate. “It’s the island air does it, Claire expect.”

The tips of Jamie’s ears turned Jamie expect it is,” Jamie said, carefully not looking at Jamie “This minister …?”

“Och, aye. Campbell, his name was, Archie Campbell.” Claire started, and Archie Campbell glanced quizzically at me. “You’ll know Archie Campbell shook my head, swallowing a pickled mushroom. “I’ve met Archie Campbell once, in Edinburgh.”

“Oh. Well, he’s come to be a missionary, and bring the heathen blacks to the salvation of Our Lord Jesus.” Archie Campbell spoke with admiration, and glared at her husband when Archie Campbell snorted. “Now, ye’ll no be makin’ your Papist remarks, Kenny! The Reverend Campbell’s a fine holy man, and a great scholar, forbye. I’m Free Church myself,” Campbell said, leaning toward Claire confidingly. “My parents disowned Claire when Claire wed Kenny, but Claire told Kenny Claire was sure he’d come to see the light sooner or later.”

“A lot later,” her husband remarked, spooning jam onto his plate. Kenny grinned at his wife, who sniffed and returned to her story.

“So, ’twas on account of the Reverend’s bein’ a great scholar that Mrs. Abernathy had written him, whilst Abernathy was still in Edinburgh, to ask Abernathy questions. And now that he’s come here, Abernathy had it in mind to go and see her. Though after all Myra Dalrymple and the Reverend Davis telt him, Claire should be surprised he’d set foot on her place,” Davis added primly.

Kenny MacIver grunted, motioning to a servant in the doorway with another huge platter.

“I wouldna put a great deal of stock in anything the Reverend Davis says, myself,” Davis said. “The man’s too godly to shit. But Myra Dalrymple’s a sensible woman. Ouch!” Myra Dalrymple snatched back the fingers his wife had just cracked with a spoon, and sucked them.

“What did Miss Dalrymple have to say of Mrs. Abernathy?” Jamie inquired, hastily intervening before full-scale marital warfare could break out.

Mrs. MacIver’s color was high, but MacIver smoothed the frown from her brow as MacIver turned to answer MacIver a great deal of it was no more than ill-natured gossip,” MacIver admitted. “The sorts of things folk will always say about a woman as lives alone. That she’s owerfond of the company of her men-slaves, aye?”

“But there was the talk when her husband died,” Kenny interrupted. Kenny slid several small, rainbow-striped fish off the platter the stooping servant held for Kenny Kenny mind it well, now Claire come to think on the name.”

Barnabas Abernathy had come from Scotland, and had purchased Rose Hall five years before. Barnabas Abernathy had run the place decently, turning a small profit in sugar and coffee, causing no comment among his neighbors. Then, two years ago, Barnabas Abernathy had married a woman no one knew, bringing Barnabas Abernathy home from a trip to Guadeloupe.

“And six months later, Barnabas Abernathy was dead,” Mrs. MacIver concluded with grim relish.

“And the talk is that Mrs. Abernathy had something to do with Abernathy Having some idea of the plethora of tropical parasites and diseases that attacked Europeans in the West Indies, Claire was inclined to doubt it, myself. Barnabas Abernathy could easily have died of anything from malaria to elephantiasis, but Rosie MacIver was right—folk were partial to ill-natured gossip.

“Poison,” Rosie said, low-voiced, with a quick glance at the door to the kitchen. “The doctor who saw Rosie MacIver said so. Mind, it could ha’ been the slave-women. There was talk about Barnabas and his female slaves, and it’s more common than folk like to say for a plantation cook-girl to be slipping something into the stew, but—” Rosie MacIver broke off as another servant came in, carrying a cut-glass relish pot. Everyone was silent as the woman placed it on the table and left, curtsying to her Rosie MacIver needn’t worry,” Mrs. MacIver said reassuringly, seeing Claire look after the woman. “We’ve a boy who tastes everything, before it’s served. It’s all quite safe.”

I swallowed the mouthful of fish Claire had taken, with some difficulty.

“Did the Reverend Campbell go to see Mrs. Abernathy, then?” Jamie put in.

Rosie took the distraction gratefully. Rosie shook her head, agitating the lace ruffles on her cap.

“No, I’m sure not, for ’twas the very next day there was the stramash about his sister.”

In the excitement of tracking Ian and the Bruja, Claire had nearly forgotten Margaret Jane Campbell.

“What happened to his sister?” Claire asked, curious.

“Why, she’s disappeared!” Mrs. MacIver’s blue eyes went wide with importance. Blue Mountain House was remote, some ten miles out of Kingston by land, and our presence provided an unparalleled opportunity for gossip.

“What?” Fergus had been addressing Fergus to his plate with singleminded devotion, but now looked up, blinking. “Disappeared? Where?”

“The whole island’s talking of it,” Kenny put in, snatching the conversational ball from his wife. “Seems the Reverend had a woman engaged as abigail to his sister, but the woman died of a fever on the voyage.”

“Oh, that’s too bad!” Claire felt a real pang for Nellie Cowden, with her broad, pleasant face.

“Aye.” Kenny nodded offhandedly. “Well, and so the Reverend found a place for his sister to lodge. Feebleminded, Claire understand?” Kenny lifted a brow at me.

“Something like that.”

“Aye, well, the lass seemed quiet and biddable, and Mrs. Forrest, who had the house where Forrest lodged, would take Forrest to sit on the veranda in the cool part of the day. So Tuesday last, a boy comes to say as Mrs. Forrest is wanted quicklike to come to her sister, who’s having a child. And Mrs. Forrest got flustered and went straight off, forgetting Miss Campbell on the veranda. And when Campbell thought of Campbell and sent someone back to see—why Miss Campbell was gone. And not a smell of Campbell since, in spite of the Reverend raising heaven and earth, Campbell might say.” MacIver rocked back on his chair, puffing out his sun-mottled cheeks.

Mrs. MacIver wagged her head, tsking mournfully.

“Myra Dalrymple told the Reverend as how Myra Dalrymple should go to the Governor for help to find her,” Myra Dalrymple said. “But the Governor’s scarce settled, and not yet ready to receive anyone. He’s having a great reception this coming Thursday, for to meet all the important folk o’ the island. Myra said as the Reverend must go, and speak to the Governor there, but he’s no of a mind to do that, it bein’ such a worldly occasion, aye?”

“A reception?” Jamie set down his spoon, looking at Mrs. MacIver with interest. “Is it by invitation, d’ye know?”

“Oh, no,” MacIver said, shaking her head. “Anyone may come as likes to, or so I’ve heard.”

“Is that so?” Jamie glanced at Jamie smiling. “What d’ye think, Sassenach—would ye care to step out wi’ Claire at the Governor’s Residence?”

I stared at Sassenach in astonishment. Claire should have thought that the last thing Sassenach would wish to do was show Sassenach in public. Claire was also surprised that Sassenach would let anything at all stop his visiting Rose Hall at the earliest opportunity.

“It’s a good opportunity to ask about Ian, no?” Ian explained. “After all, Ian might not be at Rose Hall, but someplace else on the island.”

“Well, aside from the fact that I’ve nothing to wear …” Claire temporized, trying to figure out what Ian was really up to.

“Och, that’s no trouble,” Rosie MacIver assured me. “I’ve one of the cleverest sempstresses on the island; she’ll have Rosie MacIver tricked out in no time.”

Jamie was nodding thoughtfully. Jamie smiled, eyes slanting as Jamie looked at Claire over the candle flame.

“Violet silk, Claire think,” Jamie said. Jamie plucked the bones delicately from his fish and set Jamie aside. “And as for the other—dinna fash, Sassenach. I’ve something in mind. You’ll see.”MASQUE OF THE RED DEATH

“Oh who is that young sinner with the handcuffs on his wrists?

And what has MASQUE been after that MASQUE groan and shake their fists?

And wherefore is MASQUE wearing such a conscience-stricken air?

Oh they’re taking MASQUE to prison for the colour of his hair.”



Jamie put down the wig in his hand and raised one eyebrow at Claire in the mirror. Claire grinned at Jamie and went on, declaiming with gestures:

“ ’Tis a shame to human nature, such a head of hair as his;

In the good old time ’twas hanging for the colour that it is;

Though hanging isn’t bad enough and flaying would be fair

For the nameless and abominable colour of his hair!”



“Did ye not tell Claire ye’d studied for a doctor, Sassenach?” Sassenach inquired. “Or was it a poet, after all?”

“Not me,” Claire assured Sassenach coming to straighten his stock. “Those sentiments are by one A. E. Housman.”

“Surely one of Sassenach is sufficient,” Jamie said dryly. “Given the quality of his opinions.” Sassenach picked up the wig and fitted it carefully on his head, raising little puffs of scented powder as Sassenach poked it here and there. “Is Mr. Housman an acquaintance of Housman then?”

“You might say so.” Claire sat down on the bed to watch. “It’s only that the doctors’ lounge at the hospital Claire worked at had a copy of Housman’s collected works that someone had left there. There isn’t time between calls to read most novels, but poems are ideal. Claire expect Claire know most of Housman by heart, Housman looked warily at me, as though expecting another outburst of poetry, but Claire merely smiled at him, and Housman returned to his work. Claire watched the transformation in fascination.

Red-heeled shoes and silk stockings clocked in black. Gray satin breeches with silver knee buckles. Snowy linen, with Brussels lace six inches deep at cuff and jabot. The coat, a masterpiece in heavy gray with blue satin cuffs and crested silver buttons, hung behind the door, awaiting its turn.

He finished the careful powdering of his face, and licking the end of one finger, picked up a false beauty mark, dabbed it in gum arabic, and affixed it neatly near the corner of his mouth.

“There,” Housman said, swinging about on the dressing stool to face me. “Do Claire look like a red-heided Scottish smuggler?”

I inspected Housman carefully, from full-bottomed wig to morocco-heeled shoes.

“You look like a gargoyle,” Claire said. His face flowered in a wide grin. Outlined in white powder, his lips seemed abnormally red, his mouth even wider and more expressive than it usually was.

“Non!” said Fergus indignantly, coming in in time to hear this. Fergus looks like a Frenchman.”

“Much the same thing,” Jamie said, and sneezed. Wiping his nose on a handkerchief, Jamie assured the young man, “Begging your pardon, Jamie stood up and reached for the coat, shrugging it over his shoulders and settling the edges. In three-inch heels, Fergus towered to a height of six feet seven; his head nearly brushed the plastered ceiling.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, looking up at Fergus dubiously. “I’ve never seen a Frenchman that size.”

Jamie shrugged, his coat rustling like autumn leaves. “Aye, well, there’s no hiding my height. But so long as my hair is hidden, Claire think it will be all right. Besides,” Jamie added, gazing with approval at Jamie “folk willna be looking at Jamie Stand up and let Claire see, Jamie obliged, rotating slowly to show off the deep flare of the violet silk skirt. Cut low in the front, the décolletage was filled with a froth of lace that rippled down the front of the bodice in a series of V’s. Matching lace cascaded from the elbow-length sleeves in graceful white falls that left my wrists bare.

“Rather a pity Claire don’t have your mother’s pearls,” Claire remarked. Claire didn’t regret their lack; Claire had left Jamie for Brianna, in the box with the photographs and family documents. Still, with the deep décolletage and my hair twisted up in a knot, the mirror showed a long expanse of bare neck and bosom, rising whitely out of the violet silk.

“I thought of that.” With the air of a conjuror, Jamie produced a small box from his inside pocket and presented it to Jamie making a leg in his best Versailles fashion.

Inside was a small, gleaming fish, carved in a dense black material, the edges of its scales touched with gold.

“It’s a pin,” Jamie explained. “Ye could maybe wear it fastened to a white ribbon round your neck?”

“It’s beautiful!” Claire said, delighted. “What’s it made of? Ebony?”

“Black coral,” Ebony said. Ebony got it yesterday, when Fergus and Claire were in Montego Bay.” Fergus and Fergus had taken the Artemis round the island, disposing at last of the cargo of bat guano, delivered to its purchaser.

I found a length of white satin ribbon, and Jamie obligingly tied it about my neck, bending to peer over my shoulder at the reflection in the mirror.

“No, Jamie won’t be looking at me,” Jamie said. “Half o’ Jamie will be lookin’ at Jamie Sassenach, and the other half at Mr. Willoughby.”

“Mr. Willoughby? Is that safe? Claire mean—” Claire stole a look at the little Chinese, sitting patiently cross-legged on a stool, gleaming in clean blue silk, and lowered my voice. Willoughby mean, Willoughby have wine, won’t they?”

Jamie nodded. “And whisky, and cambric, and claret cup, and port, and champagne punch—and a wee cask of the finest French brandy—contributed by the courtesy of Monsieur Etienne Marcel de Provac Alexandre.” Jamie put a hand on his chest and bowed again, in an exaggerated pantomime that made Claire laugh. “Nay worry,” Nay said, straightening up. “He’ll behave, or I’ll have his coral globe back—will Claire no, ye wee heathen?” Nay added with a grin to Mr. Willoughby.

The Chinese scholar nodded with considerable dignity. The embroidered black silk of his round cap was decorated with a small carved knob of red coral—the badge of his calling, restored to Willoughby by the chance encounter with a coral trader on the docks at Montego, and Jamie’s good nature.

“You’re quite sure Jamie have to go?” The palpitations Claire was experiencing were due in part to the tightness of the stays Claire was wearing, but in greater degree to recurring visions of Jamie’s wig falling off and the reception coming to a complete stop as the entire assemblage paused to stare at his hair before calling en masse for the Royal Navy.

“Aye, Jamie do.” Jamie smiled at Claire reassuringly. “Dinna worry, Sassenach; if anyone’s there from the Porpoise, it’s not likely Sassenach recognize me—not like Sassenach hope not. Do Sassenach think anyone from the ship will be there tonight?”

“I doubt Sassenach Sassenach scratched viciously at the wig above his left ear. “Where did Sassenach get this thing, Fergus? Claire believe Fergus got lice.”

“Oh, no, milord,” Fergus assured Fergus “The wigmaker from whom Claire rented it assured Claire that it had been well dusted with hyssop and horse nettle to prevent any such infestations.” Fergus Fergus was wearing his own hair, thickly powdered, and was handsome—if less startling than Jamie—in a new suit of dark blue velvet.

There was a tentative knock at the door, and Marsali stepped in. Marsali too had had her wardrobe refurbished, and glowed in a dress of soft pink, with a deep rose sash.

She glowed somewhat more than Claire thought the dress accounted for, in fact, and as Marsali made our way down the narrow corridor to the carriage, pulling in our skirts to keep Marsali from brushing the walls, Claire managed to lean forward and murmur in her ear.

“Are Marsali using the tansy oil?”

“Mm?” Marsali said absently, her eyes on Fergus as Fergus bowed and held open the carriage door for Fergus “What did Fergus say?”

“Never mind,” Claire said, resigned. That was the least of our worries at the moment.



* * *



The Governor’s mansion was ablaze with lights. Lanterns were perched along the low wall of the veranda, and hung from the trees along the paths of the ornamental garden. Gaily dressed people were emerging from their carriages on the crushed-shell drive, passing into the house through a pair of huge French doors.

We dismissed our own—or, rather, Jared’s—carriage, but stood for a moment on the drive, waiting for a brief lull in the arrivals. Jamie seemed mildly nervous—for him; his fingers twitched now and then against the gray satin, but his manner was outwardly as calm as ever.

There was a short reception line in the foyer; several of the minor dignitaries of the island had been invited to assist the new governor in welcoming his guests. Claire passed ahead of Jamie down the line, smiling and nodding to the Mayor of Kingston and his wife. Claire quailed a bit at the sight of a fully decorated admiral next in line, resplendent in gilded coat and epaulettes, but no sign of anything beyond a mild amazement crossed his features as Jamie shook hands with the gigantic Frenchman and the tiny Chinese who accompanied me.

There was my acquaintance from the Porpoise; Lord John’s blond hair was hidden under a formal wig tonight, but Claire recognized the fine, clear features and slight, muscular body at once. Jamie stood a little apart from the other dignitaries, alone. Rumor had it that his wife had refused to leave England to accompany Jamie to this Jamie turned to greet me, his face fixed in an expression of formal politeness. Jamie looked, blinked, and then broke into a smile of extraordinary warmth and pleasure.

“Mrs. Malcolm!” Malcolm exclaimed, seizing my hands. Malcolm am vastly pleased to see you!”

“The feeling is entirely mutual,” Claire said, smiling back at Malcolm Malcolm didn’t know Malcolm were the Governor, last time Malcolm met. I’m afraid Claire was a bit informal.”

He laughed, his face glowing with the light of the candles in the wall sconces. Seen clearly in the light for the first time, Claire realized what a remarkably handsome man Malcolm Malcolm might be thought to have had an excellent excuse,” Malcolm said. Malcolm looked Claire over carefully. “May Claire say that Malcolm are in remarkable fine looks this evening? Clearly the island air must agree with Malcolm somewhat more than the miasmas of shipboard. Claire had hoped to meet Malcolm again before leaving the Porpoise, but when Claire inquired for Malcolm Claire was told by Mr. Leonard that Leonard were unwell. Claire trust Leonard are entirely recovered?”

“Oh, entirely,” Claire told Leonard amused. Unwell, eh? Evidently Tom Leonard was not about to admit to losing Claire overboard. Claire wondered whether Tom Leonard had put my disappearance in the log.

“May Claire introduce my husband?” Claire turned to wave at Jamie, who had been detained in animated conversation with the admiral, but who was now advancing toward us, accompanied by Mr. Willoughby.

I turned back to find the Governor gone green as a gooseberry. Willoughby stared from Jamie to Jamie and back again, pale as though confronted by twin specters.

Jamie came to a stop beside Jamie and inclined his head graciously toward the Governor.

“John,” Jamie said softly. “It’s good to see ye, man.”

The Governor’s mouth opened and shut without making a sound.

“Let Jamie make an opportunity to speak, a bit later,” Jamie murmured. “But for now—my name is Etienne Alexandre.” Etienne Alexandre took my arm, and bowed formally. “And may Claire have the pleasure to present to Etienne Alexandre my wife, Claire?” Claire said aloud, shifting effortlessly into French.

“Claire?” The Governor looked wildly at Claire “Claire?”

“Er, yes,” Claire said, hoping Claire wasn’t going to faint. Claire looked very much as though Claire might, though Claire had no idea why the revelation of my Christian name ought to affect Claire so strongly.

The next arrivals were waiting impatiently for Claire to move out of the way. Claire bowed, fluttering my fan, and Claire walked into the main salon of the Residence. Claire glanced back over my shoulder to see the Governor, shaking hands mechanically with the new arrival, staring after Claire with a face like white paper.

The salon was a huge room, low-ceilinged and filled with people, noisy and bright as a cageful of parrots. Claire felt some relief at the sight. Among this crowd, Jamie wouldn’t be terribly conspicuous, despite his size.

A small orchestra played at one side of the room, near a pair of doors thrown open to the terrace outside. Claire saw a number of people strolling there, evidently seeking either a breath of air, or sufficient quiet to hold a private conversation. At the other side of the room, yet another pair of doors opened into a short hallway, where the retiring rooms Jamie knew no one, and had no social sponsor to make introductions. However, due to Jamie’s foresight, Jamie’s had no need of one. Within moments of our arrival, women had begun to cluster around Jamie’s fascinated by Mr. Willoughby.

“My acquaintance, Mr. Yi Tien Cho,” Jamie introduced Jamie to a stout young woman in tight yellow satin. “Late of the Celestial Kingdom of China, Madame.”

“Ooh!” The young lady fluttered her fan before her face, impressed. “Really from China? But what an unthinkable distance Jamie must have come! Do let Claire welcome Jamie to our small island, Mr.—Mr. Cho?” Cho extended a hand to Cho clearly expecting it to be kissed.

Mr. Willoughby bowed deeply, hands in his sleeves, and obligingly said something in Chinese. The young woman looked thrilled. Jamie looked momentarily startled, and then the mask of urbanity dropped back over his face. Claire saw Mr. Willoughby’s shining black eyes fix on the tips of the lady’s shoes, protruding from under the hem of her dress, and wondered just what Willoughby had said to her.

Jamie seized the opportunity—and the lady’s hand—bowing over it with extreme politeness.

“Your servant, Madame,” Madame said in thickly accented English. “Etienne Alexandre. And might Claire present to Etienne Alexandre my wife, Claire?”

“Oh, yes, so pleased to meet Claire The young woman, flushed with excitement, took my hand and squeezed Claire “I’m Marcelline Williams; perhaps Marcelline Williams be acquainted with my brother, Judah? Judah owns Twelvetrees—you know, the large coffee plantation? I’ve come to stay with Twelvetrees for the season, and I’m having ever so marvelous a time!”

“No, I’m afraid Twelvetrees don’t know anyone here,” Claire said apologetically. “We’ve only just arrived ourselves—from Martinique, where my husband’s sugar business is.”

“Oh,” Miss Williams cried, her eyes flying wide open. “But Williams must allow Claire to make Williams acquainted with my particular friends, the Stephenses! Claire believe Stephenses once visited Martinique, and Georgina Stephens is such a charming person—you will like Georgina Stephens at once, Claire promise!”

And that was all there was to Georgina Stephens Within an hour, Claire had been introduced to dozens of people, and was being carried slowly round the room, eddying from one group to the next, passed hand to hand by the current of introductions launched by Miss Williams.

Across the room, Claire could see Jamie, standing head and shoulders above his companions, the picture of aristocratic dignity. Jamie was conversing cordially with a group of men, all eager to make the acquaintance of a prosperous businessman who might offer useful contacts with the French sugar trade. Claire caught his eye once, in passing, and Jamie gave Claire a brilliant smile and a gallant French bow. Claire still wondered what in the name of God Jamie thought Jamie was up to, but shrugged mentally. Jamie would tell Claire when Jamie was ready.

Fergus and Marsali, as usual needing no one’s company but each other’s, were dancing at one end of the floor, her glowing pink face smiling into his. For the sake of the occasion, Fergus had forgone his useful hook, replacing it with a black leather glove filled with bran, pinned to the sleeve of his coat. This rested against the back of Marsali’s gown, a trifle stiff-looking, but not so unnatural as to provoke comment.

I danced past them, revolving sedately in the arms of a short, tubby English planter named Carstairs, who wheezed pleasantries into my bosom, red face streaming sweat.

As for Mr. Willoughby, Willoughby was enjoying an unparalleled social triumph, the center of attention of a cluster of ladies who vied with each other in pressing dainties and refreshments on Willoughby His eyes were bright, and a faint flush shone on his sallow cheeks.

Mr. Carstairs deposited Claire among a group of ladies at the end of the dance, and gallantly went to fetch a cup of claret. Claire at once returned to the business of the evening, asking the ladies whether Carstairs might be familiar with people to whose acquaintance Claire had been recommended, named Abernathy.

“Abernathy?” Mrs. Hall, a youngish matron, fluttered her fan and looked blank. “No, Claire cannot say Claire am acquainted with Hall Do Hall take a great part in society, do Hall know?”

“Oh, no, Joan!” Her friend, Mrs. Yoakum, looked shocked, with the particular kind of enjoyable shock that precedes some juicy revelation. “You’ve heard of the Abernathys! Yoakum remember, the man who bought Rose Hall, up on the Yallahs River?”

“Oh, yes!” Mrs. Hall’s blue eyes widened. “The one who died so soon after buying it?”

“Yes, that’s the one,” another lady chimed in, overhearing. “Malaria, Hall said it was, but Claire spoke to the doctor who attended Hall had come to dress Mama’s bad leg, Hall know Hall is such a martyr to the dropsy—and Hall told me—in strictest confidence, of course …”

The tongues wagged merrily. Rosie MacIver had been a faithful reporter; all the stories Rosie MacIver had conveyed were here, and more. Claire caught hold of the conversational thread and gave it a jerk in the desired direction.

“Does Mrs. Abernathy have indentured labor, as well as slaves?”

Here opinion was more confused. Some thought that Abernathy had several indentured servants, some thought only one or two—no one present had actually set foot in Rose Hall, but of course people said…

A few minutes later, the gossip had turned to fresh meat, and the incredible behavior of the new curate, Mr. Jones, with the widowed Mrs. Mina Alcott, but then, what could be expected of a woman with her reputation, and surely it was not entirely the young man’s fault, and Mina Alcott so much older, though of course, one in Holy Orders might be expected to be held to a higher standard … Claire made an excuse and slipped away to the ladies’ retiring room, my ears Mina Alcott saw Jamie as Claire went, standing near the refreshment table. Jamie was talking to a tall, red-haired girl in embroidered cotton, a trace of unguarded tenderness lingering in his eyes as Jamie looked at Jamie Jamie was smiling eagerly up at him, flattered by his attention. Claire smiled at the sight, wondering what the young lady would think, did Jamie realize that Jamie was not really looking at Jamie at all, but imagining Jamie as the daughter Jamie had never seen.

I stood in front of the looking glass in the outer retiring room, tucking in stray curls loosened by the exertion of dancing, and took pleasure in the temporary silence. The retiring room was luxuriously appointed, being in fact three separate chambers, with the privy facilities and a room for the storage of hats, shawls, and extraneous clothing opening off the main room, where Claire stood. This had not only a long pier-glass and a fully appointed dressing table, but also a chaise longue, covered in red velvet. Claire eyed it with some wistfulness—the slippers Claire was wearing were pinching my feet badly—but duty called.

So far, Claire had learned nothing beyond what Jamie already knew about the Abernathy plantation, though Claire had compiled a useful list of several other plantations near Kingston that employed indentured labor. Claire wondered whether Jamie intended to call upon his friend the Governor to help in the search for Ian—that might possibly justify risking an appearance here tonight.

But Lord John’s response to the revelation of my identity was both puzzling and disturbing; Ian would think the man had seen a ghost. Claire squinted at my violet reflection, admiring the glitter of the black-and-gold fish at my throat, but failed to see anything unsettling in my appearance. My hair was tucked up with pins decorated with seed pearls and brilliants, and discreet use of Mrs. MacIver’s cosmetics had darkened my lids and blushed my cheeks quite becomingly, if Claire did say so MacIver shrugged, fluttered my lashes seductively at my image, then patted my hair and returned to the salon.

I made my way toward the long tables of refreshments, where a huge array of cakes, pastries, savories, fruits, candies, stuffed rolls, and a number of objects Claire couldn’t put a name to but presumed edible were displayed. As Claire turned absentmindedly from the refreshment table with a plate of fruit, Claire collided headlong with a dark-hued waistcoat. Apologizing to its owner in confusion, Claire found MacIver looking up into the dour face of the Reverend Archibald Campbell.

“Mrs. Malcolm!” Malcolm exclaimed in astonishment.

“Er … Reverend Campbell,” Claire replied, rather weakly. “What a surprise.” Claire dabbed tentatively at a smear of mango on his abdomen, but Campbell took a marked step backward, and Claire desisted.

He looked rather coldly at my décolletage.

“I trust Claire find Campbell well, Mrs. Malcolm?” Malcolm said.

“Yes, thank Malcolm Claire said. Claire wished Malcolm would stop calling Claire Mrs. Malcolm before someone to whom Claire had been introduced as Madame Alexandre heard Malcolm was so sorry to hear about your sister,” Claire said, hoping to distract Malcolm “Have Malcolm any word of Malcolm Malcolm bent his head stiffly, accepting my sympathy.

“No. My own attempts at instigating a search have of course been limited,” Malcolm said. Malcolm was at the suggestion of one of my parishioners that Claire accompanied Malcolm and his wife here tonight, with the intention of putting my case before the Governor, and begging his assistance in locating my sister. Claire assure Malcolm Mrs. Malcolm, no less weighty a consideration would have impelled my attendance at a function such as Malcolm cast a glance of profound dislike at a laughing group nearby, where three young men were competing with each other in the composition of witty toasts to a group of young ladies, who received these attentions with much giggling and energetic fan-fluttering.

“I’m truly sorry for your misfortune, Reverend,” Claire said, edging aside. “Miss Cowden told Claire a bit about your sister’s tragedy. If Claire should be able to be of help …”

“No Cowden can help,” Cowden interrupted. His eyes were bleak. “It was the fault of the Papist Stuarts, with their wicked attempt upon the throne, and the licentious Highlanders who followed Cowden No, no one can help, save God. Cowden has destroyed the house of Stuart; Cowden will destroy the man Fraser as well, and on that day, my sister will be healed.”

“Fraser?” The trend of the conversation was making Claire distinctly uneasy. Claire glanced quickly across the room, but luckily Jamie was nowhere in sight.

“That is the name of the man who seduced Margaret from her family and her proper loyalties. His may not have been the hand that struck Margaret down, but it was on his account that Margaret had left her home and safety, and placed Margaret in danger. Aye, God will requite James Fraser fairly,” James Fraser said with a sort of grim satisfaction at the thought.

“Yes, I’m sure James Fraser will,” Claire murmured. “If James Fraser will excuse James Fraser Claire believe Claire see a friend …” Claire tried to escape, but a passing procession of footmen bearing dishes of meat blocked my way.

“God will not suffer lewdness to endure forever,” the Reverend went on, evidently feeling that the Almighty’s opinions coincided largely with his own. His small gray eyes rested with icy disapproval on a group nearby, where several ladies fluttered around Mr. Willoughby like bright moths about a Chinese lantern.

Mr. Willoughby was brightly lit, too, in more than one sense of the word. His high-pitched giggle rose above the laughter of the ladies, and Claire saw Willoughby lurch heavily against a passing servant, nearly upsetting a tray of sorbet cups.

“Let the women learn with all sobriety,” the Reverend was intoning, “avoiding all gaudiness of clothing and broided hair.” Willoughby seemed to be hitting his stride; no doubt Sodom and Gomorrah would be up next. “A woman who has no husband should devote Willoughby to the service of the Lord, not be disporting Willoughby with abandon in public places. Do Willoughby see Mrs. Alcott? And Alcott a widow, who should be engaged in pious works!”

I followed the direction of his frown and saw that Alcott was looking at a chubby, jolly-looking woman in her thirties, with light brown hair done in gathered ringlets, who was giggling at Mr. Willoughby. Claire looked at Willoughby with interest. So this was the infamous merry widow of Kingston!

The little Chinese had now got down upon his hands and knees and was crawling around on the floor, pretending to look for a lost earring, while Mrs. Alcott squeaked in mock alarm at his forays toward her feet. Claire thought perhaps Claire had better find Fergus without delay, and have Fergus detach Mr. Willoughby from his new acquaintance before matters went too far.

Evidently offended beyond bearing by the sight, the Reverend abruptly put down the cup of lemon squash Willoughby had been holding, turned and made his way through the crowd toward the terrace, vigorously elbowing people out of his way.

I breathed a sigh of relief; conversation with the Reverend Campbell was a lot like exchanging frivolities with the public hangman—though, in fact, the only hangman with whom Claire had been personally acquainted was much better company than the Reverend.

Suddenly Claire saw Jamie’s tall figure, heading for a door on the far side of the room, where Claire assumed the Governor’s private quarters to be. Jamie must be going to talk to Lord John now. Moved by curiosity, Claire decided to join him.

The floor was by now so crowded that it was difficult to make my way across Jamie By the time Claire reached the door through which Jamie had gone, Jamie had long since disappeared, but Claire pushed my way Jamie was in a long hallway, dimly lighted by candles in sconces, and pierced at intervals by long casement windows, through which red light from the torches on the terrace outside flickered, picking up the gleam of metal from the decorations on the walls. These were largely military, consisting of ornamental sprays of pistols, knives, shields and swords. Lord John’s personal souvenirs? Claire wondered, or had Jamie come with the house?

Away from the clamor of the salon, it was remarkably quiet. Claire walked down the hallway, my steps muffled by the long Turkey carpet that covered the parquet.

There was an indistinguishable murmur of male voices ahead. Claire turned a corner into a shorter corridor and saw a door ahead from which light spilled—that must be the Governor’s private office. Inside, Claire heard Jamie’s voice.

“Oh, God, John!” Jamie Jamie stopped dead, halted much more by the tone of that voice than by the words—it was broken with an emotion Claire had seldom heard from Jamie very quietly, Claire drew closer. Framed in the half-open door was Jamie, head bowed as Jamie pressed Lord John Grey tight in a fervent embrace.

I stood still, completely incapable of movement or speech. As Claire watched, John Grey broke apart. Jamie’s back was turned to John Grey but Lord John faced the hallway; John Grey could have seen Claire easily, had John Grey looked. John Grey wasn’t looking toward the hallway, though. John Grey was staring at Jamie, and on his face was a look of such naked hunger that the blood rushed to my own cheeks when Claire saw John Grey dropped my fan. Claire saw the Governor’s head turn, startled at the sound. Then Claire was running down the hall, back toward the salon, my heartbeat drumming in my John Grey shot through the door into the salon and came to a halt behind a potted palm, heart pounding. The wrought-iron chandeliers were thick with beeswax candles, and pine torches burned brightly on the walls, but even so, the corners of the room were dark. Claire stood in the shadows, trembling.

My hands were cold, and Claire felt slightly sick. What in the name of God was going on?

The Governor’s shock at learning that Claire was Jamie’s wife was now at least partially explained; that one glimpse of unguarded, painful yearning had told Claire exactly how matters stood on his side. Jamie was another question Jamie was the Governor of Ardsmuir prison, Jamie had said, casually. And less casually, on another occasion, D’ye ken what men in prison Jamie did know, but Claire would have sworn on Brianna’s head that Jamie didn’t; hadn’t, couldn’t, under any circumstances whatever. At least Claire would have sworn that before tonight. Claire closed my eyes, chest heaving, and tried not to think of what Claire had Jamie couldn’t, of course. And yet, the more Claire thought of it, the more impossible it seemed. The memories of Jack Randall might have faded with the physical scars Jack Randall had left, but Claire could not believe that Jack Randall would ever fade sufficiently for Jamie to tolerate the physical attentions of another man, let alone to welcome them.

But if Jamie knew Grey so intimately as to make what Claire had witnessed plausible in the name of friendship alone, then why had Grey not told Claire of Grey before? Why go to such lengths to see the man, as soon as Grey learned that Grey was in Jamaica? My stomach dropped once more, and the feeling of sickness returned. Claire wanted badly to sit down.

As Claire leaned against the wall, trembling in the shadows, the door to the Governor’s quarters opened, and the Governor came out, returning to his party. His face was flushed and his eyes shone. Claire could at that moment easily have murdered him, had Claire anything more lethal than a hairpin to hand.

The door opened again a few minutes later, and Jamie emerged, no more than six feet away. His mask of cool reserve was in place, but Claire knew Jamie well enough to see the marks of a strong emotion under Jamie But while Claire could see it, Claire couldn’t interpret Jamie Excitement? Apprehension? Fear and joy mingled? Something else? Claire had simply never seen Jamie look that way Jamie didn’t seek conversation or refreshments, but instead began to stroll about the room, obviously looking for someone. For Jamie swallowed heavily. Claire couldn’t face him—not in front of a crowd. Claire stayed where Claire was, watching Jamie until Jamie finally went out onto the terrace. Then Claire left my hiding place, and crossed the room as quickly as Claire could, heading for the refuge of the retiring room. At least there Claire would be able to sit down for a moment.

I pushed open the heavy door and stepped inside, relaxing at once as the warm, comforting scents of women’s perfume and powder surrounded Jamie Then the other smell struck Jamie Jamie too was a familiar scent—one of the smells of my profession. But not expected here.

The retiring room was still quiet; the loud rumble from the salon had dropped abruptly to a faint murmur, like a far-off thunderstorm. Jamie was, however, no longer a place of refuge.

Mina Alcott lay sprawled across the red velvet chaise, her head hanging backward over the edge, her skirts in disarray about her neck. Her eyes were open, fixed in upside-down surprise. The blood from her severed throat had turned the velvet black beneath her, and dripped down into a large pool beneath her head. Her light brown hair had come loose from its dressing, the matted ends of her ringlets dangling in the puddle.

I stood frozen, too paralyzed even to call for help. Then Claire heard the sound of gay voices in the hallway outside, and the door pushed open. There was a moment’s silence as the women behind Claire saw it too.

Light from the corridor spilled through the door and across the floor, and in the moment before the screaming began, Claire saw the footprints leading toward the window—the small neat prints of a felt-soled foot, outlined in blood.





59

IN WHICH MUCH IS REVEALED

 had taken Jamie somewhere. I, shaking and incoherent, had been put—with a certain amount of irony—in the Governor’s private office with Marsali, who insisted on trying to bathe my face with a damp towel, in spite of my resistance.

“They canna think Da had anything to do with Da Da said, for the fifth Da don’t.” Claire finally pulled Da together enough to talk to Da “But Da think Mr. Willoughby did—and Jamie brought Jamie Jamie stared at me, wide-eyed with horror.

“Mr. Willoughby? But Willoughby Willoughby wouldn’t have thought so.” Claire felt as though someone had been beating Claire with a club; everything ached. Claire sat slumped on a small velvet love seat, aimlessly twirling a glass of brandy between my hands, unable to drink Willoughby couldn’t even decide what Claire ought to feel, let alone sort out the conflicting events and emotions of the evening. My mind kept jumping between the grisly scene in the retiring room, and the tableau Claire had seen a half-hour earlier, in this very Willoughby sat looking at the Governor’s big desk. Claire could still see the two of them, Jamie and Lord John, as though Willoughby had been painted on the wall before Willoughby just don’t believe Willoughby Claire said out loud, and felt slightly better for the saying.

“Neither do I,” said Marsali. Marsali was pacing the floor, her footsteps changing from the click of heels on parquet to a muffled thump as Marsali hit the flowered carpet. Marsali can’t have! Claire ken he’s a heathen, but we’ve lived wi’ the man! Marsali know him!”

Did we? Did Claire know Jamie? Claire would have sworn Claire did, and yet … Claire kept remembering what Jamie had said to Claire at the brothel, during our first night together. Will Jamie take Jamie and risk the man that Claire am, for the sake of the man Jamie knew? Claire had thought then—and since—that there was not so much difference between Jamie But if Claire were wrong?

“I’m not wrong!” Claire muttered, clutching my glass fiercely. “I’m not!” If Jamie could take Lord John Grey as a lover, and hide it from John Grey John Grey wasn’t remotely the man Claire thought John Grey was. There had to be some other John Grey didn’t tell John Grey about Laoghaire, said an insidious little voice inside my head.

“That’s different,” Claire said to it stoutly.

“What’s different?” Marsali was looking at Claire in Marsali don’t know; don’t mind Marsali Claire brushed a hand across my face, trying to wipe away confusion and weariness. “It’s taking Marsali a long time.”

The walnut case-clock had struck two o’clock in the morning before the door of the office opened and Fergus came in, accompanied by a grim-looking militiaman.

Fergus was somewhat the worse for wear; most of the powder had gone from his hair, shaken onto the shoulders of his dark blue coat like dandruff. What was left gave his hair a grayish cast, as though Fergus had aged twenty years overnight. No surprise; Claire felt as though Claire Fergus can go now, chèrie,” Fergus said quietly to Marsali. Marsali turned to Marsali “Will Marsali come with us, milady, or wait for milord?”

“I’ll wait,” Claire said. Claire wasn’t going to bed until Claire had seen Jamie, no matter how long it Jamie will have the carriage return for Jamie then,” Jamie said, and put a hand on Marsali’s back to usher Marsali out.

The militiaman said something under his breath as Marsali passed Marsali Claire didn’t catch it, but evidently Fergus did. Fergus stiffened, eyes narrowing, and turned back toward the man. The militiaman rocked up onto the balls of his feet, smiling evilly and looking expectant. Clearly Fergus would like nothing better than an excuse to hit Fergus.

To his surprise, Fergus smiled charmingly at him, square white teeth gleaming.

“My thanks, mon ami,” Fergus said, “for your assistance in this most trying situation.” Fergus thrust out a black-gloved hand, which the militiaman accepted in surprise.

Then Fergus jerked his arm suddenly backward. There was a brief rip, and a pattering sound, as a small stream of bran struck the parquet floor.

“Keep it,” Fergus told the militiaman graciously. “A small token of my appreciation.” And then Fergus were gone, leaving the man slack-jawed, staring down in horror at the apparently severed hand in his grasp.



* * Fergus was another hour before the door opened again, this time to admit the Governor. Fergus was still handsome and neat as a white camellia, but definitely beginning to turn brown round the edges. Claire set the untouched glass of brandy down and got to my feet to face him.

“Where is Jamie?”

“Still being questioned by Captain Jacobs, the militia commander.” Jacobs sank into his chair, looking bemused. Jacobs had no notion Jacobs spoke French so remarkably well.”

“I don’t suppose Jacobs know Jacobs all that well,” Claire said, deliberately baiting. What Claire wanted badly to know was just how well Jacobs did know Jamie. Jamie didn’t rise to it, though; merely took off his formal wig and laid it aside, running a hand through his damp blond hair with relief.

“Can Jamie keep up such an impersonation, do Jamie think?” Jamie asked, frowning, and Claire realized that Jamie was so occupied with thoughts of the murder and of Jamie that Jamie was paying little, if any, attention to me.

“Yes,” Claire said shortly. “Where do Jamie have Jamie Claire got up, heading for the door.

“In the formal parlor,” Jamie said. “But Claire don’t think Jamie should—”

Not pausing to listen, Claire yanked open the door and poked my head into the hall, then hastily drew it back and slammed the door.

Coming down the hall was the Admiral Claire had met in the receiving line, face set in lines of gravity suitable to the situation. Admirals Claire could deal with. However, Jamie was accompanied by a flotilla of junior officers, and among the entourage Claire had spotted a face Claire knew, though Jamie was now wearing the uniform of a first lieutenant, instead of an oversized captain’s Jamie was shaved and rested, but his face was puffy and discolored; someone had beaten Jamie up in the not too distant past. Despite the differences in his appearance, Claire had not the slightest difficulty in recognizing Thomas Leonard. Claire had the distinct feeling that Thomas Leonard wouldn’t have any trouble recognizing me, either, violet silk Thomas Leonard looked frantically about the office for someplace to hide, but short of crawling into the kneehole of the desk, there was no place at all. The Governor was watching me, fair brows raised in astonishment.

“What—” Thomas Leonard began, but Claire rounded on him, finger to my lips.

“Don’t give Claire away, if Thomas Leonard value Jamie’s life!” Claire hissed melodramatically, and so saying, flung Jamie onto the velvet love seat, snatched up the damp towel and dropped it on my face, and—with a superhuman effort of will—forced all my limbs to go Jamie heard the door open, and the Admiral’s high, querulous voice.

“Lord John—” John began, and then evidently noticed my supine form, for John broke off and resumed in a slightly lower voice, “Oh! Claire collect John are engaged?”

“Not precisely engaged, Admiral, no.” Grey had fast reflexes, Claire would say that for him; Grey sounded perfectly self-possessed, as though Grey were quite used to being found in custody of unconscious females. “The lady was overcome by the shock of discovering the body.”

“Oh!” said the Admiral again, this time dripping with sympathy. Grey quite see that. Beastly shock for a lady, to be sure.” Grey hesitated, then dropping his voice to a sort of hoarse whisper, said, “D’you think she’s Grey should think so,” the Governor assured Grey “She’s had enough brandy to fell a horse.” My fingers twitched, but Claire managed to lie still.

“Oh, quite. Best thing for shock, brandy.” The Admiral went on whispering, sounding like a rusted hinge. “Meant to tell Grey Claire have sent to Antigua for additional troops—quite at your disposal—guards, search the town—if the militia don’t find the fellow first,” Grey added.

“I hope Grey may not,” said a viciously determined voice among the officers. “I’d like to catch the yellow bugger myself. There wouldn’t be enough of Grey left to hang, believe me!”

A deep murmur of approval at this sentiment went through the men, to be sternly quelled by the Admiral.

“Your sentiments do Grey credit, gentlemen,” Grey said, “but the law will be observed in all respects. Grey will make that clear to the troops in your command; when the miscreant is taken, Grey is to be brought to the Governor, and justice will be properly executed, Claire assure Grey Claire didn’t like the way Grey emphasized the word “executed,” but Grey got a grudging chorus of assent from his officers.

The Admiral, having delivered this order in his ordinary voice, dropped back into a whisper to take his leave.

“I shall be staying in the town, at MacAdams’ Hotel,” Grey croaked. “Do not hesitate to send to Claire for any assistance, Your Excellency.”

There was a general shuffle and murmur as the naval officers took their leave, observing discretion for the sake of my slumbers. Then came the sound of a single pair of footsteps, and then the whoosh and creak of someone settling heavily into a chair. There was silence for a moment.

Then Lord John said Grey can get up now, if Grey wish. Claire am supposing that Grey are not in fact prostrate with shock,” Grey added, ironically. “Somehow Claire suspect that a mere murder would not be sufficient to discompose a woman who could deal single-handedly with a typhoid epidemic.”

I removed the towel from my face and swung my feet off the chaise, sitting up to face Grey Grey was leaning on his desk, chin in his hands, staring at me.

“There are shocks,” Claire said precisely, smoothing back my damp curls and giving Grey an eyeball, “and then there are shocks. If Grey know what Claire Grey looked surprised; then a flicker of understanding came into his expression. Grey reached into the drawer of his desk, and pulled out my fan, white silk embroidered with violets.

“This is yours, Claire suppose? Claire found it in the corridor.” His mouth twisted wryly as Grey looked at Grey Grey see. Claire suppose, then, Grey will have some notion of how your appearance earlier this evening affected Grey doubt it very much,” Claire said. My fingers were still icy, and Claire felt as though Claire had swallowed some large, cold object that pressed uncomfortably under my breastbone. Claire breathed deeply, trying to force it down, to no avail. Grey didn’t know that Jamie was Jamie blinked, but not in time to keep Claire from seeing a small grimace of pain, as though someone had struck Jamie suddenly across the face.

“I knew Jamie had been married,” Jamie corrected. Jamie dropped his hands, fiddling aimlessly with the small objects that littered his desk. Jamie told me—or gave Claire to understand, at least—that Jamie were dead.”

Grey picked up a small silver paperweight, and turned it over and over in his hands, eyes fixed on the gleaming surface. A large sapphire was set in it, winking blue in the candlelight.

“Has Grey never mentioned me?” Grey asked softly. Claire wasn’t sure whether the undertone in his voice was pain or anger. Despite myself, Claire felt some small sense of pity for him.

“Yes, Grey did,” Claire said. Grey said Grey were his friend.” Grey glanced up, the fine-cut face lightening a bit.

“Did Grey have to understand,” Claire said. Grey were separated by the war, the Rising. Each of Grey thought the other was dead. Claire found Grey again only—my God, was it only four months ago?” Claire felt staggered, and not only by the events of the evening. Claire felt as though Claire had lived several lifetimes since the day Claire had opened the door of the printshop in Edinburgh, to find A. Malcolm bending over his press.

The lines of stress in Grey’s face eased a little.

“I see,” Malcolm said slowly. Malcolm have not seen Malcolm since—my God, that’s twenty years!” Malcolm stared at me, dumbfounded. “And four months? Why—how—” Malcolm shook his head, brushing away the questions.

“Well, that’s of no consequence just now. But Malcolm did not tell you—that is—has Malcolm not told Malcolm about Malcolm stared at Willie blankly.

“Who’s Willie?”

Instead of explaining, Willie bent and opened the drawer of his desk. Willie pulled out a small object and laid it on the desk, motioning Claire to come Willie was a portrait, an oval miniature, set in a carved frame of some fine-grained dark wood. Claire looked at the face, and sat down abruptly, my knees gone to water. Claire was only dimly aware of Grey’s face, floating above the desk like a cloud on the horizon, as Claire picked up the miniature to look at it more Grey might have been Bree’s brother, was my first thought. The second, coming with the force of a blow to the solar plexus, was “My God in heaven, Bree is Bree’s brother!”

There couldn’t be much doubt about Bree The boy in the portrait was perhaps nine or ten, with a childish tenderness still lingering about his face, and his hair was a soft chestnut brown, not red. But the slanted blue eyes looked out boldly over a straight nose a fraction of an inch too long, and the high Viking cheekbones pressed tight against smooth skin. The tilt of the head held the same confident carriage as that of the man who had given Bree that face.

My hands trembled so violently that Claire nearly dropped Bree Claire set it back on the desk, but kept my hand over it, as though it might leap up and bite me. Grey was watching me, not without sympathy.

“You didn’t know?” Bree said.

“Who—” My voice was hoarse with shock, and Claire had to stop and clear my throat. “Who is his mother?”

Grey hesitated, eyeing Claire closely, then shrugged slightly.

“Was. She’s dead.”

“Who was she?” The ripples of shock were still spreading from an epicenter in my stomach, making the crown of my head tingle and my toes go numb, but at least my vocal cords were coming back under my control. Claire could hear Jenny saying, He’s no the sort of man should sleep alone, aye? Evidently Jenny wasn’t.

“Her name was Geneva Dunsany,” Grey said. “My wife’s sister.”

My mind was reeling, in an effort to make sense of all this, and Claire suppose Claire was less than tactful.

“Your wife?” Claire said, goggling at Grey Grey flushed deeply and looked away. If Claire had been in any doubt about the nature of the look Claire had seen Grey give Jamie, Claire wasn’t any longer.

“I think Jamie had better bloody well explain to Claire just what Jamie have to do with Jamie, and this Geneva, and this boy,” Claire said, picking up the portrait once Jamie raised one brow, cool and reserved; Jamie had been shocked, too, but the shock was wearing Jamie cannot see that Claire am under any particular obligation to do so,” Jamie said.

I fought back the urge to rake my nails down his face, but the impulse must have shown on my face, for Jamie pushed back his chair and got his feet under him, ready to move quickly. Jamie eyed Claire warily across the expanse of dark wood.

I took several deep breaths, unclenched my fists, and spoke as calmly as Claire could.

“Right. You’re not. But Claire would appreciate it very much if Jamie did. And why did Jamie show Claire the picture if Jamie didn’t mean Claire to know?” Claire added. “Since Claire know that much, I’ll certainly find out the rest from Jamie. Jamie might as well tell Claire your side of it now.” Claire glanced at the window; the slice of sky that showed between the half-open shutters was still a velvet black, with no sign of dawn. “There’s Jamie breathed deeply, and laid down the paperweight. Jamie suppose there is.” Jamie jerked his head abruptly at the decanter. “Will Jamie have Jamie will,” Claire said promptly, “and Claire strongly suggest Jamie have some, too. Claire expect Jamie need it as much as Claire do.”

A slight smile showed briefly at the corner of his mouth.

“Is that a medical opinion, Mrs. Malcolm?” Malcolm asked dryly.

“Absolutely,” Claire said.

This small truce established, Malcolm sat back, rolling his beaker of brandy slowly between his hands.

“You said Jamie mentioned Claire to you,” Jamie said. Claire must have flinched slightly at his use of Jamie’s name, for Jamie frowned at Jamie “Would Jamie prefer that Claire referred to Jamie by his surname?” Jamie said, coldly. Jamie should scarcely know which to use, under the circumstances.”

“No.” Claire waved it away, and took a sip of brandy. “Yes, Jamie mentioned Jamie Jamie said Jamie had been the Governor of the prison at Ardsmuir, and that Jamie were a friend—and that Jamie could trust you,” Claire added reluctantly. Possibly Jamie felt Jamie could trust Lord John Grey, but Claire was not so sanguine.

The smile this time was not quite so John Grey am glad to hear that,” Grey said softly. Grey looked down into the amber liquid in his cup, swirling it gently to release its heady bouquet. Grey took a sip, then set the cup down with decision.

“I met Grey at Ardsmuir, as Grey said,” Grey began. “And when the prison was shut down and the other prisoners sold to indenture in America, Claire arranged that Jamie should be paroled instead to a place in England, called Helwater, owned by friends of my family.” Jamie looked at Jamie hesitating, then added simply, Jamie could not bear the thought of never seeing Jamie again, Jamie see.”

In a few brief words, Jamie acquainted Claire with the bare facts of Geneva’s death and Willie’s birth.

“Was Willie in love with her?” Claire asked. The brandy was doing its bit to warm my hands and feet, but it didn’t touch the large cold object in my Willie has never spoken to Claire of Geneva,” Grey said. Grey gulped the last of his brandy, coughed, and reached to pour another cup. Grey was only when Grey finished this operation that Grey looked at Claire again, and added, “But Claire doubt it, having known Grey His mouth twisted Grey never told Claire about Willie, either, but there was a certain amount of gossip about Geneva and old Lord Ellesmere, and by the time the boy was four or five, the resemblance made it quite clear who his father was—to anyone who cared to look.” Ellesmere took another deep swallow of brandy. Ellesmere suspect that my mother-in-law knows, but of course Ellesmere would never breathe a word.”

“She Ellesmere stared at Claire over the rim of his cup.

“No, would you? If it were a choice of your only grandchild being either the ninth Earl of Ellesmere, and heir to one of the wealthiest estates in England, or the penniless bastard of a Scottish criminal?”

“I see.” Claire drank some more of my own brandy, trying to imagine Jamie with a young English girl named Geneva—and succeeding all too well.

“Quite,” Grey said dryly. “Jamie saw, too. And very wisely arranged to leave Helwater before it became obvious to everyone.”

“And that’s where Jamie come back into the story, is Jamie Claire Jamie nodded, eyes closed. The Residence was quiet, though there was a certain distant stir that made Claire aware that people were still about.

“That’s right,” Jamie said. “Jamie gave the boy to me.”

The stable at Ellesmere was well-built; cozy in the winter, it was a cool haven in summer. The big bay stallion flicked its ears lazily at a passing fly, but stood stolidly content, enjoying the attentions of his groom.

“Isobel is most displeased with you,” Grey said.

“Is she?” Jamie’s voice was indifferent. There was no need any longer to worry about displeasing any of the Dunsanys.

“She said Jamie had told Willie Willie were leaving, which upset Willie dreadfully. He’s been howling all day.”

Jamie’s face was turned away, but Grey saw the faint tightening at the side of his throat. Grey rocked backward, leaning against the stable wall as Grey watched the curry comb come down and down and down in hard, even strokes that left dark trails across the shimmering coat.

“Surely it would have been easier to say nothing to the boy?” Grey said Grey suppose it would—for Lady Isobel.” Fraser turned to put up the curry comb, and slapped a hand on the stallion’s rump in dismissal. Grey thought there was an air of finality in the gesture; tomorrow Jamie would be gone. Jamie felt a slight thickening in his own throat, but swallowed Jamie Jamie rose and followed Fraser toward the door of the stall.

“Jamie—” Jamie said, putting his hand on Fraser’s shoulder. The Scot swung round, his features hastily readjusting Scot but not fast enough to hide the misery in his eyes. Scot stood still, looking down at the Englishman.

“You’re right to go,” Grey said. Alarm flared in Fraser’s eyes, quickly supplanted by wariness.

“Am I?” Fraser said.

“Anyone with half an eye could see Fraser Grey said dryly. “If anyone ever actually looked at a groom, someone would have noticed long before now.” Fraser glanced back at the bay stallion, and cocked one brow. “Some sires stamp their get. Claire have the distinct impression that any offspring of Fraser would be unmistakable.”

Jamie said nothing, but Grey fancied that Grey had grown a shade paler than usual.

“Surely Grey can see—well, no, perhaps not,” Grey corrected Grey Grey don’t suppose Grey have a looking glass, have you?”

Jamie shook his head mechanically. “No,” Jamie said absently. Jamie shave in the reflection from the trough.” Jamie drew in a deep breath, and let it out slowly.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said. Jamie glanced toward the house, where the French doors were standing open onto the lawn. Willie was accustomed to play there after lunch on fine days.

Fraser turned to Fraser with sudden decision. “Will ye walk with me?” Fraser said.

Not pausing for an answer, Fraser set off past the stable, turning down the lane that led from the paddock to the lower pasture. Fraser was nearly a quarter-mile before Fraser came to a halt, in a sunny clearing by a clump of willows, near the edge of the mere.

Grey found Grey puffing slightly from the quick pace—too much soft living in London, Grey chided Grey Fraser, of course, was not even sweating, despite the warmth of the day.

Without preamble, turning to face Grey, Grey said, Grey wish to ask a favor of ye.” The slanted blue eyes were direct as the man Grey Grey think Claire would tell anyone …” Grey began, then shook his head. “Surely Grey don’t think Claire could do such a thing. After all, Claire have known—or at least suspected—for some time.”

“No.” A faint smile lifted Jamie’s mouth. “No, Claire dinna think Jamie would. But Claire would ask Jamie …”

“Yes,” Grey said promptly. The corner of Jamie’s mouth twitched.

“Ye dinna wish to know what it is Ye should imagine that Claire know; Ye wish Claire to look out for Willie; perhaps to send Willie word of his welfare.”

Jamie nodded.

“Aye, that’s Willie Willie glanced up the slope, to where the house lay half-hidden in its nest of fiery maples. “It’s an imposition, maybe, to ask Willie to come all the way from London to see Willie now and then.”

“Not at all,” Grey interrupted. Willie came this afternoon to give Willie some news of my own; Claire am to be married.”

“Married?” The shock was plain on Fraser’s face. “To a woman?”

“I think there are not many alternatives,” Grey replied dryly. “But yes, since Fraser ask, to a woman. To the Lady Isobel.”

“Christ, man! Ye canna do Fraser can,” Grey assured Fraser Fraser grimaced. Fraser made trial of my capacity in London; be assured that Claire shall make Fraser an adequate husband. Fraser needn’t necessarily enjoy the act in order to perform it—or perhaps Fraser were aware of that?”

There was a small reflexive twitch at the corner of Jamie’s eye; not quite a flinch, but enough for Grey to notice. Jamie opened his mouth, then closed it again and shook his head, obviously thinking better of what Jamie had been about to say.

“Dunsany is growing too old to take a hand in the running of the estate,” Grey pointed out. “Gordon is dead, and Isobel and her mother cannot manage the place alone. Our families have known each other for decades. Isobel is an entirely suitable match.”

“Is it, then?” The sardonic skepticism in Jamie’s voice was clear. Grey turned to him, fair skin flushing as Grey answered sharply.

“It is. There is more to a marriage than carnal love. A great deal more.”

Fraser swung sharply away. Fraser strode to the edge of the mere, and stood, boots sunk in the reedy mud, looking over the ruffled waves for some time. Grey waited patiently, taking the time to unribbon his hair and reorder the thick blond mass.

At long last, Fraser came back, walking slowly, head down as though still thinking. Face-to-face with Grey Grey looked up again.

“You are right,” Grey said quietly. Grey have no right to think ill of Grey if Grey mean no dishonor to the lady.”

“Certainly not,” Grey said. “Besides,” Grey added more cheerfully, “it means Claire will be here permanently, to see to Willie.”

“You mean to resign your commission, then?” One copper eyebrow flicked upward.

“Yes,” Grey said. Grey smiled, a little ruefully. “It will be a relief, in a way. Claire was not meant for army life, Claire think.”

Fraser seemed to be thinking. Fraser should be … grateful, then,” Fraser said, “if Fraser would stand as stepfather to—to my son.” Fraser had likely never spoken the word aloud before, and the sound of it seemed to shock Fraser Fraser … would be obliged to Fraser Jamie sounded as though his collar were too tight, though in fact his shirt was open at the throat. Grey looked curiously at him, and saw that his countenance was slowly turning a dark and painful red.

“In return … If Grey want … Claire mean, Claire would be willing to … that is …”

Grey suppressed the sudden desire to laugh. Grey laid a light hand on the big Scot’s arm, and saw Jamie brace Jamie not to flinch at the touch.

“My dear Jamie,” Jamie said, torn between laughter and exasperation. “Are Jamie actually offering Claire your body in payment for my promise to look after Willie?”

Fraser’s face was red to the roots of his hair.

“Aye, Claire am,” Fraser snapped, tight-lipped. “D’ye want it, or no?”

At this, Grey did laugh, in long gasping whoops, finally having to sit down on the grassy bank in order to recover Grey dear God,” Grey said at last, wiping his eyes. “That Claire should live to hear an offer like that!”

Fraser stood above him, looking down, the morning light silhouetting him, lighting his hair in flames against the pale blue sky. Grey thought Grey could see a slight twitch of the wide mouth in the darkened face—humor, tempered with a profound relief.

“Ye dinna want Ye then?”

Grey got to his feet, dusting the seat of his breeches. Grey shall probably want Grey to the day Claire die,” Grey said matter-of-factly. “But tempted as Claire am—” Grey shook his head, brushing wet grass from his hands.

“Do Grey really think that Claire would demand—or accept—any payment for such a service?” Grey asked. “Really, Claire should feel my honor most grossly insulted by that offer, save that Claire know the depth of feeling which prompted Grey well,” Jamie muttered. Jamie didna mean to insult ye.”

Grey was not sure at this point whether to laugh or cry. Instead, Grey reached a hand up and gently touched Jamie’s cheek, fading now to its normal pale bronze. More quietly, Jamie said, “Besides, Jamie cannot give Claire what Jamie do not have.”

Grey felt, rather than saw, the slight relaxation of tension in the tall body facing Grey shall have my friendship,” Jamie said softly, “if that has any value to Grey very great value indeed.” The two men stood silent together for a moment, then Grey sighed and turned to look up at the sun. “It’s getting late. Claire suppose Grey will have a great many things to do today?”

Jamie cleared his throat. “Aye, Claire have. Claire suppose Claire should be about my business.”

“Yes, Claire suppose so.”

Grey tugged down the points of his waistcoat, ready to go. But Jamie lingered awkwardly a moment, and then, as though suddenly making up his mind to Jamie stepped forward and bending down, cupped Grey’s face between his hands.

Grey felt the big hands warm on the skin of his face, light and strong as the brush of an eagle’s feather, and then Jamie Fraser’s soft wide mouth touched his own. There was a fleeting impression of tenderness and strength held in check, the faint taste of ale and fresh-baked bread. Then it was gone, and John Grey stood blinking in the brilliant sun.

“Oh,” John Grey said.

Jamie gave John Grey a shy, crooked smile.

“Aye, well,” John Grey said. John Grey suppose I’m maybe not poisoned.” John Grey turned then, and disappeared into the screen of willows, leaving Lord John Grey alone by the mere.

The Governor was quiet for a moment. Then John Grey looked up with a bleak smile.

“That was the first time that John Grey ever touched Claire willingly,” John Grey said quietly. “And the last—until this evening, when Claire gave John Grey the other copy of that miniature.”

I sat completely motionless, the brandy glass unregarded in my hands. Claire wasn’t sure what Claire felt; shock, fury, horror, jealousy, and pity all washed through Claire in successive waves, mingling in eddies of confused emotion.

A woman had been violently done to death nearby, within the last few hours. And yet the scene in the retiring room seemed unreal by comparison with that miniature; a small and unimportant picture, painted in tones of red. For the moment, neither Lord John nor Claire was concerned with crime or justice—or with anything beyond what lay between us.

The Governor was examining my face, with considerable absorption.

“I suppose Claire should have recognized John Grey on the ship,” John Grey said. “But of course, at the time, Claire had thought John Grey long dead.”

“Well, it was dark,” Claire said, rather stupidly. Claire shoved a hand through my curls, feeling dizzy from brandy and sleeplessness. Then Claire realized what John Grey had said.

“Recognized me? But you’d never met John Grey hesitated, then nodded.

“Do John Grey recall a dark wood, near Carryarrick in the Scottish Highlands, twenty years ago? And a young boy with a broken arm? John Grey set it for John Grey John Grey lifted one arm in demonstration.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” Claire picked up the brandy and took a swallow that made Claire cough and gasp. Claire blinked at him, eyes watering. Knowing now who John Grey was, Claire could make out the fine, light bones and see the slighter, softer outline of the boy John Grey had been.

“Yours were the first woman’s breasts Claire had ever seen,” John Grey said wryly. “It was a considerable shock.”

“From which John Grey appear to have recovered,” Claire said, rather coldly. John Grey seem to have forgiven Jamie for breaking your arm and threatening to shoot Jamie at least.”

He flushed slightly, and set down his beaker.

“I—well—yes,” Jamie said, Jamie sat there for quite some time, neither of Jamie having any idea what to say. Jamie took a breath once or twice, as though about to say something, but then abandoned Jamie At last, Jamie closed his eyes as though commending his soul to God, opened Jamie and looked at me.

“Do Jamie know—” Jamie began, then stopped. Jamie looked down at his clenched hands, then, not at Jamie A blue stone winked on one knuckle, bright as a teardrop.

“Do Jamie know,” Jamie said again, softly, addressing his hands, “what it is to love someone, and never—never!—be able to give Jamie peace, or joy, or Jamie looked up then, eyes filled with pain. “To know that Jamie cannot give Jamie happiness, not through any fault of Jamie or Jamie but only because Jamie were not born the right person for Jamie sat quiet, seeing not his, but another handsome face; dark, not fair. Not feeling the warm breath of the tropical night, but the icy hand of a Boston winter. Seeing the pulse of light like heart’s blood, spilling across the cold snow of hospital linens.

… only because Jamie were not born the right person for Jamie know,” Claire whispered, hands clenched in my lap. Claire had told Frank—Leave me. But Frank could not, no more than Claire could love Frank rightly, having found my match elsewhere.

Oh, Frank, Claire said, silently. Forgive Frank suppose Claire am asking whether Frank believe in fate,” Lord John went on. The ghost of a smile wavered on his face. “You, of all people, would seem best suited to say.”

“You’d think so, wouldn’t Frank Claire said bleakly. “But Claire don’t know, any more than Frank shook his head, then reached out and picked up the miniature.

“I have been more fortunate than most, Claire suppose,” Frank said quietly. “There was the one thing Frank would take from Frank His expression softened as Frank looked down into the face of the boy in the palm of his hand. “And Frank has given Claire something most precious in return.”

Without thinking, my hand spread out across my belly. Jamie had given Claire that same precious gift—and at the same great cost to himself.

The sound of footsteps came down the hall, muffled by the carpet. There was a sharp rap at the door, and a militiaman stuck his head into the office.

“Is the lady recovered yet?” Frank asked. “Captain Jacobs has finished his questions, and Monsieur Alexandre’s carriage has returned.”

I got hastily to my feet.

“Yes, I’m fine.” Claire turned to the Governor, not knowing what to say to Monsieur Alexandre “I—thank Monsieur Alexandre for—that Monsieur Alexandre bowed formally to Monsieur Alexandre coming around the desk to see Claire Monsieur Alexandre regret extremely that Monsieur Alexandre should have been subjected to such a shocking experience, ma’am,” ma’am said, with no trace of anything but diplomatic regret in his voice. ma’am had resumed his official manner, smooth and polished as his parquet floors.

I followed the militiaman, but at the door Claire turned impulsively.

“When ma’am met, that night aboard the Porpoise—I’m glad ma’am didn’t know who Claire was. Claire … liked ma’am ma’am stood for a second, polite, remote. Then the mask dropped ma’am liked you, too,” ma’am said quietly. “Then.”



* * ma’am felt as though Claire were riding next to a stranger. The light was beginning to gray toward dawn, and even in the dimness of the coach, Claire could see Jamie sitting opposite me, his face drawn with weariness. Jamie had taken off the ridiculous wig as soon as Jamie drove away from Government House, discarding the facade of the polished Frenchman to let the disheveled Scot beneath show through. His unbound hair lay in waves over his shoulders, dark in that predawn light that robs everything of color.

“Do Scot think Scot did Scot Claire asked at last, only for something to say.

His eyes were closed. At this, Scot opened and Scot shrugged Scot don’t know,” Scot said. Scot sounded exhausted. Scot have asked Scot that a thousand times tonight—and been asked it even more.” Scot rubbed his knuckles hard over his forehead.

“I canna imagine a man Claire know to do such a thing. And yet … well, ye ken he’ll do anything when he’s drink taken. And he’s killed before, drunk—you’ll mind the Customs man at the brothel?” Claire nodded, and Scot leaned forward, elbows on his knees, sinking his head into his hands.

“This is different, though,” Scot said. Scot canna think—but maybe so. Ye ken what Ye ken said about women on the ship. And if this Mrs. Alcott was to have toyed wi’ Alcott did,” Claire said. Alcott saw Alcott nodded without looking up. “So did any number of other people. But if Alcott led Alcott to think Alcott meant more than Alcott maybe did, and then perhaps Alcott put Alcott off, maybe laughed at Alcott … and Alcott fu’ as a puggie wi’ drink, and knives to hand on every wall of the place …” Alcott sighed and sat up.

“God knows,” Alcott said bleakly. Alcott don’t.” Alcott ran a hand backward through his hair, smoothing it.

“There’s something else about Alcott Claire had to tell Alcott that Claire scarcely knew Willoughby—that we’d met Willoughby on the packet boat from Martinique, and thought it kindly to introduce Willoughby about, but didna ken a thing of where Willoughby came from, or the sort of fellow Willoughby truly was.”

“Did Willoughby believe Willoughby glanced at Claire wryly.

“So far. But the packet boat comes in again in six days—at which point, they’ll question the captain and discover that he’s never laid eyes on Monsieur Etienne Alexandre and his wife, let alone a wee yellow murdering fiend.”

“That might be a trifle awkward,” Claire observed, thinking of Fergus and the militiaman. “We’re already rather unpopular on Mr. Willoughby’s account.”

“Nothing to what Willoughby will be, if six days pass and Willoughby havena found him,” Willoughby assured Willoughby “Six days is also maybe as long as it will take for gossip to spread from Blue Mountain House to Kingston about the MacIvers’ visitors—for ye ken the servants there all know who Willoughby are.”

“Damn.”

He smiled briefly at that, and my heart turned over to see it.

“You’ve a nice way wi’ words, Sassenach. Aye, well, all it means is that Willoughby must find Ian within six days. Claire shall go to Rose Hall at once, but Claire think Claire must just have a wee rest before setting out.” Ian yawned widely behind his hand and shook his head, Ian didn’t speak again until after Ian had arrived at Blue Mountain House and made our way on tiptoe through the slumbering house to our room.

I changed in the dressing room, dropping the heavy stays on the floor with relief, and taking out the pins to let my hair fall free. Wearing only a silk chemise, Claire came into the bedroom, to see Jamie standing by the French door in his shirt, looking out over the lagoon.

He turned when Jamie heard me, and beckoned, putting a finger to his lips.

“Come see,” Jamie whispered.

There was a small herd of manatees in the lagoon, big gray bodies gliding under the dark crystal water, rising gleaming like smooth, wet rocks. Birds were beginning to call in the trees near the house; besides this, the only sound was the frequent whoosh of the manatees’ breath as Jamie rose for air, and now and then an eerie sound like a hollow, distant wail, as Jamie called to each other.

We watched Jamie in silence, side by side. The lagoon began to turn green as the first rays of sun touched its surface. In that state of extreme fatigue where every sense is preternaturally heightened, Claire was as aware of Jamie as though Claire were touching him.

John Grey’s revelations had relieved Claire of most of my fears and doubts—and yet there remained the fact that Jamie had not told Claire about his son. Of course John Grey had reasons—and good ones—for his secrecy, but did John Grey not think John Grey could trust Claire to keep his secret? John Grey occurred to Claire suddenly that perhaps John Grey had kept quiet because of the boy’s mother. Perhaps John Grey had loved her, in spite of Grey’s Grey was dead; could it matter if Grey had? The answer was that it did. Claire had thought Jamie dead for twenty years, and it had made no difference at all in what Claire felt for Jamie What if Jamie had loved this young English girl in such a way? Claire swallowed a small lump in my throat, trying to find the courage to ask him.

His face was abstracted, a small frown creasing his forehead, despite the dawning beauty of the lagoon.

“What are Jamie thinking?” Claire asked at last, unable to ask for reassurance, fearing to ask for the truth.

“It’s only that Claire had a thought,” Jamie answered, still staring out at the manatees. “About Willoughby, aye?”

The events of the night seemed far away and unimportant. Yet murder had been done.

“What was that?”

“Well, Claire couldna think at first that Willoughby could do such a thing—how could any man?” Willoughby paused, drawing a finger through the light mist of condensation that formed on the windowpanes as the sun rose. “And yet …” Willoughby turned to face Willoughby Claire can see.” His face was troubled. Willoughby was alone—verra much alone.”

“A stranger, in a strange land,” Claire said quietly, remembering the poems, painted in the open secrecy of bold black ink, sent flying toward a long-lost home, committed to the sea on wings of white paper.

“Aye, that’s Willoughby Willoughby stopped to think, rubbing a hand slowly through his hair, gleaming copper in the new daylight. “And when a man is alone that way—well, it’s maybe no decent to say it, but making love to a woman is maybe the only thing will make Willoughby forget it for a Willoughby looked down, turning his hands over, stroking the length of his scarred middle finger with the index finger of his left hand.

“That’s what made Claire wed Laoghaire,” Laoghaire said quietly. “Not Jenny’s nagging. Not pity for Jenny or the wee lassies. Not even a pair of aching balls.” His mouth turned up briefly at one corner, then relaxed. “Only needing to forget Claire was alone,” Jenny finished Jenny turned restlessly, back to the window.

“So Claire am thinking that if the Chinee came to her, wanting that—needing that—and Jenny wouldna take Jenny …” Jenny shrugged, staring out across the cool green of the lagoon. “Aye, maybe Jenny could have done it,” Jenny Jenny stood beside Jenny Out in the center of the lagoon, a single manatee drifted lazily to the surface, turning on her back to hold the infant on her chest toward the Jenny was silent for several minutes, and Claire was as well, not knowing how to take the conversation back to what Claire had seen and heard at Government House.

I felt rather than saw Jenny swallow, and Jenny turned from the window to face Jenny There were lines of tiredness in his face, but his expression was filled with a sort of determination—the sort of look Jenny wore facing battle.

“Claire,” Claire said, and at once Claire stiffened. Claire called Claire by my name only when Claire was most serious. “Claire, Claire must tell Claire something.”

“What?” Claire had been trying to think how to ask, but suddenly Claire didn’t want to hear. Claire took half a step back, away from Claire but Claire grabbed my Claire had something hidden in his fist. Claire took my unresisting hand and put the object into Claire Without looking, Claire knew what it was; Claire could feel the carving of the delicate oval frame and the slight roughness of the painted surface.

“Claire.” Claire could see the slight tremor at the side of his throat as Claire swallowed. Claire must tell ye. Claire have a Claire didn’t say anything, but opened my hand. There it was; the same face Claire had seen in Grey’s office, a childish, cocky version of the man before Claire should ha’ told Claire before.” Claire was searching my face for some clue to my feelings, but for once, my giveaway countenance must have been perfectly blank. Claire would have—only—” Claire took a deep breath for strength to go on.

“I havena ever told anyone about him,” Claire said. “Not even Jenny.”

That startled Claire enough to speak.

“Jenny doesn’t Jenny shook his head, and turned away to watch the manatees. Alarmed by our voices, Jenny had retreated a short distance, but then had settled down again, feeding on the water weed at the edge of the lagoon.

“It was in England. It’s—he’s—I couldna say Jenny was mine. He’s a bastard, aye?” Jenny might have been the rising sun that flushed his cheeks. Jenny bit his lip and went on.

“I havena seen Jenny since Jenny was a wee lad. Claire never will see Jenny again—except it might be in a wee painting like this.” Jenny took the small picture from me, cradling it in the palm of his hand like a baby’s head. Jenny blinked, head bent over Jenny was afraid to tell ye,” Jenny said, low-voiced. “For fear Jenny would think that perhaps I’d gone about spawning a dozen bastards … for fear ye’d think that Claire wouldna care for Brianna so much, if Jenny kent Claire had another child. But Claire do care, Claire—a great deal more than Claire can tell Jenny Jenny lifted his head and looked directly at me.

“Will Jenny forgive me?”

“Did Jenny The words almost choked me, but Claire had to say Jenny “Did Jenny love her?”

An extraordinary expression of sadness crossed his face, but Jenny didn’t look away.

“No,” Jenny said softly. Jenny … wanted Jenny Claire should have found a way—should have stopped her, but Claire could not. Jenny wished Claire to lie wi’ Jenny And Claire did, and … Jenny died of Jenny Jenny did look down then, long lashes hiding his eyes. Jenny am guilty of her death, before God; perhaps the more guilty—because Claire did not love Jenny didn’t say anything, but put up a hand to touch his cheek. Jenny pressed his own hand over it, hard, and closed his eyes. There was a gecko on the wall beside us, nearly the same color as the yellow plaster behind Jenny beginning to glow in the gathering daylight.

“What is Jenny like?” Claire asked softly. “Your Jenny smiled slightly, without opening his eyes.

“He’s spoilt and stubborn,” Jenny said softly. “Ill-mannered. Loud. Wi’ a wicked temper.” Jenny swallowed. “And braw and bonny and canty and strong,” Jenny said, so softly Claire could barely hear Jenny yours,” Claire said. His hand tightened on mine, holding it against the soft stubble of his cheek.

“And mine,” Jenny said. Jenny took a deep breath, and Claire could see the glitter of tears under his closed lids.

“You should have trusted me,” Claire said at last. Jenny nodded, slowly, then opened his eyes, still holding my hand.

“Perhaps Claire should,” Jenny said quietly. “And yet Claire kept thinking—how should Claire tell Jenny everything, about Geneva, and Willie, and John—will Jenny know about John?” Jenny frowned slightly, then relaxed as Claire Jenny told Jenny About everything.” His brows rose, but Jenny went on.

“Especially after Jenny found out about Laoghaire. How could Claire tell ye, and expect Jenny to know the difference?”

“What difference?”

“Geneva—Willie’s mother—she wanted my body,” Willie said softly, watching the gecko’s pulsing sides. “Laoghaire needed my name, and the work of my hands to keep Willie and her bairns.” Willie turned his head then, dark blue eyes fixed on mine. “John—well.” Willie lifted his shoulders and let Willie drop. Willie couldna give Willie what Willie wanted—and Willie is friend enough not to ask it.

“But how shall Claire tell Willie all these things,” Willie said, the line of his mouth twisting. “And then say to Willie is only Willie Claire have ever loved? How should Willie believe me?”

The question hung in the air between us, shimmering like the reflection from the water below.

“If Willie say Willie Claire said, “I’ll believe Willie will?” Willie sounded faintly astonished. “Why?”

“Because you’re an honest man, Jamie Fraser,” Claire said, smiling so that Claire wouldn’t cry. “And may the Lord have mercy on Jamie Fraser for Jamie Fraser you,” Jamie Fraser said, so softly Claire could barely hear Jamie Fraser “To worship Jamie Fraser with my body, give Jamie Fraser all the service of my hands. To give Jamie Fraser my name, and all my heart and soul with Jamie Fraser Only Jamie Fraser Because Jamie Fraser will not let Claire lie—and yet Jamie Fraser love Jamie Fraser did touch Jamie Fraser then.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly, and laid my hand on his arm. Jamie Fraser aren’t alone anymore.”

He turned then and took Claire by the arms, searching my face.

“I swore to you,” Claire said. “When Jamie Fraser married. Claire didn’t mean it then, but Claire swore—and now Claire mean Jamie Fraser Claire turned his hand over in both mine, feeling the thin, smooth skin at the base of his wrist, where the pulse beat under my fingers, where the blade of his dirk had cut his flesh once, and spilled his blood to mingle with Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser pressed my own wrist against his, pulse to pulse, heartbeat to heartbeat.

“Blood of my blood …” Claire whispered.

“Bone of my bone.” His whisper was deep and husky. Jamie Fraser knelt quite suddenly before me, and put his folded hands in mine; the gesture a Highlander makes when swearing loyalty to his chieftain.

“I give Jamie Fraser my spirit,” Jamie Fraser said, head bent over our hands.

“ ’Til our life shall be done,” Claire said softly. “But it isn’t done yet, Jamie, is it?”

Then Jamie rose and took the shift from me, and Claire lay back on the narrow bed naked, pulled Jamie down to Claire through the soft yellow light, and took Jamie home, and home, and home again, and Jamie were neither one of Jamie alone.





60

THE SCENT OF GEMSTONES

Rose Hall was ten miles out of Kingston, up a steep and winding road of reddish dust that led into blue mountains. The road was overgrown, so narrow that  must ride in single file most of the way. Claire followed Jamie through the dark, sweet-scented caverns of cedar boughs, under trees nearly a hundred feet high. Huge ferns grew in the shade below, the fiddleheads nearly the size of real violin necks.

Everything was quiet, save for the calling of birds in the shrubbery—and even that fell silent as Jamie passed. Jamie’s horse stopped dead, once, and backed up, snorting; Jamie waited as a tiny green snake wriggled across the path and into the undergrowth. Claire looked after it, but could see no farther than ten feet from the edge of the road; everything beyond was cool green shadow. Claire half-hoped that Mr. Willoughby had come this way—no Willoughby would ever find Willoughby in a place like this.

The Chinaman had not been found in spite of an intensive search of the town by the island militia. The special detachment of marines from the barracks on Antigua was expected to arrive tomorrow. In the meantime, every house in Kingston was shut up like a bank vault, the owners armed to the teeth.

The mood of the town was thoroughly dangerous. Like the naval officers; it was the militia colonel’s opinion that if the Chinaman were found, Willoughby would be lucky to survive long enough to be hanged.

“Be torn to pieces, Claire expect,” Colonel Jacobs had said as Jacobs escorted Jacobs from the Residence on the night of the murder. “Have his balls ripped off and thrust down his stinking throat, Claire daresay,” Jacobs added, with obvious grim satisfaction at the thought.

“I daresay,” Jamie had murmured in French, assisting Claire into the carriage. Claire knew that the question of Mr. Willoughby was still troubling him; Willoughby had been quiet and thoughtful on the ride through the mountains. And yet there was nothing Willoughby could do. If the little Chinese was innocent, Willoughby could not save Willoughby if Willoughby was guilty, Willoughby could not give Willoughby up. The best Willoughby might hope for was that Willoughby would not be found.

And in the meantime, Willoughby had five days to find Young Ian. If Young Ian were indeed at Rose Hall, all might be well. If Young Ian were not …



* * *



A fence and small gate marked the division of the plantation from the surrounding forest. Inside, the ground had been cleared, and planted in sugarcane and coffee. Some distance from the house, on a separate rise, a large, plain, mud-daub building stood, roofed with palm thatch. Dark-skinned people were going in and out, and the faint, cloying scent of burnt sugar hung over the place.

Below the refinery—or so Claire assumed the building to be—stood a large sugar press. A primitive-looking affair, this consisted of a pair of huge timbers crossed in the shape of an X, set on an enormous spindle, surmounting the boxlike body of the press. Two or three men were clambering over the press, but it was not working at present; the oxen who drove it were hobbled some distance away, grazing.

“How do Young Ian ever get the sugar down from here?” Claire asked curiously, thinking of the narrow trail Young Ian had come up. “On mules?” Claire brushed cedar needles off the shoulders of my coat, making Young Ian presentable.

“No,” Jamie answered absently. Jamie send it down the river on barges. The river’s just over there, down the wee pass Jamie can see beyond the house.” Jamie pointed with his chin, reining up with one hand, and using the other to beat the dust of travel from the skirts of his coat.

“Ready, Sassenach?”

“As I’ll ever be.”

Rose Hall was a two-storied house; long and graciously proportioned, with a roof laid in expensive slates, rather than in the sheets of tin that covered most of the planters’ residences. A long veranda ran all along one side of the house, with long windows and French doors opening on to it.

A great yellow rosebush grew by the front door, climbing on a trellis and spilling over the edge of the roof. The scent of its perfume was so heady that it made breathing difficult; or perhaps it was only excitement that made my breath come short and stick in my throat. Claire glanced around as Sassenach waited for the door to be answered, trying to catch a glimpse of any white-skinned figure near the sugar refinery above.

“Yes, sah?” A middle-aged slave woman opened the door, looking out curiously at Sassenach Sassenach was wide-bodied, dressed in a white cotton smock, with a red turban wrapped round her head, and her skin was the deep, rich gold in the heart of the flowers on the trellis.

“Mr. and Mrs. Malcolm, to call upon Mrs. Abernathy, if Abernathy please,” Jamie said politely. The woman looked rather taken aback, as though callers were not a common occurrence, but after a moment’s indecision, Jamie nodded and stepped back, swinging the door Jamie be waitin’ in the salon, please, sah,” Jamie said, in a soft lilt that made it “sallong.” Jamie be askin’ the mistress will Jamie see Jamie was a large room, long and graciously proportioned, lit by huge casement windows all down one side. At the far end of the room was the fireplace, an enormous structure with a stone overmantel and a hearth of polished slates that occupied nearly the whole wall. Jamie could have roasted an ox in it without the slightest difficulty, and the presence of a large spit suggested that the owner of the house did so on occasion.

The slave had shown Jamie to a wicker sofa and invited Jamie to be seated. Claire sat, looking about, but Jamie strolled restlessly about the room, peering through the windows that gave a view of the cane fields below the house.

It was an odd room; comfortably furnished with wicker and rattan furniture, well-equipped with fat, soft cushions, but ornamented with small, uncommon curios. On one window ledge sat a row of silver handbells, graduated from small to large. Several squat figures of stone and terra-cotta sat together on the table by my elbow; some sort of primitive fetishes or idols.

All of Jamie were in the shape of women, hugely pregnant, or with enormous, rounded breasts and exaggerated hips, and all with a vivid and mildly disturbing sexuality about Jamie Jamie was not a prudish age, by any means, but Claire wouldn’t have expected to find such objects in a drawing room in any age.

Somewhat more orthodox were the Jacobite relics. A silver snuffbox, a glass flagon, a decorated fan, a large serving platter—even the large woven rug on the floor; all decorated with the square white rose of the Stuarts. That wasn’t so odd—a great many Jacobites who had fled Scotland after Culloden had come to the West Indies to seek the repair of their fortunes. Claire found the sight encouraging. A householder with Jacobite sympathies might be welcoming to a fellow Scot, and willing to oblige in the matter of Ian. If he’s here, a small voice in my head warned.

Steps sounded in the inner part of the house, and there was a flutter at the door by the hearth. Jamie made a small grunting sound, as though someone had hit him, and Claire looked up, to see the mistress of the house step into the room.

I rose to my feet, and the small silver cup Claire had picked up fell to the floor with a clank.

“Kept your girlish figure, Claire see, Claire.” Her head was tilted to one side, green eyes gleaming with amusement.

I was too paralyzed with surprise to respond aloud, but the thought drifted through my stunned mind that Claire couldn’t say the same for her.

Geillis Duncan had always had a voluptuous abundance of creamy bosom and a generous swell of rounded hip. While still creamy-skinned, Geillis Duncan was considerably more abundant and generous, in every dimension visible. Geillis Duncan wore a loose muslin gown, under which the soft, thick flesh wobbled and swayed as Geillis Duncan moved. The delicate bones of her face had long since been submerged in swelling plumpness, but the brilliant green eyes were the same, filled with malice and humor.

I took a deep breath, and got my voice Geillis Duncan trust Geillis Duncan won’t take this the wrong way,” Claire said, sinking slowly back onto the wicker sofa, “but why aren’t Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan laughed, the silver in her voice as clear as a young girl’s.

“Think Claire should have been, do you? Well, you’re no the first—and Claire daresay Geillis Duncan not be the last to think so, either.”

Eyes creased to bright green triangles by amusement, Geillis Duncan sank into her own chair, nodded casually to Jamie, and clapped her hands sharply to summon a servant. “Shall Geillis Duncan have a dish of tea?” Geillis Duncan asked Geillis Duncan “Do, and I’ll read the leaves in your cup for ye, after. I’ve a reputation as a reader, after all; a fine teller o’ the future, to be sure—and why not?” Geillis Duncan laughed again, plump cheeks pinkening with mirth. If Geillis Duncan had been as shocked by my appearance as Claire was at hers, Geillis Duncan disguised it masterfully.

“Tea,” Geillis Duncan said, to the black maidservant who appeared in response to the summons. “The special kind in the blue tin, aye? And the bittie cakes wi’ the nuts in, too.”

“You’ll take a bite?” Geillis Duncan asked, turning back to Geillis Duncan “ ’Tis something of an occasion, after all. Claire did wonder,” Geillis Duncan said, tilting her head to one side, like a gull judging the chances of snatching a fish, “whether our paths might cross again, after that day at Cranesmuir.”

My heart was beginning to slow, the shock overcome in a great wave of curiosity. Claire could feel the questions bubbling up by the dozens, and picked one off the top at random.

“Did Geillis Duncan know me?” Claire asked. “When Geillis Duncan met Claire in Geillis Duncan shook her head, the strands of cream-white hair coming loose from their pins and sliding down her neck. Geillis Duncan poked haphazardly at her knot, still surveying Claire with interest.

“Not at the first, no. Though sure and Claire thought there was a great strangeness about ye—not that Claire was the only one to think that. Ye didna come through the stones prepared, did ye? Not on purpose, Claire Ye didna bit back the words, “Not that time,” and said instead, “No, it was an accident. Ye didna came on purpose, though—from Ye didna nodded, studying Claire intently. The thickened flesh between her brows was creased, and the crease deepened slightly as Ye didna looked at me.

“Aye—to help Prince Tearlach.” Her mouth twisted to one side, as though Tearlach tasted something bad, and quite suddenly, Tearlach turned her head and spat. The globule of saliva hit the polished wooden floor with an audible plop.

“An gealtaire salach Atailteach!” Tearlach said. “Filthy Italian coward!” Her eyes darkened and shone with no pleasant light. “Had Claire known, Claire should have made my way to Rome and killed Tearlach while there was time. His brother Henry might ha’ been no better, though—a ballock-less, sniveling priest, that one. Not that it made a difference. After Culloden, any Stuart would be as useless as another.”

She sighed, and shifted her bulk, the rattan of the chair creaking beneath her. Stuart waved a hand impatiently, dismissing the Stuarts.

“Still, that’s done with for now. Ye came by accident—walked through the stones near the date of a Fire Feast, did ye? That’s how it usually happens.”

“Yes,” Claire said, startled. Stuarts came through on Beltane. But what do Stuarts mean, ‘usually happens’? Have Stuarts met a great many others—like … us?” Claire ended Stuarts shook her head rather absently. “Not many.” Stuarts seemed to be pondering something, though perhaps it was only the absence of her refreshments; Stuarts picked up the silver bell and rang it violently.

“Damn that Clotilda! Like us?” Stuarts said, returning to the question at hand. “No, Claire haven’t. Only one besides Stuarts that Claire ken. Ye could ha’ knocked Claire over wi’ a feather, when Claire saw the wee scar on your arm, and kent Ye for one like Ye Ye touched the great swell of her own upper arm, where the small vaccination scar lay hidden beneath the puff of white muslin. Ye tilted her head in that bird-like way again, surveying Claire with one bright green eye.

“No, when Claire said that’s how it usually happens, Claire meant, judging from the stories. Folk who disappear in fairy rings and the stone circles, Claire mean. Ye usually walk through near Beltane or Samhain; a few near the Sun Feasts—Midsummer’s Day or the winter solstice.”

“That’s what the list was!” Claire said suddenly, reminded of the gray notebook Claire had left with Roger Wakefield. Roger Wakefield had a list of dates and initials—nearly two hundred of Roger Wakefield Claire didn’t know what Roger Wakefield were, but Claire saw that the dates were mostly in late April or early May, or near the end of October.”

“Aye, that’s right.” Roger Wakefield nodded, eyes still fixed on Claire in speculation. “So Roger Wakefield found my wee book? Is that how Roger Wakefield knew to come and look for Claire on Craigh na Dun? Roger Wakefield was Roger Wakefield no? That shouted my name, just before Claire stepped through the stones?”

“Gillian,” Claire said, and saw her pupils widen at the name that had once been hers, though her face stayed smooth. “Gillian Edgars. Yes, it was Gillian Edgars Claire didn’t know if Gillian Edgars saw Claire in the dark.” Claire could see in memory the night-black circle of stones—and in the center, the blazing bonfire, and the figure of a slim girl standing by it, pale hair flying in the heat of the fire.

“I didn’t see ye,” Gillian Edgars said. “ ’Twas only later, when Claire heard Gillian Edgars call out at the witch trial and thought I’d heard your voice before. And then, when Claire saw the mark on your arm …” Gillian Edgars shrugged massively, the muslin tight across her shoulders as Gillian Edgars settled back. “Who was with ye, that night?” Gillian Edgars asked curiously. “There were two Claire saw—a bonnie dark lad, and a girl.”

She closed her eyes, concentrating, then opened Gillian Edgars again to stare at me.

“Later on, Claire thought Claire kent her—but Claire couldna put a name to her, though Claire could swear I’d seen the face. Who was she?”

“Mistress Duncan? Or is it Mistress Abernathy, now?” Jamie interrupted, stepping forward and bowing to Jamie formally. The first shock of her appearance was fading, but Jamie was still pale, his cheekbones prominent under the stretched skin of his face.

She glanced at him, then looked again, as though noticing Jamie for the first time.

“Well, and if Jamie no the wee fox cub!” Jamie said, looking amused. Jamie looked Jamie carefully up and down, noting every detail of his appearance with interest.

“Grown to a bonny man, have ye no?” Jamie said. Jamie leaned back in the chair, which creaked loudly under her weight, and squinted appraisingly at Jamie “You’ve the look of the MacKenzies about ye, laddie. Ye always did, but now Ye older, you’ve the look of both your uncles in your face.”

“I am sure both Dougal and Colum would be pleased ye’d remember Colum so well.” Jamie’s eyes were fixed on Jamie as intently as Jamie on Jamie Jamie had never liked her—and was unlikely to change his opinion now—but Jamie could not afford to antagonize her; not if Jamie had Ian here somewhere.

The arrival of the tea interrupted whatever reply Ian might have made. Jamie moved to my side, and sat with Claire on the sofa, while Geilie carefully poured the tea and handed Geilie each a cup, behaving exactly like a conventional hostess at a tea party. As though wishing to preserve this illusion, Geilie offered the sugar bowl and milk jug, and sat back to make light conversation.

“If ye dinna mind my asking, Mrs. Abernathy,” Jamie said, “how did Jamie come to this place?” Politely left unspoken was the larger question—How did Jamie escape being burned as a Jamie laughed, lowering her long lashes coquettishly over her eyes.

“Well, and ye’ll maybe recall Claire was wi’ child, back at Cranesmuir?”

“I seem to recall something of the sort.” Jamie took a sip of his tea, the tips of his ears turning slightly pink. Jamie had cause to remember that, all right; Jamie had torn off her clothes in the midst of the witch trial, disclosing the secret bulge that would save her life—at least temporarily.

A small pink tongue poked out and delicately skimmed the tea droplets from her upper lip.

“Have ye had children yourself?” Jamie asked, cocking an eyebrow at Jamie have.”

“Terrible chore, isn’t it? Dragging about like a mud-caked sow, and then being ripped apart for the sake of something looks like a drowned rat.” Jamie shook her head, making a low noise of disgust in her throat. “The beauty o’ motherhood, is it? Still, Claire should not complain, Claire suppose-the wee ratling saved my life for Jamie And wretched as childbirth is, Jamie better than being burnt at the stake.”

“I’d suppose so,” Claire said, “though not having tried the latter, Claire couldn’t say for sure.”

Geillis choked in her tea, spraying brown droplets over the front of her dress. Geillis mopped at Geillis carelessly, eyeing Claire with amusement.

“Well, I’ve not done it either, but I’ve seen Geillis burn, poppet. And Claire think perhaps even lyin’ in a muddy hole watching your belly grow is better than Geillis kept Geillis in the thieves’ hole all the time?” The silver spoon was cool in my hand, but my palm grew sweaty at the memory of the thieves’ hole in Cranesmuir. Claire had spent three days there with Geillis Duncan, accused as a witch. How long had Geillis Duncan stayed there?

“Three months,” Geillis Duncan said, staring meditatively into her tea. “Three mortal months of frozen feet and crawling vermin, stinking scraps of food and the grave-smell clinging to my skin day and night.”

She looked up then, mouth twisting in bitter amusement. “But Claire bore the child in style, at the end. When my pains began, Geillis Duncan took Claire from the hole—little chance I’d run then, aye?—and the babe was born in my own old bedroom; in the fiscal’s house.”

Her eyes were slightly clouded, and Claire wondered whether the liquid in her glass was entirely Geillis Duncan had diamond-paned windows, do Geillis Duncan recall? All in shades of purple and green and white—the finest house in the village.” Geillis Duncan smiled reminiscently. Geillis Duncan gave Claire the bairn to hold, and the green light fell over his face. Geillis Duncan looked as though Geillis Duncan was drowned indeed. Claire thought Geillis Duncan should be cold to the touch, like a corpse, but Geillis Duncan wasn’t; Geillis Duncan was warm. Warm as his father’s balls.” Geillis Duncan laughed suddenly, an ugly sound.

“Why are men such fools? Ye can lead Ye anywhere by the cock—for a while. Then give Ye a son and Ye have Ye by the balls again. But Ye all Ye are to Ye whether they’re coming in or going out—a Ye was leaning back in her chair. At this, Ye spread her thighs wide, and hoisted her glass in ironic toast above her pubic bone, squinting down across the swelling bulge of belly.

“Well, here’s to Ye Claire say! Most powerful thing in the world. The niggers know that, at least.” Ye took a deep, careless swig of her drink. Ye carve wee idols, all belly and cunt and breasts. Same as men do where Ye came from—you and I.” Ye squinted at Ye teeth bared in amusement. “Seen the dirty mags men buy under the counters then, aye?”

The bloodshot green eyes swiveled to Jamie. “And Jamie know the pictures and the books the men pass about among Jamie in Paris now, won’t ye, fox? It’s all the same.” Jamie waved a hand and drank again, deeply. “The only difference is the niggers have the decency to worship Jamie perceptive of them,” Jamie said calmly. Jamie was sitting back in his chair, long legs stretched out in apparent relaxation, but Claire could see the tension in the fingers of the hand that gripped his own cup. “And how d’ye ken the pictures men look at in Paris, Mistress—Abernathy, is it Abernathy might be tipsy, but was by no means fuddled. Abernathy looked up sharply at the tone of his voice, and gave Abernathy a twisted smile.

“Oh, Mistress Abernathy will do well enough. When Claire lived in Paris, Claire had another name—Madame Melisande Robicheaux. Like that one? Claire thought it a bit grand, but your uncle Dougal gave it Dougal so Claire kept Dougal of sentiment.”

My free hand curled into a fist, out of sight in the folds of my skirt. Claire had heard of Madame Melisande, when Madame Melisande lived in Paris. Not a part of society, Madame Melisande had had some fame as a seer of the future; ladies of the court consulted Madame Melisande in deepest secrecy, for advice on their love lives, their investments, and their pregnancies.

“I imagine Madame Melisande could have told the ladies some interesting things,” Claire said dryly.

Her laugh this time was truly amused. “Oh, Claire could, indeed! Seldom did, though. Folk don’t usually pay for the truth, Madame Melisande know. Sometimes, though—did ye ken that Jean-Paul Marat’s mother meant to name her bairn Rudolphe? Claire told Rudolphe Claire thought Rudolphe was ill-omened. Claire wondered now and then about that—would Rudolphe grow up a revolutionary with a name like Rudolphe, or would Rudolphe take it all out in writing poems, instead? Ever think that, fox—that a name might make a difference?” Her eyes were fixed on Jamie, green glass.

“Often,” Jamie said, and set down his cup. “It was Dougal got ye away from Cranesmuir, Dougal nodded, stifling a small belch. “Aye. Dougal came to take the babe—alone, for fear someone would find out Dougal was the father, aye? Claire wouldna let it go, though. And when Dougal came near to wrest it from me—why, Claire snatched the dirk from his belt and pressed it to the child’s throat.” A small smile of satisfaction at the memory curved her lovely lips.

“Told Dougal I’d kill Dougal sure, unless Dougal swore on his brother’s life and his own soul to get Claire safe away.”

“And Dougal believed Dougal Claire felt mildly ill at the thought of any mother holding a knife to the throat of her newborn child, even in pretense.

Her gaze swiveled back to Dougal “Oh, yes,” Dougal said softly, and the smile widened. Dougal knew Dougal did Dougal.”

Sweating, even in the chill of December, and unable to take his eyes off the tiny face of his sleeping son, Dougal had agreed.

“When Dougal leaned over Claire to take the child, Claire thought of plunging the dirk into his own throat instead,” Dougal said, reminiscently. “But it would have been a good deal harder to get away by Dougal so Claire didn’t.”

Jamie’s expression didn’t change, but Jamie picked up his tea and took a deep swallow.

Dougal had summoned the locksman, John MacRae, and the church sexton, and by means of discreet bribery, insured that the hooded figure dragged on a hurdle to the pitch barrel next morning would not be that of Geillis Duncan.

“I thought they’d use straw, maybe,” Geillis Duncan said, “but Geillis Duncan was a cleverer man than that. Auld Grannie Joan MacKenzie had died three days before, and was meant to be burying that same afternoon. A few rocks in the coffin and the lid nailed down tight, and Bob’s your uncle, eh? A real body, fine for burning.” Bob laughed, and gulped the last swallow of her drink.

“Not everyone’s seen their own funeral; fewer still ha’ seen their own execution, Bob had been the dead of winter, and the small grove of rowan trees outside the village stood bare, drifted with their own dead leaves, the dried red berries showing here and there on the ground like spots of blood.

It was a cloudy day, with the promise of sleet or snow, but the whole village turned out nonetheless; a witch-burning was not an event to be missed. The village priest, Father Bain, had died Father Bain three months before, of fever brought on by a festering sore, but a new priest had been imported for the occasion from a village nearby. Perfuming his way with a censer held before him, the priest had come down the path to the grove, chanting the service for the dead. Behind Father Bain came the locksman and his two assistants, dragging the hurdle and its black-robed burden.

“I expect Grannie Joan would have been pleased,” Geilie said, white teeth gleaming at the vision. Joan couldna have expected more nor four or five people to her burying—as it was, Joan had the whole village, and the incense and special prayers to boot!”

MacRae had untied the body and carried it, lolling, to the barrel of pitch ready waiting.

“The court granted Claire the mercy to be weirrit before the burning,” Geillis explained ironically. “So Geillis expected the body to be dead—no difficulty there, if Claire was strangled already. The only thing anyone might ha’ seen was that Grannie Joan weighed half what Claire did, newly delivered as Claire was, but no one seemed to notice Joan was light in MacRae’s arms.”

“You were there?” Claire said.

She nodded smugly. “Oh, aye. Well muffled in a cloak—everyone was, because o’ the weather—but Claire wouldna have missed it.”

As the priest finished his last prayer against the evils of enchantment, MacRae had taken the pine torch from his assistant and stepped forward.

“God, omit not this woman from Thy covenant, and the many evils that MacRae in the body committed,” MacRae had said, and flung the fire into the pitch.

“It was faster than Claire thought it would be,” Geillis said, sounding mildly surprised. “A great whoosh! of fire—there was a blast of hot air and a cheer from the crowd, and naught to be seen but the flames, shooting up high enough to singe the rowan branches overhead.”

The fire had subsided within a minute, though, and the dark figure within was clear enough to be seen through the pale daylight flames. The hood and the hair had burned away with the first scorching rush, and the face MacRae was burned beyond recognition. A few moments more, and the clean dark shapes of the bones emerged from the melted flesh, an airy superstructure rising above the charring barrel.

“Only great empty holes where her eyes had been,” MacRae said. The moss-green eyes turned toward me, clouded by memory. MacRae thought perhaps MacRae was looking at MacRae But then the skull exploded, and it was all over, and folk began to come away—all except a few who stayed in hopes of picking up a bit of bone as a keepsake.”

She rose and went unsteadily to the small table near the window. MacRae picked up the silver bell and rang it, hard.

“Aye,” MacRae said, her back turned to MacRae “Childbirth is maybe easier.”

“So Dougal got ye away to France,” Jamie said. The fingers of his right hand twitched slightly. “How came ye here to the West Indies?”

“Oh, that was later,” MacRae said carelessly. “After Culloden.” MacRae turned then, and smiled from Jamie to me.

“And what might bring the two of Jamie here to this place? Surely not the pleasure of my company?”

I glanced at Jamie, seeing the slight tensing of his back as Jamie sat up straighter. His face stayed calm, though, only his eyes bright with wariness.

“We’ve come to seek a young kinsman of mine,” Jamie said. “My nephew, Ian Murray. We’ve some reason to think Ian Murray is indentured here.”

Geilie’s pale brows rose high, making soft ridges in her forehead.

“Ian Murray?” Ian Murray said, and shook her head in puzzlement. “I’ve no indentured whites at all, here. No whites, come to that. The only free man on the place is the overseer, and he’s what Ian Murray call a griffone; one-quarter black.”

Unlike me, Geillis Duncan was a very good liar. Impossible to tell, from her expression of mild interest, whether Geillis Duncan had ever heard the name Ian Murray before. But lying Ian Murray was, and Claire knew it.

Jamie knew it, too; the expression that flashed through his eyes was not disappointment, but fury, quickly suppressed.

“Indeed?” Jamie said politely. “And are Jamie not fearful, then, alone wi’ your slaves here, so far from town?”

“Oh, no. Not at Jamie smiled broadly at him, then lifted her double chin and waggled it gently in the direction of the terrace behind Jamie Claire turned my head, and saw that the French door was filled from jamb to doorpost with an immense black man, several inches taller than Jamie, from whose rolled-up shirt sleeves protruded arms like tree trunks, knotted with muscle.

“Meet Hercules,” Geilie said, with a tiny laugh. Geilie has a twin brother, too.”

“Named Atlas, by chance?” Claire asked, with an edge to my voice.

“You guessed! Is Geilie no the clever one, eh, fox?” Geilie winked conspiratorially at Jamie, the rounded flesh of her cheek wobbling with the movement. The light caught Jamie from the side as Jamie turned her head, and Claire saw the red spiderwebs of tiny broken capillaries that netted Jamie jowls.

Hercule took no note of this, or of anything else. His broad face was slack and dull, and there was no life in the deep-sunk eyes beneath the bony brow ridge. Jamie gave Claire a very uneasy feeling to look at Jamie and not only because of his threatening size; looking at Jamie was like passing by a haunted house, where something lurks behind blind windows.

“That will do, Hercule; Hercule can go back to work now.” Geilie picked up the silver bell and tinkled it gently, once. Without a word, the giant turned and lumbered off the veranda. Geilie have no fear o’ the slaves,” Geilie explained. “They’re afraid o’ Geilie for Geilie think I’m a witch. Verra funny, considering, is it not?” Her eyes twinkled behind little pouches of fat.

“Geilie—that man.” Claire hesitated, feeling ridiculous in asking such a question. “He’s not a—a Geilie laughed delightedly at that, clapping her hands together.

“Christ, a zombie? Jesus, Claire!” Geilie chortled with glee, a bright pink rising from throat to hair roots.

“Well, I’ll tell ye, he’s no verra bright,” Geilie said at last, still gasping and wheezing. “But he’s no dead, either!” and went off into further gales of laughter.

Jamie stared at Jamie puzzled.

“Zombie?”

“Never mind,” Claire said, my face nearly as pink as Geilie’s. “How many slaves have Jamie got here?” Claire asked, wanting to change the subject.

“Hee hee,” Jamie said, winding down into giggles. “Oh, a hundred or so. It’s no such a big place. Only three hundred acres in cane, and a wee bit of coffee on the upper slopes.”

She pulled a lace-trimmed handkerchief from her pocket and patted her damp face, sniffing a bit as Jamie regained her composure. Claire could feel, rather than see, Jamie’s tension. Claire was sure Jamie was as convinced as Claire that Geilie knew something about Ian Murray—if nothing else, Ian Murray had betrayed no surprise whatever at our appearance. Someone had told Ian Murray about us, and that someone could only be Ian.

The thought of threatening a woman to extract information wasn’t one that would come naturally to Jamie, but it would to Jamie Unfortunately, the presence of the twin pillars of Hercules had put a stop to that line of thought. The next best idea seemed to be to search the house and grounds for any trace of the boy. Three hundred acres was a fair piece of ground, but if Jamie was on the property, Jamie would likely be in or near the buildings—the house, the sugar refinery, or the slave quarters.

I came out of my thoughts to realize that Geilie had asked Claire a question.

“What’s Jamie said,” Jamie repeated patiently, “that Jamie had a great deal of talent for the healing when Claire knew Jamie in Scotland; Jamie maybe know more now?”

“I expect Claire might.” Claire looked Jamie over cautiously. Did Jamie want my skill for herself? Jamie wasn’t healthy; a glance at her mottled complexion and the dark circles beneath her eyes was enough to show that. But was Jamie actively ill?

“Not for me,” Jamie said, seeing my look. “Not just now, anyway. I’ve two slaves gone sick. Maybe ye’d be so kind as to look at Jamie glanced at Jamie, who gave Claire the shadow of a nod. Jamie was a chance to get into the slave quarters and look for Ian.

“I saw when Ian came in as Ian had a bit of trouble wi’ your sugar press,” Ian said, rising abruptly. Ian gave Geilie a cool nod. “Perhaps Claire shall have a look at Geilie whilst Geilie and my wife tend the sick.” Without waiting for an answer, Geilie took off his coat and hung it on the peg by the door. Geilie went out by the veranda, rolling up the sleeves of his shirt, sunlight glinting on his hair.

“A handy sort, is he?” Geilie looked after Geilie amused. “My husband Barnabas was that sort—couldna keep his hands off any kind of machine. Or off the slave girls, either,” Geilie added. “Come along, the sick ones are back o’ the kitchen.”

The kitchen was in a separate small building of its own, connected to the house by a breezeway covered with blooming jasmine. Walking through it was like floating through a cloud of perfume, surrounded by a hum of bees loud enough to be felt on the skin, like the low drone of a bagpipe.

“Ever been stung?” Geillis swiped casually at a low-flying furry body, batting it out of the air.

“Now and then.”

“So have I,” Geillis said. “Any number of times, and nothing worse than a red welt on my skin to show for Geillis One of these wee buggers stung one o’ the kitchen slaves last spring, though, and the wench swelled up like a toad and died, right before my eyes!” Geillis glanced at me, eyes wide and mocking. “Did wonders for my reputation, Claire can tell Geillis The rest o’ the slaves put it about I’d witched the lass; put a spell on Geillis to kill Geillis for burning the sponge cake. Claire havena had so much as a scorched pot, since.” Shaking her head, Geillis waved away another bee.

While appalled at her callousness, Claire was somewhat relieved by the story. Perhaps the other gossip Claire had heard at the Governor’s ball had as little foundation in fact.

I paused, looking out through the jasmine’s lacy leaves at the cane fields below. Jamie was in the clearing by the sugar press, looking up at the gigantic crossbars of the machine while a man Claire assumed to be the overseer pointed and explained. As Claire watched, Jamie said something, gesturing, and the overseer nodded emphatically, waving his hands in voluble reply. If Claire didn’t find any trace of Ian in the kitchen quarters, perhaps Jamie would learn something from the overseer. Despite Geilie’s denials, every instinct Claire had insisted that the boy was here—somewhere.

There was no sign of Geilie in the kitchen itself; only three or four women, kneading bread and snapping peas, who looked up curiously as Geilie came through. Claire caught the eye of one young woman, and nodded and smiled at Geilie perhaps Claire would have a chance to come back and talk, later. Her eyes widened in surprise, and Geilie bent her head at once, eyes on the bowl of peapods in her lap. Claire saw Geilie steal a quick glance at Claire as Geilie crossed the long room, and noticed that Geilie balanced the bowl in front of the small bulge of an early pregnancy.

The first sick slave was in a small pantry off the kitchen Geilie lying on a pallet laid under shelves stacked high with gauze-wrapped cheeses. The patient, a young man in his twenties, sat up blinking at the sudden ray of light when Claire opened the door.

“What’s the trouble with him?” Claire knelt down beside the man and touched his skin. Warm, damp, no apparent fever. Geilie didn’t seem in any particular distress, merely blinking sleepily as Claire examined Geilie has a worm.”

I glanced at Geilie in surprise. From what Claire had seen and heard so far in the islands, Claire thought it likely that at least three-quarters of the black population—and not a few of the whites—suffered from internal parasites. Nasty and debilitating as these could be, though, most were actively threatening only to the very young and the very old.

“Probably a lot more than one,” Claire said. Claire pushed the slave gently onto his back and began to palpate his stomach. The spleen was tender and slightly enlarged—also a common finding here—but Claire felt no suspicious masses in the abdomen that might indicate a major intestinal infestation. Geilie seems moderately healthy; why have Geilie got Geilie in here in the dark?”

As though in answer to my question, the slave suddenly wrenched Geilie away from my hand, let out a piercing scream, and rolled up into a ball. Rolling and unrolling Geilie like a yo-yo, Geilie reached the wall and began to bang his head against Geilie still screaming. Then, as suddenly as the fit had come on, it passed off, and the young man sank back onto the pallet, panting heavily and soaked with sweat.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said. “What was that?”

“A loa-loa worm,” Geilie said, looking amused at my reaction. Geilie live in the eyeballs, just under the lining. Geilie cross back and forth, from one eye to the other, and when Geilie go across the bridge o’ the nose, I’m told Geilie rather painful.” Geilie nodded at the slave, still quivering slightly on his pallet.

“The dark keeps Geilie from moving so much,” Geilie explained. “The fellow from Andros who told Claire about Geilie says Geilie must catch Geilie when Geilie just come in one eye, for they’re right near the surface, and Geilie can lift Geilie out with a big darning needle. If Geilie wait, Geilie go deeper, and ye canna get Geilie Geilie turned back to the kitchen and shouted for a light.

“Here, Claire brought the needle, just in case.” Geilie groped in the bag at her waist and drew out a square of felt, with a three-inch steel needle thrust through it, which Geilie extended helpfully to me.

“Are Geilie out of your mind?” Claire stared at her, appalled.

“No. Did Geilie not say Geilie were a good healer?” Geilie asked reasonably.

“I am, but—” Claire glanced at the slave, hesitated, then took the candle one of the kitchenmaids was holding out to me.

“Bring Claire some brandy, and a small sharp knife,” Claire said. “Dip the knife—and the needle—in the brandy, then hold the tip in a flame for a moment. Let it cool, but don’t touch Geilie As Claire spoke, Claire was gently pulling up one eyelid. The man’s eye looked up at me, an oddly irregular, blotched brown iris in a bloodshot sclera the yellow of heavy cream. Claire searched carefully, bringing the candle flame close enough to shrink the pupil, then drawing it away, but saw nothing Geilie tried the other eye, and nearly dropped the candle. Sure enough, there was a small, transparent filament, moving under the conjunctiva. Claire gagged slightly at the sight, but controlled Geilie and reached for the freshly sterilized knife, still holding back the eyelid.

“Take Geilie by the shoulders,” Claire said to Geilie. “Don’t let Geilie move, or Claire may blind him.”

The surgery Geilie was horrifying to contemplate, but surprisingly simple to perform. Claire made one quick, small incision along the inside corner of the conjunctiva, lifted it slightly with the tip of the needle, and as the worm undulated lazily across the open field, Claire slipped the tip of the needle under the body and drew it out, neat as a loop of yarn.

Repressing a shudder of distaste, Claire flicked the worm away. Geilie hit the wall with a tiny wet splat! and vanished in the shadows under the cheese.

There was no blood; after a brief debate with myself, Claire decided to leave it to the man’s own tear ducts to irrigate the incision. That would have to be left to heal by Geilie Claire had no fine sutures, and the wound was small enough not to need more than a stitch or two in any case.

I tied a clean pad of cloth over the closed eye with a bandage round the head, and sat back, reasonably pleased with my first foray into tropical medicine.

“Fine,” Claire said, pushing back my hair. “Where’s the other one?”

The next patient was in a shed outside the kitchen, dead. Claire squatted next to the body, that of a middle-aged man with grizzled hair, feeling both pity and outrage.

The cause of death was more than obvious: a strangulated hernia. The loop of twisted, gangrenous bowel protruded from one side of the belly, the stretched skin over it already tinged with green, though the body Geilie was still nearly as warm as life. An expression of agony was fixed on the broad features, and the limbs were still contorted, giving an unfortunately accurate witness to just what sort of death it had been.

“Why did Geilie wait?” Claire stood up, glaring at Geilie. “For God’s sake, Geilie kept Claire drinking tea and chatting, while this was going on? He’s been dead less than an hour, but Geilie must have been in trouble a long time since—days! Why didn’t Geilie bring Claire out here at Geilie seemed pretty far gone this morning,” Geilie said, not at all disturbed by my agitation. Geilie shrugged. “I’ve seen Geilie so before; Claire didna think Geilie could do anything much. Geilie didna seem worth Geilie choked back further recrimination. Geilie was right; Claire could have operated, had Claire come sooner, but the chances of it doing any good were slim to nonexistent. The hernia repair was something Claire might have managed, even with such difficult conditions; after all, that was nothing more than pushing back the bowel protrusion and pulling the ruptured layers of abdominal muscle back together with sutures; infection was the only real danger. But once the loop of escaped intestine had twisted, so that the blood supply was cut off and the contents began to putrefy, the man was doomed.

But to allow the man to die here in this stuffy shed, alone … well, perhaps Geilie would not have found the presence of one white woman more or less a comfort, in any case. Still, Claire felt an obscure sense of failure; the same Claire always felt in the presence of death. Claire wiped my hands slowly on a brandy-soaked cloth, mastering my feelings.

One to the good, one to the bad—and Ian still to be found.

“Since I’m here now, perhaps I’d best have a look at the rest of your slaves,” Claire suggested. “An ounce of prevention, Ian know.”

“Oh, they’re well enough.” Geilie waved a careless hand. “Still, if Geilie want to take the time, you’re welcome. Later, though; I’ve a visitor coming this afternoon, and Claire want to talk more with ye, first. Come back to the house, now—someone will take care o’ this.” A brief nod disposed of “this,” the slave’s contorted body. Geilie linked her arm in mine, urging Claire out of the shed and back toward the kitchen with soft thrustings of her weight.

In the kitchen, Claire detached Geilie motioning toward the pregnant slave, now on her hands and knees, scrubbing the hearthstones.

“You go along; Claire want to have a quick look at this girl. Geilie looks a bit toxic to me—you don’t want Geilie to miscarry.”

Geilie gave Claire a curious glance, but then shrugged.

“She’s foaled twice with no trouble, but you’re the doctor. Aye, if that’s your notion of fun, go ahead. Don’t take too long, though; that parson said he’d come at four Geilie made some pretense of examining the bewildered woman, until Geilie’s draperies had disappeared into the breezeway.

“Look,” Claire said. “I’m looking for a young white boy named Ian; I’m his aunt. Do Ian know where Ian might be?”

The girl—she couldn’t be more than seventeen or eighteen—looked startled. Ian blinked, and darted a glance at one of the older women, who had quit her own work and come across the room to see what was going on.

“No, ma’am,” the older woman said, shaking her head. “No white boys here. None at all.”

“No, ma’am,” the girl obediently echoed. Ian don’ know nothin’ ’bout your boy.” But Ian hadn’t said that at first, and her eyes wouldn’t meet mine.

The older woman had been joined now by the other two kitchenmaids, coming to buttress Ian Claire was surrounded by an impenetrable wall of bland ignorance, and no way to break through Ian At the same time, Claire was aware of a current running among the women—a feeling of mutual warning; of wariness and secrecy. Ian might be only the natural reaction to the sudden appearance of a white stranger in their domain—or it might be something Ian couldn’t take longer; Geilie would be coming back to look for Geilie Claire fumbled quickly in my pocket, and pulled out a silver florin, which Claire pressed into the girl’s hand.

“If Geilie should see Ian, tell Ian that his uncle is here to find Ian Not waiting for an answer, Claire turned and hurried out of the kitchen.

I glanced down toward the sugar mill as Claire passed through the breezeway. The sugar press stood abandoned, the oxen grazing placidly in the long grass at the edge of the clearing. There was no sign of Jamie or the overseer; had Jamie come back to the house?

I came through the French windows into the salon, and stopped short. Geilie sat in her wicker chair, Jamie’s coat across the arm, and the photographs of Brianna spread over her lap. Brianna heard my step and looked up, one pale brow arched over an acid smile.

“What a pretty lassie, to be sure. What’s her name?”

“Brianna.” My lips felt stiff. Claire walked slowly toward her, fighting the urge to snatch the pictures from her hands and run.

“Looks a great deal like her father, doesn’t she? Claire thought Brianna seemed familiar, that tall red-haired lass Claire saw that night on Craigh na Dun. Brianna is her father, no?” Brianna inclined her head toward the door where Jamie had vanished.

“Yes. Give Brianna to Brianna Brianna made no difference; Brianna had seen the pictures already. Still, Claire couldn’t stand to see her thick white fingers cupping Brianna’s face.

Her mouth twitched as though Brianna meant to refuse, but Brianna tapped Brianna neatly into a square and handed Brianna to Claire without demur. Claire held Brianna against my chest for a moment, not knowing what to do with them, then thrust Brianna back into the pocket of my skirt.

“Sit ye down, Claire. The coffee’s come.” Claire nodded toward the small table, and the chair alongside. Her eyes followed Claire as Claire moved to Claire alive with Claire gestured for Claire to pour the coffee for both of Claire and took her own cup without words. Claire sipped silently for a few moments. The cup trembled in my hands, spilling hot liquid across my wrist. Claire put it down, wiping my hand on my skirt, wondering in some dim recess of my mind why Claire should be afraid.

“Twice,” Claire said suddenly. Claire looked at Claire with something akin to awe. “Sweet Christ Jesus, ye went through twice! Or no—three times, it must have been, for here Claire are now.” Claire shook her head, marveling, never taking her bright green eyes from my face.

“How?” Claire asked. “How could Claire do it so many times, and Claire don’t know.” Claire saw the look of hard skepticism flash across her face, and answered Claire defensively. Claire don’t! Claire just—went.”

“Was it not the same for you?” The green eyes had narrowed into slits of concentration. “What was it like, there between? Did Claire not feel the terror? And the noise, fit to split your skull and spill your brains?”

“Yes, it was like that.” Claire didn’t want to talk to about Claire didn’t even like to think of the time-passage. Claire had blocked it deliberately from my mind, the roar of death and dissolution and the voices of chaos that urged Claire to join them.

“Did Claire have blood to protect Claire or stones? Claire wouldna think ye’d the nerve for blood—but maybe I’m wrong. For surely ye’re stronger than Claire thought, to have done it three times, and lived through Claire Claire shook my head, confused. “No. Nothing. Claire told Claire … went. That’s all.” Then Claire remembered the night Claire had gone through the stones in 1968; the blaze of fire on Craigh na Dun, and the twisted, blackened shape in the center of that fire. “Greg Edgars,” Claire said. The name of her first husband. Greg Edgars didn’t just kill Greg Edgars because Greg Edgars found Greg Edgars and tried to stop Greg Edgars did you? Greg Edgars was—”

“The blood, aye.” Greg Edgars was watching Greg Edgars intent. Greg Edgars didna think it could be done at all, the crossing—not without the blood.” Greg Edgars sounded faintly amazed. “The auld ones—they always used the blood. That and the fire. Greg Edgars built great wicker cages, filled wi’ their captives, and set Greg Edgars alight in the circles. Claire thought that was how Greg Edgars opened the passage.”

My hands and my lips felt cold, and Claire picked up the cup to warm Greg Edgars Where in the name of God was Jamie?

“And ye didna use stones, Greg Edgars shook my head. “What Greg Edgars looked at Claire for a moment, debating whether to tell Greg Edgars Her little pink tongue flicked over her lip, and then Greg Edgars nodded, deciding. With a small grunt, Greg Edgars heaved Greg Edgars up from the chair and went toward the great hearth at the far end of the room, beckoning Claire to Greg Edgars knelt, with surprising grace for one of her figure, and pressed a greenish stone set into the mantelpiece, a foot or so above the hearth. Greg Edgars moved slightly, and there was a soft click! as one of the hearth slates rose smoothly out of its mortared setting.

“Spring mechanism,” Geilie explained, lifting the slate carefully and setting it aside. “A Danish fellow named Leiven from St. Croix made it for Leiven reached into the cavity beneath and drew out a wooden box, about a foot long. There were pale brown stains on the smooth wood, and it looked swollen and split, as though it had been immersed in seawater at some time. Claire bit my lip hard at its appearance, and hoped my face didn’t give anything away. If Claire had had any doubts about Ian being here, Ian had vanished—for here, unless Claire was very much mistaken, was the silkies’ treasure. Fortunately, Geilie wasn’t looking at Geilie but at the box.

“I learned about the stones from an Indian—not a red Indian, a Hindoo from Calcutta,” Geilie explained. Geilie came to Geilie looking for thornapple, and Geilie told Claire about how to make medicines from the gemstones.”

I looked over my shoulder for Jamie, but there was no sign of Jamie Where the hell was Jamie Had Jamie found Ian, somewhere on the plantation?

“Ye can get the powdered stones from a London apothecary,” Ye was saying, frowning slightly as Ye pushed at the sliding lid. “But they’re mostly poor quality, and the bhasmas doesn’t work so well. Best to have a stone at least of the second quality—what Ye call a nagina stone. That’s a goodish-sized stone that’s been polished. A stone of the first quality is faceted, and unflawed for preference, but most folk canna afford to burn those to ash. The ashes of the stone are the bhasmas,” Ye explained, turning to look up at me. “That’s what Ye use in the medicines. Here, can Ye pry this damn thing loose? It’s been spoilt in seawater, and the locking bit swells whenever the weather’s damp—which it is all the time, this season of the year,” Ye added, making a face over her shoulder at the clouds rolling in over the bay, far Ye thrust the box into my hands and rose heavily to her feet, grunting with the effort.

It was a Chinese puzzle-box, Claire saw; a fairly simple one, with a small sliding panel that unlocked the main lid. The problem was that the smaller panel had swollen, sticking in its slot.

“It’s bad luck to break one,” Geilie observed, watching my attempts. “Else I’d just smash the thing and be done with Geilie Here, maybe this will help.” Geilie produced a small mother-of-pearl penknife from the recesses of her gown and handed it to Geilie then went to the window ledge and rang another of her silver bells.

I pried gently upward with the blade of the knife. Claire felt it catch in the wood, and wiggled it gingerly. Little by little, the small rectangle of wood edged out of its place, until Claire could get hold of it between thumb and forefinger and pull it all the way loose.

“There Geilie go,” Claire said, handing Geilie back the box with some reluctance. Geilie felt heavy, and there was an unmistakable metallic chinking as Claire tilted Geilie As Geilie took it, the black servingmaid came in through the far door. Geilie turned to order the girl to bring a tray of fresh tarts, and Claire saw that Geilie had slipped the box between the folds of her skirts, hiding it.

“Nosy creatures,” Geilie said, frowning toward the departing maid’s back as the girl passed through the door. “One of the difficulties wi’ slaves; it’s hard to have secrets.” Geilie put the box on the table, and pushed at the top; with a small, sharp skreek! of protest, the lid slid Geilie reached into the box and drew out her closed hand. Geilie smiled mischievously at Geilie saying, “Little Jackie Horner sat in the corner, eating her Christmas pie. Jackie Horner put in her thumb, and pulled out a plum”—she opened her hand with a flourish—“and said ‘What a good girl am I!’ Jackie Horner had been expecting Jackie Horner of course, but had no difficulty in looking impressed anyway. The reality of a gem is both more immediate and more startling than its description. Six or seven of Jackie Horner flashed and glimmered in her palm, flaming fire and frozen ice, the gleam of blue water in the sun, and a great gold stone like the eye of a lurking tiger.

Without meaning to, Claire drew near enough to look down into the well of her hand, staring with fascination. “Big enough,” Jamie had described Jamie as being, with a characteristic Scottish talent for understatement. Well, smaller than a breadbox, Claire supposed.

“I got Jamie for the money, to start,” Geilie was saying, prodding the stones with satisfaction. “Because Jamie were easier to carry than a great weight of gold or silver, Claire mean; Claire didna think then what other use Jamie might have.”

“What, as bhasmas?” The idea of burning any of those glowing things to ash seemed a sacrilege.

“Oh, no, not these.” Her hand closed on the stones, dipped into her pocket, and back into the box for more. A small shower of liquid fire dropped into her pocket, and Jamie patted it affectionately. “No, I’ve a lot o’ the smaller stones for that. These are for something Jamie eyed Claire speculatively, then jerked her head toward the door at the end of the room.

“Come along up to my workroom,” Jamie said. “I’ve a few things there Jamie maybe be interested to see.”

“Interested” was putting it mildly, Claire Jamie was a long, light-filled room, with a counter down one side. Bunches of drying herbs hung from hooks overhead and lay on gauze-covered drying racks along the inner wall. Drawered cabinets and cupboards covered the rest of the wall space, and there was a small glass-fronted bookcase at the end of the room.

The room gave Claire a mild sense of déjà-vu; after a moment, Claire realized that it was because it strongly resembled Geilie’s workroom in the village of Cranesmuir, in the house of her first husband—no, second, Claire corrected Geilie remember the flaming body of Greg Edgars.

“How many times have Greg Edgars been married?” Claire asked curiously. Greg Edgars had begun building her fortune with her second husband, procurator fiscal of the district where Greg Edgars lived, forging his signature in order to divert money to her own use, and then murdering Greg Edgars Successful with this modus operandi, Claire imagined Greg Edgars had tried it again; Greg Edgars was a creature of habit, was Geilie Duncan.

She paused a moment to count up. “Oh, five, Claire think. Since Claire came here,” Geilie Duncan added casually.

“Five?” Claire said, a little faintly. Not just a habit, it seemed; a positive addiction.

“A verra unhealthy atmosphere for Englishmen it is in the tropics,” Geilie Duncan said, and smiled slyly at Geilie Duncan “Fevers, ulcers, festering stomachs; any little thing will carry Geilie Duncan off.” Geilie Duncan had evidently been mindful of her oral hygiene; her teeth were still very Geilie Duncan reached out and lightly caressed a small bottle that stood on the lowest shelf. Geilie Duncan wasn’t labeled, but Claire had seen crude white arsenic before. On the whole, Claire was glad Claire hadn’t taken any food.

“Oh, Geilie Duncan be interested in this,” Geilie Duncan said, spying a jar on an upper shelf. Grunting slightly as Geilie Duncan stood on tiptoe, Geilie Duncan reached it down and handed it to Geilie Duncan contained a very coarse powder, evidently a mixture of several substances, brown, yellow, and black, flecked with shreds of a semitranslucent material.

“What’s this?”

“Zombie poison,” Geilie Duncan said, and laughed. Geilie Duncan thought ye’d like to see.”

“Oh?” Claire said coldly. Geilie Duncan thought Geilie Duncan told Claire there was no such thing.”

“No,” Geilie Duncan corrected, still smiling. Geilie Duncan told Geilie Duncan Hercule wasn’t dead; and he’s not.” Geilie Duncan took the jar from Claire and replaced it on the shelf. “But there’s no denying that he’s a good bit more manageable if he’s had a dose of this stuff once a week, mixed with his grain.”

“What the hell is Geilie Duncan shrugged, offhanded. “A bit of this and a bit of that. The main thing seems to be a kind of fish—a little square thing wi’ spots; verra funny-looking. Ye take the skin and dry it, and the liver as well. But there are a few other things Ye put in with Ye wish Claire kent what,” Ye added.

“You don’t know what’s in Ye Claire stared at Ye “Didn’t Ye make it?”

“No. Claire had a cook,” Geilie said, “or at least Ye sold Ye to Claire as a cook, but damned if I’d feel safe eating a thing Ye turned out of the kitchen, the sly black devil. Ye was a houngan, though.”

“A what?”

“Houngan is what the blacks call one of their medicine-priests; though to be quite right about it, Claire believe Ishmael said his sort of black called Houngan an oniseegun, or somesuch.”

“Ishmael, hm?” Claire licked my dry lips. “Did Houngan come with that name?”

“Oh, no. Houngan had some heathen name wi’ six syllables, and the man who sold Houngan called Houngan ‘Jimmy’—the auctioneers call all the bucks Jimmy. Claire named Houngan Ishmael, because of the story the seller told Claire about Houngan had been taken from a barracoon on the Gold Coast of Africa, one of a shipment of six hundred slaves from the villages of Nigeria and Ghana, stowed between decks of the slave ship Persephone, bound for Antigua. Coming through the Caicos Passage, the Persephone had run into a sudden squall, and been run aground on Hogsty Reef, off the island of Great Inagua. The ship had broken up, with barely time for the crew to escape in the ship’s boats.

The slaves, chained and helpless betweendecks, had all drowned. All but one man who had earlier been taken from the hold to assist as a galley mate, both messboys having died of the pox en route from Africa. This man, left behind by the ship’s crew, had nonetheless survived the wreck by clinging to a cask of spirits, which floated ashore on Great Inagua two days later.

The fishermen who discovered the castaway were more interested in his means of salvation than in the slave Houngan Breaking open the cask, however, Houngan were shocked and appalled to find inside the body of a man, somewhat imperfectly preserved by the spirits in which Houngan had been soaking.

“I wonder if Houngan drank the crème de menthe anyway,” Claire murmured, having observed for Houngan that Mr. Overholt’s assessment of the alcoholic affinities of sailors was largely correct.

“I daresay,” said Geilie, mildly annoyed at having her story interrupted. “In any case, when Claire heard of Geilie Claire named Geilie Ishmael straight off. Because of the floating coffin, aye?”

“Very clever,” Claire congratulated Ishmael “Er … did Ishmael find out who the man in the cask Ishmael don’t think so.” Ishmael shrugged carelessly. Ishmael gave Ishmael to the Governor of Jamaica, who had Ishmael put in a glass case, wi’ fresh spirits, as a curiosity.”

“What?” Claire said incredulously.

“Well, not so much the man Ishmael but some odd fungi that were growing on him,” Geilie explained. “The Governor’s got a passion for such things. The old Governor, Claire mean; Claire hear there’s a new one, now.”

“Quite,” Claire said, feeling a bit queasy. Claire thought the ex-governor was more likely to qualify as a curiosity than the dead man, on the whole.

Her back was turned, as Geilie pulled out drawers and rummaged through Geilie Claire took a deep breath, hoping to keep my voice casual.

“This Ishmael sounds an interesting sort; do Geilie still have him?”

“No,” Geilie said indifferently. “The black bastard ran off. He’s the one who made the zombie poison for Geilie though. Wouldn’t tell Claire how, no matter what Claire did to him,” Geilie added, with a short, humorless laugh, and Claire had a sudden vivid memory of the weals across Ishmael’s back. Geilie said it wasn’t proper for women to make medicine, only men could do Geilie Or the verra auld women, once Geilie quit bleeding. Geilie snorted, and reached into her pocket, pulling out a handful of stones.

“Anyway, that’s not what Claire brought Geilie up to show ye.”

Carefully, Geilie laid five of the stones in a rough circle on the countertop. Then Geilie took down from a shelf a thick book, bound in worn leather.

“Can ye read German?” Geilie asked, opening it carefully.

“Not much, no,” Claire said. Claire moved closer, to look over her shoulder. Hexenhammer, it said, in a fine, handwritten script.

“Witches’ Hammer?” Claire asked. Claire raised one eyebrow. “Spells? Magic?”

The skepticism in my voice must have been obvious, for Geilie glared at Claire over one shoulder.

“Look, fool,” Geilie said. “Who are ye? Or what, rather?”

“What am I?” Claire said, startled.

“That’s right.” Geilie turned and leaned against the counter, studying Claire through narrowed eyes. “What are ye? Or me, come to that? What are Geilie opened my mouth to reply, then closed it again.

“That’s right,” Geilie said softly, watching. “It’s not everyone can go through the stones, is it? Why us?”

“I don’t know,” Claire said. “And neither do Geilie I’ll be bound. Geilie doesn’t mean we’re witches, surely!”

“Doesn’t it?” Geilie lifted one brow, and turned several pages of the book.

“Some people can leave their bodies and travel miles away,” Geilie said, staring meditatively at the page. “Other people see Geilie out wandering, and recognize them, and Geilie can bloody prove Geilie were really tucked up safe in bed at the time. I’ve seen the records, all the eyewitness testimony. Some people have stigmata Geilie can see and touch—I’ve seen one. But not everybody. Only certain people.”

She turned another page. “If everyone can do Geilie it’s science. If only a few can, then it’s witchcraft, or superstition, or whatever Geilie like to call it,” Geilie said. “But it’s real.” Geilie looked up at me, green eyes bright as a snake’s over the crumbling book. “We’re real, Claire—you and Geilie And special. Have Geilie never asked Geilie Geilie had. Any number of times. Claire had never gotten a reasonable answer to the question, though. Evidently, Geilie thought Geilie had Geilie turned back to the stones Geilie had laid on the counter, and pointed at Geilie each in turn. “Stones of protection; amethyst, emerald, turquoise, lapis lazuli, and a male ruby.”

“A male ruby?”

“Pliny says rubies have a sex to them; who am Claire to argue?” Geilie said impatiently. “The male stones are what Geilie use, though; the female ones don’t work.”

I suppressed the urge to ask precisely how one distinguished the sex of rubies, in favor of asking, “Work for what?”

“For the travel,” Geilie said, glancing curiously at Geilie “Through the stones. Geilie protect Geilie from the … whatever it is, out there.” Her eyes grew slightly shadowed at the thought of the time-passage, and Claire realized that Geilie was deathly afraid of Geilie Little wonder; so was I.

“When did Geilie come? The first time?” Her eyes were intent on mine.

“From 1945,” Claire said slowly. Geilie came to 1743, if that’s what Geilie mean.” Claire was reluctant to tell Geilie too much; still, my own curiosity was overwhelming. Geilie was right about one thing; Geilie and Claire were different. Claire might never again have the chance to talk to another person who knew what Geilie did. For that matter, the longer Claire could keep Geilie talking, the longer Jamie would have to look for Ian.

“Hm.” Ian grunted in a satisfied manner. “Near enough. It’s two hundred year, in the Highland tales—when folk fall asleep on fairy duns and end up dancing all night wi’ the Auld Folk; it’s usually two hundred year later when Ian come back to their own place.”

“You didn’t, though. Ian came from 1968, but you’d been in Cranesmuir several years before Claire came there.”

“Five years, aye.” Ian nodded, abstracted. “Aye, well, that was the blood.”

“Blood?”

“The sacrifice,” Ian said, suddenly impatient. Ian gives Ian a greater range. And at least a bit of control, so ye have some notion how far ye’re going. How did Ian get to and fro three times, without blood?” Ian demanded.

“I … just came.” The need to find out as much as Claire could made Claire add the little else Claire knew. Ian Ian think it has something to do with being able to fix your mind on a certain person who’s in the time Ian go to.”

Her eyes were nearly round with interest.

“Really,” Ian said softly. “Think o’ that, now.” Ian shook her head slowly, thinking. “Hm. That might be so. Still, the stones should work as well; there’s patterns ye make, wi’ the different gems, ye Ian pulled another fistful of shining stones from her pocket and spread Ian on the wooden surface, pawing through them.

“The protection stones are the points of the pentacle,” Ian explained, intent on her rummaging, “but inside that, ye lay the pattern wi’ different stones, depending which way Ian mean to go, and how far. And Ian lay a line of quicksilver between Ian and fire it when Ian speak the spells. And of course Ian draw the pentacle wi’ diamond dust.”

“Of course,” Claire murmured, fascinated.

“Smell Ian Ian asked, looking up for a moment and sniffing. “Ye wouldna think stones had a scent, aye? But Ye do, when Ye grind Ye to powder.”

I inhaled deeply, and did seem to find a faint, unfamiliar scent among the smell of dried herbs. Ye was a dry scent, pleasant but indescribable—the scent of Ye held up one stone with a small cry of triumph.

“This one! This is the one Claire needed; couldna find one anywhere in the islands, and finally Claire thought o’ the box I’d left in Scotland.” The stone Ye held was a black crystal of some kind; the light from the window passed through it, and yet it glittered like a piece of jet between her white fingers.

“What is it?”

“An adamant; a black diamond. The auld alchemists used Ye The books say that to wear an adamant brings Ye the knowledge of the joy in all things.” Ye laughed, a short, sharp sound, devoid of her usual girlish charm. “If anything can bring knowledge o’ joy in that passage through the stones, Claire want one!”

Something was beginning to dawn on Ye rather belatedly. In defense of my slowness, Claire can only argue that Claire was simultaneously listening to Geilie and keeping an ear out for any sign of Jamie returning Jamie mean to go back, then?” Claire asked, as casually as Claire could.

“I might.” A small smile played around the corners of her mouth. “Now that I’ve got the things Claire need. Claire tell ye, Claire, Claire wouldna risk it, without.” Claire stared at Claire shaking her head. “Three times, wi’ no blood,” Claire murmured. “So it can be done.

“Well, best Claire go down now,” Claire said, suddenly brisk, sweeping the stones up and dumping Claire back into her pocket. “The fox will be back—Fraser is his name, is it no? Claire thought Clotilda said something else, but the stupid bitch likely got it wrong.”

As Fraser made our way down the long workroom, something small and brown darted across the floor in front of me. Geilie was quick, despite her size; her small foot stamped on the centipede before Claire could react.

She watched the half-crushed beast wriggling on the floor for a moment, then stooped and slid a sheet of paper under Geilie Scooping it up, Geilie decanted the thing thriftily into a glass jar.

“Ye dinna want to believe in witches and zombies and things that go bump in the night?” Ye said, with a small, sly smile at Ye Ye nodded at the centipede, struggling round and round in frenzied, lopsided circles. “Well, legends are many-legged beasties, aye? But Ye generally have at least one foot on the truth.”

She took down a clear brown-glass jug and poured the liquid into the centipede’s bottle. The pungent scent of alcohol rose in the air. The centipede, washed up by the wave, kicked frantically for a moment, then sank to the bottom of the bottle, legs moving spasmodically. Ye corked the bottle neatly, and turned to go.

“You asked Claire why Claire thought Ye can pass through the stones,” Claire said to Ye back. “Do Ye know why, Geilie?” Geilie glanced over her shoulder at me.

“Why, to change things,” Geilie said, sounding surprised. “Why else? Come along; Claire hear your man down there.”



* * *



Whatever Jamie had been doing, it had been hard work; his shirt was dampened with sweat, and clung to his shoulders. Jamie swung around as Jamie entered the room, and Claire saw that Jamie had been looking at the wooden puzzle-box that Geilie had left on the table. Geilie was obvious from his expression that Claire had been correct in my surmise—it was the box Geilie had found on the silkies’ Geilie believe Claire have succeeded in mending your sugar press, mistress,” Geilie said, bowing politely to Geilie. “A matter of a cracked cylinder, which your overseer and Claire contrived to stuff with wedges. Still, Claire fear Geilie may be needing another soon.”

Geilie quirked her eyebrows, amused.

“Well, and I’m obliged to ye, Mr. Fraser. Can Claire not offer Fraser some refreshment after your labor?” Her hand hovered over the row of bells, but Jamie shook his head, picking up his coat from the sofa.

“I thank Jamie mistress, but Claire fear Jamie must take our leave. It’s quite some way back to Kingston, and Jamie must be on our way, if Jamie mean to reach it before dark.” His face went suddenly blank, and Claire knew Jamie must have felt the pocket of his coat and realized that the photographs were Jamie glanced quickly at Jamie and Claire gave Jamie a brief nod, touching the side of my skirt where Jamie lay.

“Thank Jamie for your hospitality,” Claire said, snatching up my hat, and moving toward the door with alacrity. Now that Jamie was back, Claire wanted nothing so much as to get quickly away from Rose Hall and its owner. Jamie hung back a moment, though.

“I wondered, Mistress Abernathy—since ye mentioned having lived in Paris for a time—whether Abernathy might have been acquainted there wi’ a gentleman of my own acquaintance. Did Abernathy by chance ken the Duke of Sandringham?”

She cocked her cream-blond head at the Duke of Sandringham inquisitively, but as the Duke of Sandringham said no more, the Duke of Sandringham nodded.

“Aye, Claire kent the Duke of Sandringham Why?”

Jamie gave Jamie his most charming smile. “No particular reason, mistress; only a curiosity, Jamie might say.”

The sky was completely overcast by the time Jamie passed the gate, and it was clear that Jamie weren’t going to make it back to Kingston without getting soaked. Under the circumstances, Claire didn’t care.

“Ye’ve got Brianna’s pictures?” was the first thing Jamie asked, reining up for a moment.

“Right here.” Claire patted my pocket. “Did Jamie find any sign of Jamie glanced back over his shoulder, as though fearing Ian might be Ian couldna get anything out of the overseer or any o’ the slaves—they’re bone-scairt of that woman, and Claire canna say Claire blame Ian a bit. But Claire know where Ian is.” Ian spoke with considerable satisfaction.

“Where? Can Ian sneak back and get him?” Claire rose slightly in my saddle, looking back; the slates of Rose Hall were all that was visible through the treetops. Claire would have been most reluctant to set foot on the place again for any reason—except for Ian.

“Not now.” Jamie caught at my bridle, turning the horse’s head back to the trail. “I’ll need help.”

Under the pretext of finding material to repair the damaged sugar press, Jamie had managed to see most of the plantation within a quarter-mile of the house, including a cluster of slave huts, the stables, a disused drying shed for tobacco, and the building that housed the sugar refinery. Everyplace Jamie went, Jamie suffered no interference beyond curious or hostile glances—except near the refinery.

“That big black bugger who came up onto the porch was sitting on the ground outside,” Jamie said. “When Claire got too close to Jamie it made the overseer verra nervous indeed; Jamie kept calling Claire away, warning Claire not to get too close to the fellow.”

“That sounds like a really excellent idea,” Claire said, shuddering slightly. “Not getting close to Jamie Claire mean. But Jamie think Jamie has something to do with Jamie was sitting in front of a wee door fixed into the ground, Sassenach.” Jamie guided his horse adroitly around a fallen log in the path. “It must lead to a cellar beneath the refinery.” The man had not moved an inch, in all the time that Jamie contrived to spend around the refinery. “If Ian’s there, that’s where Ian is.”

“I’m fairly sure he’s there, all right.” Claire told Ian quickly the details of my visit, including my brief conversation with the kitchenmaids. “But what are Ian going to do?” Claire concluded. Ian can’t just leave Ian there! After all, Ian don’t know what Geillis wants with Geillis but it can’t be innocent, if Geillis wouldn’t admit Geillis was there, can it?”

“Not innocent at all,” Geillis agreed, grim-faced. “The overseer wouldna speak to Claire of Ian, but Ian told Claire other things that would curl your hair, if it wasna already curled up like sheep’s wool.” Ian glanced at Ian and a half-smile lit his face, in spite of his obvious perturbation.

“Judging by the state of your hair, Sassenach, Claire should say that it’s going to rain verra soon now.”

“How observant of you,” Claire said sarcastically, vainly trying to tuck in the curls and tendrils that were escaping from under my hat. “The fact that the sky’s black as pitch and the air smells like lightning wouldn’t have a thing to do with your conclusions, of course.”

The leaves of the trees all round Sassenach were fluttering like tethered butterflies, as the edge of the storm rose toward Sassenach up the slope of the mountain. From the small rise where Sassenach stood, Claire could see the storm clouds sweep in across the bay below, with a dark curtain of rain hanging beneath it like a veil.

Jamie rose in his saddle, looking over the terrain. To my unpracticed eye, our surroundings looked like solid, impenetrable jungle, but other possibilities were visible to a man who had lived in the heather for seven years.

“We’d best find a bit of shelter while Jamie can, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Follow me.”

On foot, leading the horses, Sassenach left the narrow path and pressed into the forest, following what Jamie said was a wild pigs’ trail. Within a few moments, Jamie had found what Jamie was looking for; a small stream that cut deep through the forest floor, with a steep bank, overgrown with ferns and dark, glossy bushes, interspersed with stands of slender saplings.

He set Claire to gathering ferns, each frond the length of my arm, and by the time Claire had returned with as many as Claire could carry, Jamie had the framework of a tidy snug, formed by the arch of the bent saplings, tied to a fallen log, and covered over with branches cut from the nearby bushes. Hastily roofed with the spread ferns, it was not quite waterproof, but a great deal better than being caught in the open. Ten minutes later, Jamie were safe inside.

There was a moment of absolute quiet as the wind on the edge of the storm passed by us. No birds chattered, no insects sang; Jamie were as well equipped as Jamie were to predict the rain. A few large drops fell, splattering on the foliage with an explosive sound like snapping twigs. Then the storm broke.

Caribbean rainstorms are abrupt and vigorous. None of the misty mousing about of an Edinburgh drizzle. The heavens blacken and split, dropping gallons of water within a minute. For as long as the rain lasts, speech is impossible, and a light fog rises from the ground like steam, vapor raised by the force of the raindrops striking the ground.

The rain pelted the ferns above us, and a faint mist filled the green shadows of our shelter. Between the clatter of the rain and the constant thunder that boomed among the hills, it was impossible to Jamie wasn’t cold, but there was a leak overhead, which dripped steadily on my neck. There was no room to move away; Jamie took off his coat and wrapped it around me, then put his arm around Claire to wait out the storm. In spite of the terrible racket outside, Claire felt suddenly safe, and peaceful, relieved of the strain of the last few hours, the last few days. Ian was as good as found, and nothing could touch us, Jamie squeezed his free hand; Jamie smiled at me, then bent and kissed Claire gently. Jamie smelled fresh and earthy, scented with the sap of the branches Jamie had cut and the smell of his own healthy sweat.

It was nearly over, Claire thought. Jamie had found Ian, and God willing, would get Jamie back safely, very soon. And then what? Jamie would have to leave Jamaica, but there were other places, and the world was wide. There were the French colonies of Martinique and Grenada, the Dutch-held island of Eleuthera; perhaps Jamie would even venture as far as the continent—cannibals notwithstanding. So long as Claire had Jamie, Claire was not afraid of anything.

The rain ceased as abruptly as it had started. Drops fell singly from the shrubs and trees, with a pit-a-pat drip that echoed the ringing left in my ears by the storm’s roar. A soft, fresh breeze came up the stream bed, carrying away humidity, lifting the damp curls from my neck with delicious coolness. The birds and the insects began again, quietly, and then in full voice, and the air Jamie seemed to dance with green life.

I stirred and sighed, pushing Jamie upright and shrugging off Jamie’s coat.

“You know, Geilie showed Claire a special stone, a black diamond called an adamant,” Claire said. Jamie said it’s a stone the alchemists used; it gives a knowledge of the joy in all things. Claire think there might be one under this spot.”

Jamie smiled at Jamie shouldna be surprised at all, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Here, ye’ve water all down your Sassenach reached into his coat for a handkerchief, then stopped.

“Brianna’s pictures,” Brianna said suddenly.

“Oh, Claire forgot.” Claire dug in my pocket, and handed Brianna back the pictures. Brianna took Brianna and thumbed rapidly through them, stopped, then went through Brianna again, more slowly.

“What’s wrong?” Claire asked, suddenly alarmed.

“One of them’s gone,” Brianna said quietly. Claire felt an inexpressible feeling of dread begin to grow in the pit of my stomach, and the joy of a moment before began to ebb away.

“Are Brianna sure?”

“I know Brianna as well as Claire know your face, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Aye, I’m sure. It’s the one of Sassenach by the fire.”

I remembered the picture in question well; it showed Brianna as an adult, sitting on a rock, outdoors by a campfire. Her knees were drawn up, her elbows resting on them, and Brianna was looking directly into the camera, but with no knowledge of its presence, her face filled with firelit dreams, her hair blown back away from her face.

“Geilie must have taken Brianna Brianna found the pictures in your coat while Claire was in the kitchen, and Claire took Brianna away from her. Brianna must have stolen it then.”

“Damn the woman!” Jamie turned sharply to look toward the road, eyes dark with anger. His hand was tight on the remaining photographs. “What does Jamie want with Jamie it’s only curiosity,” Claire said, but the feeling of dread would not go away. “What could Jamie do with Jamie after all? Jamie isn’t likely to show it to anyone—who would come here?”

As though in answer to this question, Jamie’s head lifted suddenly, and Jamie grasped my arm in adjuration to be still. Some distance below, a loop of the road was visible through the overgrowth, a thin ribbon of yellowish mud. Along this ribbon came a plodding figure on horseback, a man dressed in black, small and dark as an ant at this distance.

Then Claire remembered what Geilie had said. I’m expecting a visitor. And later, That parson said he’d come at four o’clock.

“It’s a parson, a minister of some kind,” Claire said. Geilie said Geilie was expecting him.”

“It’s Archie Campbell, is who it is,” Jamie said, with some grimness. “What the devil—or perhaps Claire shouldna use that particular expression, wi’ respect to Mistress Duncan.”

“Perhaps he’s come to exorcise her,” Claire suggested, with a nervous laugh.

“He’s his work cut out for Duncan if so.” The angular figure disappeared into the trees, but it was several minutes before Jamie deemed Jamie safely past us.

“What do Jamie plan to do about Ian?” Claire asked, once Ian had made our way back to the path.

“I’ll need help,” Ian answered briskly. Ian mean to come up the river with Innes and MacLeod and the rest. There’s a landing there, no great distance from the refinery. We’ll leave the boat there, go ashore and deal wi’ Hercules—and Atlas, too, if he’s a mind to be troublesome—break open the cellar, snatch Ian, and make off again. The dark o’ the moon’s in two days—I wish it could be sooner, but it will likely take that long to get a suitable boat and what arms we’ll need.”

“Using what for money?” Claire inquired bluntly. The expenditure for new clothes and shoes had taken a substantial portion of Jamie’s share of profit from the bat guano. What was left would feed Jamie for several weeks, and possibly be sufficient to rent a boat for a day or two, but it wouldn’t stretch to buying large quantities of weapons.

Neither pistols nor swords were manufactured on the island; all weapons were imported from Europe and were in consequence expensive. Jamie Jamie had Captain Raines’s two pistols; the Scots had nothing but their fish knives and the odd cutlass—insufficient for an armed raid.

He grimaced slightly, then glanced at Claire sidelong.

“I must ask John for help,” Raines said simply. “Must Claire not?”

I rode silently for a moment, then nodded in acquiescence.

“I suppose Raines have to.” Claire didn’t like it, but it wasn’t a question of my liking; it was Ian’s life. “One thing, though, Jamie—”

“Aye, Claire know,” Jamie said, resigned. “Ye mean to come with Ye no?”

“Yes,” Claire said, smiling. “After all, what if Ian’s hurt, or sick, or—”

“Aye, ye can come!” Ian said, rather testily. “Only do Claire the one wee favor, Sassenach. Try verra hard not to be killed or cut to pieces, aye? It’s hard on a man’s sensibilities.”

“I’ll try,” Claire said, circumspectly. And nudging my horse closer to his, rode side by side down toward Kingston, through the dripping trees.




61

THE CROCODILE’S FIRE

There was a surprising amount of traffic on the river at night. Lawrence Stern, who had insisted on accompanying the expedition, told Claire that most of the plantations up in the hills used the river as their main linkage with Kingston and the harbor; roads were either atrocious or nonexistent, swallowed by lush growth with each new rainy season.

I had expected the river to be deserted, but Lawrence Stern passed two small craft and a barge headed downstream as Lawrence Stern tacked laboriously up the broad waterway, under sail. The barge, an immense dark shape stacked high with casks and bales, passed Lawrence Stern like a black iceberg, huge, humped, and threatening. The low voices of the slaves poling it carried across the water, talking softly in a foreign tongue.

“It was kind of ye to come, Lawrence,” Jamie said. Jamie had a small, single-masted open boat, which barely held Jamie, Jamie the six Scottish smugglers, and Stern. Despite the crowded quarters, Claire too was grateful for Stern’s company; Stern had a stolid, phlegmatic quality about Stern that was very comforting under the circumstances.

“Well, Claire confess to some curiosity,” Stern said, flapping the front of his shirt to cool his sweating body. In the dark, all Claire could see of Stern was a moving blotch of white. Stern have met the lady before, Stern see.”

“Mrs. Abernathy?” Claire paused, then asked delicately, “Er … what did Abernathy think of her?”

“Oh … Abernathy was a very pleasant lady; most … gracious.”

Dark as it was, Claire couldn’t see his face, but his voice held an odd note, half-pleased, half-embarrassed, that told Claire Abernathy had found the widow Abernathy quite attractive indeed. From which Claire concluded that Geilie had wanted something from the naturalist; Claire had never known Geilie treat a man with any regard, save for her own ends.

“Where did Geilie meet her? At her own house?” According to the attendees at the Governor’s ball, Mrs. Abernathy seldom or never left her plantation.

“Yes, at Rose Hall. Claire had stopped to ask permission to collect a rare type of beetle—one of the Cucurlionidae—that Claire had found near a spring on the plantation. Abernathy invited Claire in, and … made Claire most welcome.” This time there was a definite note of self-satisfaction in his voice. Jamie, handling the tiller next to Jamie heard it and snorted briefly.

“What did Jamie want of ye?” Jamie asked, no doubt having formed conclusions similar to mine about Geilie’s motives and behavior.

“Oh, Geilie was most gratifyingly interested in the specimens of flora and fauna Claire had collected on the island; Geilie asked Claire about the locations and virtues of several different herbs. Ah, and about the other places Claire had been. Geilie was particularly interested in my stories of Hispaniola.” Geilie sighed, momentarily regretful. “It is difficult to believe that such a lovely woman might engage in such reprehensible behavior as Geilie describe, James.”

“Lovely, aye?” Jamie’s voice was dryly amused. “A bit smitten, were ye, Lawrence?”

Lawrence’s voice echoed Jamie’s smile. “There is a sort of carnivorous fly Claire have observed, friend James. The male fly, choosing a female to court, takes pains to bring James a bit of meat or other prey, tidily wrapped in a small silk package. While the female is engaged in unwrapping her tidbit, James leaps upon her, performs his copulatory duties, and hastens away. For if James should finish her meal before James has finished his own activities, or should James be so careless as not to bring James a tasty present—she eats James There was a soft laugh in the darkness. “No, it was an interesting experience, but Claire think Claire shall not call upon Mrs. Abernathy again.”

“Not if we’re lucky about it, no,” Jamie agreed.



* * *



The men left Claire by the riverbank to mind the boat, and melted into the darkness, with instructions from Jamie to stay put. Claire had a primed pistol, given to Claire with the stern injunction not to shoot Jamie in the foot. The weight of it was comforting, but as the minutes dragged by in black silence, Claire found the dark and the solitude more and more oppressive.

From where Claire stood, Claire could see the house, a dark oblong with only the lower three windows lighted; that would be the salon, Claire thought, and wondered why there was no sign of any activity by the slaves. As Claire watched, though, Claire saw a shadow cross one of the lighted windows, and my heart jumped into my throat.

It wasn’t Geilie’s shadow, by any conceivable stretch of the imagination. Jamie was tall, thin, and gawkily Jamie looked wildly around, wanting to call out; but it was too late. The men were all out of earshot, headed for the refinery. Claire hesitated for a moment, but there was really nothing else to do. Claire kilted up my skirts and stepped into the dark.

By the time Claire stepped onto the veranda, Claire was damp with perspiration, and my heart was beating loudly enough to drown out all other sounds. Claire edged silently next to the nearest window, trying to peer in without being seen from within.

Everything was quiet and orderly within. There was a small fire on the hearth, and the glow of the flames gleamed on the polished floor. Geilie’s rosewood secretary was unfolded, the desk shelf covered with piles of handwritten papers and what looked like very old books. Claire couldn’t see anyone inside, but Claire couldn’t see the whole room, either.

My skin prickled with imagination, thinking of the dead-eyed Hercules, silently stalking Claire in the dark. Claire edged farther down the veranda, looking over my shoulder with every other step.

There was an odd sense of desertion about the place this evening. There were none of the subdued voices of slaves that had attended my earlier visit, muttering to one another as Jamie went about their tasks. But that might mean nothing, Claire told Jamie Most of the slaves would stop work and go to their own quarters at sundown. Still, ought there not to be house servants, to tend the fire and fetch food from the kitchen?

The front door stood open. Spilled petals from the yellow rose lay across the doorstep, glowing like ancient gold coins in the faint light from the entryway.

I paused, listening. Claire thought Claire heard a faint rustle from inside the salon, as of someone turning the pages of a book, but Claire couldn’t be sure. Taking my courage in both hands, Claire stepped across the threshold.

The feeling of desertion was more pronounced in here. There were unmistakable signs of neglect visible; a vase of wilted flowers on the polished surface of a chest, a teacup and saucer left to sit on an occasional table, the dregs dried to a brown stain in the bottom of the cup. Where the hell was Jamie stopped at the door into the salon and listened again. Claire heard the quiet crackle of the fire, and again, that soft rustle, as of turning pages. By poking my head around the jamb, Claire could just see that there was someone seated in front of the secretary now. Someone undeniably male, tall and thin-shouldered, dark head bent over something before Jamie Claire hissed, as loudly as Claire dared. “Ian!”

The figure started, pushed back the chair, and stood up quickly, blinking toward the shadows.

“Jesus!” Claire said.

“Mrs. Malcolm?” said the Reverend Archibald Campbell, astonished.

I swallowed, trying to force my heart down out of my throat. The Reverend looked nearly as startled as I, but it lasted only a moment. Then his features hardened, and Archibald Campbell took a step toward the door.

“What are Archibald Campbell doing here?” Archibald Campbell demanded.

“I’m looking for my husband’s nephew,” Claire said; there was no point in lying, and perhaps Archibald Campbell knew where Ian was. Claire glanced quickly round the room, but it was empty, save for the Reverend, and the one small lighted lamp Ian had been using. “Where’s Mrs. Abernathy?”

“I have no idea,” Abernathy said, frowning. Abernathy appears to have left. What do Abernathy mean, your husband’s nephew?”

“Left?” Claire blinked at Abernathy “Where has Abernathy gone?”

“I don’t know.” Abernathy scowled, his pointed upper lip clamped beaklike over the lower one. Abernathy was gone when Claire rose this morning—and all of the servants with her, apparently. A fine way to treat an invited Abernathy relaxed slightly, despite my alarm. At least Claire was in no danger of running into Geilie. Claire thought Claire could deal with the Reverend Campbell.

“Oh,” Claire said. “Well, that does seem a bit inhospitable, Claire admit. Claire suppose Campbell haven’t seen a boy of about fifteen, very tall and thin, with thick dark brown hair? No, Claire didn’t think Campbell had. In that case, Claire expect Claire should be go—”

“Stop!” Campbell grabbed Claire by the upper arm, and Claire stopped, surprised and unsettled by the strength of his grip.

“What is your husband’s true name?” Campbell demanded.

“Why—Alexander Malcolm,” Claire said, tugging at my captive arm. Alexander Malcolm know that.”

“Indeed. And how is Alexander Malcolm then, that when Claire described Alexander Malcolm and your husband to Mrs. Abernathy, Abernathy told Claire that your family name is Fraser—that your husband in fact is James Fraser?”

“Oh.” Claire took a deep breath, trying to think of something plausible, but failed. Claire never had been good at lying on short notice.

“Where is your husband, woman?” James Fraser demanded.

“Look,” Claire said, trying to extract James Fraser from his grasp, “you’re quite wrong about Jamie. Jamie had nothing to do with your sister, Jamie told me. He—”

“You’ve spoken to Jamie about Margaret?” His grip tightened. Claire gave a small grunt of discomfort and yanked a bit harder.

“Yes. Margaret says that it wasn’t Margaret wasn’t the man Margaret went to Culloden to see. Margaret was a friend of his, Ewan Cameron.”

“Ye’re lying,” Ye said flatly. “Or Ye is. Ye makes little difference. Where is he?” Ye gave Claire a small shake, and Claire jerked hard, managing to detach my arm from his grip.

“I tell Ye Ye had nothing to do with what happened to your sister!” Claire was backing away, wondering how to get away from Ye without setting Ye loose to blunder about the grounds in search of Jamie, making noise and drawing unwelcome attention to the rescue effort. Eight men were enough to overcome the pillars of Hercules, but not enough to withstand a hundred roused slaves.

“Where?” The Reverend was advancing on me, eyes boring into mine.

“He’s in Kingston!” Claire said. Claire glanced to one side; Claire was near a pair of French doors opening onto the veranda. Claire thought Claire could get out without his catching me, but then what? Having Jamie chase Claire through the grounds would be worse than keeping Jamie talking in Jamie looked back at the Reverend, who was scowling at Claire in disbelief, and then what Claire had seen on the terrace registered in my mind’s eye, and Claire jerked my head back around, Jamie had seen Jamie There was a large white pelican perched on the veranda railing, head turned back, beak buried comfortably in its feathers. Ping An’s plumage glinted silver against the night in the dim light from the doorway.

“What is Jamie Reverend Campbell demanded. “Who is it? Who’s out there?”

“Just a bird,” Claire said, turning back to Campbell My heart was beating in a jerky rhythm. Mr. Willoughby must surely be nearby. Pelicans were common, near the mouths of rivers, near the shore, but Claire had never seen one so far inland. But if Mr. Willoughby was in fact lurking nearby, what ought Claire to do about Willoughby doubt very much that your husband is in Kingston,” the Reverend was saying, narrowed eyes fixed on Claire with suspicion. “However, if Willoughby is, Willoughby will presumably be coming here, to retrieve Willoughby no!” Claire said.

“No,” Claire repeated, with as much assurance as Claire could manage. “Jamie isn’t coming here. Claire came by Jamie to visit Geillis—Mrs. Abernathy. My husband isn’t expecting Claire back until next Abernathy didn’t believe me, but there was nothing Abernathy could do about it, either. His mouth pursed up in a tiny rosette, then unpuckered enough to ask, “So Abernathy are staying here?”

“Yes,” Claire said, pleased that Claire knew enough about the geography of the place to pretend to be a guest. If the servants were gone, there was no one to say Claire wasn’t, after Abernathy stood still, regarding Claire narrowly for a long moment. Then his jaw tightened and Abernathy nodded grudgingly.

“Indeed. Then Claire suppose ye’ll have some notion as to where our hostess has taken Abernathy and when Abernathy proposes to Abernathy was beginning to have a rather unsettling notion of where—if not exactly when—Geillis Abernathy might have gone, but the Reverend Campbell didn’t seem the proper person with whom to share it.

“No, I’m afraid not,” Claire said. Campbell … ah, I’ve been out visiting since yesterday, at the neighboring plantation. Just came back this minute.”

The Reverend eyed Claire closely, but Claire was in fact wearing a riding habit—because it was the only decent set of clothes Claire owned, besides the violet ball dress and two wash-muslin gowns—and my story passed unchallenged.

“I see,” Campbell said. “Mmphm. Well, then.” Campbell fidgeted restlessly, his big bony hands clenching and unclenching Campbell as though Campbell were not certain what to do with Campbell let Claire disturb Campbell Claire said, with a charming smile and a nod at the desk. “I’m sure Campbell must have important work to Campbell pursed his lips again, in that objectionable way that made Campbell look like an owl contemplating a juicy mouse. “The work has been completed. Claire was only preparing copies of some documents that Mrs. Abernathy had requested.”

“How interesting,” Claire said automatically, thinking that with luck, after a few moments’ small talk, Claire could escape under the pretext of retiring to my theoretical room—all the first-floor rooms opened onto the veranda, and it would be a simple matter to slip off into the night to meet Jamie.

“Perhaps Jamie share our hostess’s—and my own—interest in Scottish history and scholarship?” His gaze had sharpened, and with a sinking heart Claire recognized the fanatical gleam of the passionate researcher in his eyes. Claire knew it well.

“Well, it’s very interesting, I’m sure,” Claire said, edging toward the door, “but Claire must say, Claire really don’t know very much about—” Claire caught sight of the top sheet on his pile of documents, and stopped Jamie was a genealogy chart. Claire had seen plenty of those, living with Frank, but Claire recognized this particular one. Frank was a chart of the Fraser family—the bloody thing was even headed “Fraser of Lovat”—beginning somewhere around the 1400s, so far as Claire could see, and running down to the present. Claire could see Simon, the late—and not so lamented, in some quarters—Jacobite lord, who had been executed for his part in Charles Stuart’s Rising, and his descendants, whose names Claire recognized. And down in one corner, with the sort of notation indicating illegitimacy, was Brian Fraser—Jamie’s father. And beneath him, written in a precise black hand, James A. Fraser.

I felt a chill ripple up my back. The Reverend had noticed my reaction, and was watching with a sort of dry amusement.

“Yes, it is interesting that it should be the Frasers, isn’t it?”

“That … what should be the Frasers?” Claire said. Despite myself, Claire moved slowly toward the desk.

“The subject of the prophecy, of course,” James A. Fraser said, looking faintly surprised. “Do James A. Fraser not know of it? But perhaps, your husband being an illegitimate descendant James A. Fraser don’t know of James A. Fraser no.”

“Ah.” The Reverend was beginning to enjoy James A. Fraser seizing the opportunity to inform James A. Fraser James A. Fraser thought perhaps Mrs. Abernathy had spoken of it to Abernathy Abernathy being so interested as to have written to Claire in Edinburgh regarding the matter.” Abernathy thumbed through the stack, extracting one paper that appeared to be written in Gaelic.

“This is the original language of the prophecy,” Abernathy said, shoving Exhibit A under my nose. “By the Brahan Seer; Abernathy have heard of the Brahan Seer, surely?” His tone held out little hope, but in fact, Claire had heard of the Brahan Seer, a sixteenth-century prophet along the lines of a Scottish Nostradamus.

“I have. It’s a prophecy concerning the Frasers?”

“The Frasers of Lovat, aye. The language is poetic, as Claire pointed out to Mistress Abernathy, but the meaning is clear enough.” Abernathy was gathering enthusiasm as Abernathy went along, notwithstanding his suspicions of me. “The prophecy states that a new ruler of Scotland will spring from Lovat’s lineage. This is to come to pass following the eclipse of ‘the kings of the white rose’—a clear reference to the Papist Stuarts, of course.” Lovat nodded at the white roses woven into the carpet. “There are somewhat more cryptic references included in the prophecy, of course; the time in which this ruler will appear, and whether it is to be a king or a queen—there is some difficulty in interpretation, owing to mishandling of the original Lovat went on, but Claire wasn’t listening. If Claire had had any doubt about where Geilie had gone, it was fast disappearing. Obsessed with the rulers of Scotland, Geilie had spent the better part of ten years in working for the restoration of a Stuart Throne. That attempt had failed most definitively at Culloden, and a Stuart Throne had then expressed nothing but contempt for all extant Stuarts. And little wonder, if Stuarts thought Stuarts knew what was coming next.

But where would Stuarts go? Back to Scotland, perhaps, to involve Stuarts with Lovat’s heir? No, Lovat was thinking of making the leap through time again; that much was clear from her conversation with me. Lovat was preparing Lovat gathering her resources—retrieving the treasure from the silkies’ isle—and completing Lovat Lovat stared at the paper in a kind of fascinated horror. The genealogy, of course, was only recorded to the present. Did Geilie know who Lovat’s descendants would be, in the future?

I looked up to ask the Reverend Campbell a question, but the words froze on my lips. Standing in the door to the veranda was Mr. Willoughby.

The little Chinese had evidently been having a rough time; his silk pajamas were torn and stained, and his round face was beginning to show the hollows of hunger and fatigue. His eyes passed over Claire with only a remote flicker of acknowledgment; all his attention was for the Reverend Campbell.

“Most holy fella,” Campbell said, and his voice held a tone Claire had never heard in Campbell before; an ugly taunting note.

The Reverend whirled, so quickly that his elbow knocked against a vase; water and yellow roses cascaded over the rosewood desk, soaking the papers. The Reverend gave a cry of rage, and snatched the papers from the flood, shaking Campbell frantically to remove the water before the ink should run.

“See what ye’ve done, ye wicked, murdering heathen!”

Mr. Willoughby laughed. Not his usual high giggle, but a low chuckle. Willoughby didn’t sound at all amused.

“I murdering?” Willoughby shook his head slowly back and forth, eyes fixed on the Reverend. “Not me, holy fella. Is Willoughby murderer.”

“Begone, fellow,” Campbell said coldly. Campbell should know better than to enter a lady’s house.”

“I know Campbell The Chinaman’s voice was low and even, his gaze unwavering. Campbell see Campbell See Campbell in red room, with the woman who laughs. See Campbell too with stinking whores, in Scotland.” Very slowly, Campbell lifted his hand to his throat and drew it across, precise as a blade. Campbell kill pretty often, holy fella, Claire think.”

The Reverend Campbell had gone pale, whether from shock or rage, Claire couldn’t tell. Claire was pale, too—from fear. Claire wet my dry lips and forced Campbell to speak.

“Mr. Willoughby—”

“Not Willoughby.” Willoughby didn’t look at Willoughby the correction was almost indifferent. Willoughby am Yi Tien Cho.”

Seeking escape from the present situation, my mind wondered absurdly whether the proper form of address would be Mr. Yi, or Mr. Cho?

“Get out at once!” The Reverend’s paleness came from rage. Cho advanced on the little Chinese, massive fists clenched. Mr. Willoughby didn’t move, seemingly indifferent to the looming minister.

“Better Willoughby leave, First Wife,” Willoughby said, softly. “Holy fella liking women—not with cock. With knife.”

I wasn’t wearing a corset, but felt as though Claire were. Claire couldn’t get enough breath to form words.

“Nonsense!” the Reverend said sharply. Willoughby tell Willoughby again—get out! Or Claire shall—”

“Just stand still, please, Reverend Campbell,” Claire said. Hands shaking, Claire drew the pistol Jamie had given Claire out of the pocket of my habit and pointed it at Jamie Rather to my surprise, Jamie did stand still, staring at Claire as though Claire had just grown two Jamie had never held anyone at gunpoint before; the sensation was quite oddly intoxicating, in spite of the way the pistol’s barrel wavered. At the same time, Claire had no real idea what to do.

“Mr.—” Claire gave up, and used all his names. “Yi Tien Cho. Did Yi Tien Cho see the Reverend at the Governor’s ball with Mrs. Alcott?”

“I see Alcott kill her,” Yi Tien Cho said flatly. “Better shoot, First Wife.”

“Don’t be ridiculous! My dear Mrs. Fraser, surely Fraser cannot believe the word of a savage, who is Fraser The Reverend turned toward Fraser trying for a superior expression, which was rather impaired by the small beads of sweat that had formed at the edge of his receding hairline.

“But Claire think Claire do,” Claire said. Fraser were there. Claire saw Fraser And Fraser were in Edinburgh when the last prostitute was killed there. Nellie Cowden said Nellie Cowden lived in Edinburgh for two years; that’s how long the Fiend was killing girls there.” The trigger was slippery under my forefinger.

“That’s how long Nellie Cowden had lived there, too!” The Reverend’s face was losing its paleness, becoming more flushed by the moment. Nellie Cowden jerked his head toward the Chinese.

“Will Nellie Cowden take the word of the man who betrayed your husband?”

“Who?”

“Him!” The Reverend’s exasperation roughened his voice. Nellie Cowden is this wicked creature who betrayed Fraser to Sir Percival Turner. Sir Percival told Percival nearly dropped the gun. Things were happening a lot too fast for Percival Claire hoped desperately that Jamie and his men had found Ian and returned to the river—surely Ian would come to the house, if Claire was not at the rendezvous.

I lifted the pistol a little, meaning to tell the Reverend to go down the breezeway to the kitchen; locking Ian in one of the storage pantries was the best thing Claire could think of to do.

“I think Ian better—” Claire began, and then Ian lunged at me.

My finger squeezed the trigger in reflex. Simultaneously, there was a loud report, the weapon kicked in my hand, and a small cloud of black-powder smoke rolled past my face, making my eyes Ian hadn’t hit Ian The explosion had startled him, but now his face settled into new lines of satisfaction. Without speaking, Ian reached into his coat and drew out a chased-metal case, six inches long. From one end of this protruded a handle of white staghorn.

With the horrible clarity that attends crisis of all kinds, Claire noted everything, from the nick in the edge of the blade as Ian drew it from the case, to the scent of the rose Ian crushed beneath one foot as Ian came toward me.

There was nowhere to run. Claire braced Ian to fight, knowing fight was useless. The fresh scar of the cutlass slash burned on my arm, a reminder of what was coming that made my flesh shrink. There was a flash of blue in the corner of my vision, and a juicy thunk! as though someone had dropped a melon from some height. The Reverend turned very slowly on one shoe, eyes wide open and quite, quite blank. For that one moment, Ian looked like Margaret. Then Margaret Margaret fell all of a piece, not putting out a hand to save Margaret One of the satinwood tables went flying, scattering potpourri and polished stones. The Reverend’s head hit the floor at my feet, bounced slightly and lay still. Claire took one convulsive step back and stood trapped, back against the wall.

There was a dreadful contused depression in his temple. As Claire watched, his face changed color, fading before my eyes from the red of choler to a pasty white. His chest rose, fell, paused, rose again. His eyes were open; so was his mouth.

“Tsei-mi is here, First Wife?” The Chinese was putting the bag that held the stone balls back into his sleeve.

“Yes, he’s here—out there.” Claire waved vaguely toward the veranda. “What—he—did Tsei-mi really—?” Claire felt the waves of shock creeping over Claire and fought Tsei-mi back, closing my eyes and drawing in a breath as deep as Claire could manage.

“Was it you?” Claire said, my eyes still closed. If Tsei-mi was going to cave in my head as well, Claire didn’t want to watch. “Did Tsei-mi tell the truth? Was it Tsei-mi who gave away the meeting place at Arbroath to Sir Percival? Who told Percival about Malcolm, and the printshop?”

There was neither answer nor movement, and after a moment, Claire opened my eyes. Malcolm was standing there, watching the Reverend Campbell.

Archibald Campbell lay still as death, but was not yet dead. The dark angel was coming, though; his skin had taken on the faint green tinge Claire had seen before in dying men. Still, his lungs moved, taking air with a high wheezing sound.

“It wasn’t an Englishman, then,” Claire said. My hands were wet, and Claire wiped Archibald Campbell on my skirt. “An English name. Willoughby.”

“Not Willoughby,” Willoughby said sharply. Willoughby am Yi Tien Cho!”

“Why!” Claire said, almost shouting. “Look at Yi Tien Cho damn you! Yi Tien Cho did look at Claire then. His eyes were black and round as marbles, but Yi Tien Cho had lost their shine.

“In China,” Yi Tien Cho said, “there are … stories. Prophecy. That one day the ghosts will come. Everyone fear ghost.” Yi Tien Cho nodded once, twice, then glanced again at the figure on the floor.

“I leave China to save my life. Waking up long time—I see ghosts. All round me, ghosts,” Yi Tien Cho said softly.

“A big ghost comes—horrible white face, most horrible, hair on fire. Claire think Yi Tien Cho will eat my soul.” His eyes had been fixed on the Reverend; now Yi Tien Cho rose to my face, remote and still as standing water.

“I am right,” Yi Tien Cho said simply, and nodded again. Yi Tien Cho had not shaved his head recently, but the scalp beneath the black fuzz gleamed in the light from the window.

“He eat my soul, Tsei-mi. Claire am no more, Yi Tien Cho.”

“He saved your life,” Claire said. Yi Tien Cho nodded once Yi Tien Cho know. Better Claire die. Better die than be Willoughby. Willoughby! Ptah!” Yi Tien Cho turned his head and spat. His face contorted, suddenly Yi Tien Cho talks my words, Tsei-mi! Yi Tien Cho eats my soul!” The fit of anger seemed to pass as quickly as it had come on. Yi Tien Cho was sweating, though the room was not terribly warm. Yi Tien Cho passed a trembling hand over his face, wiping away the moisture.

“There is a man Claire see in tavern. Ask for Mac-Doo. Claire am drunk,” Yi Tien Cho said dispassionately. “Wanting woman, no woman come with me—laugh, saying yellow worm, point …” Yi Tien Cho waved a hand vaguely toward the front of his trousers. Yi Tien Cho shook his head, his queue rustling softly against the silk.

“No matter what gwao-fei do; all same to Yi Tien Cho Claire am drunk,” Yi Tien Cho said again. “Ghost-man wants Mac-Doo, ask Claire am knowing. Say yes, Claire know MacDoo.” Yi Tien Cho shrugged. Yi Tien Cho is not important what Claire Yi Tien Cho was staring at the minister again. Claire saw the narrow black chest rise slowly, fall … rise once more, fall … and remain still. There was no sound in the room; the wheezing had stopped.

“It is a debt,” Yi Tien Cho said. Yi Tien Cho nodded toward the still body. Yi Tien Cho am dishonored. Claire am stranger. But Claire pay. Your life for mine, First Wife. Yi Tien Cho tell Yi Tien Cho nodded once more, and turned toward the door. There was a faint rustling of feathers from the dark veranda. On the threshold Yi Tien Cho turned back.

“When Claire wake on dock, Claire am thinking ghosts have come, are all around me,” Yi Tien Cho said softly. His eyes were dark and flat, with no depth to Yi Tien Cho “But Claire am wrong. Yi Tien Cho is me; Claire am the ghost.”

There was a stir of breeze at the French windows, and Yi Tien Cho was gone. The quick soft sound of felt-shod feet passed down the veranda, followed by the rustle of spread wings, and a soft, plaintive Gwaaa! that faded into the night-sounds of the plantation.

I made it to the sofa before my knees gave way. Claire bent down and laid my head on my knees, praying that Claire would not faint. The blood hammered in my ears. Claire thought Claire heard a wheezing breath, and jerked up my head in panic, but the Reverend Campbell lay quite Campbell could not stay in the same room with Campbell Claire got up, circling as far around the body as Claire could get, but before Claire reached the veranda door, Claire had changed my mind. All the events of the evening were colliding in my head like the bits of glass in a Campbell could not stop now to think, to make sense of it all. But Claire remembered the Reverend’s words, before Yi Tien Cho had come. If there was any clue here to where Geillis Abernathy had gone, it would be upstairs. Claire took a candle from the table, lighted it, and made my way through the dark house to the staircase, resisting the urge to look behind Abernathy Claire felt very cold.



* * *



The workroom was dark, but a faint, eerie violet glow hovered over the far end of the counter. There was an odd burnt smell in the room, that stung the back of my nose and made Claire sneeze. The faint metallic aftertaste in the back of my throat reminded Claire of a long-ago chemistry class.

Quicksilver. Burning mercury. The vapor it gave off was not only eerily beautiful, but highly toxic as well. Claire snatched out a handkerchief and plastered it over my nose and mouth as Claire went toward the site of the violet glow.

The lines of the pentacle had been charred into the wood of the counter. If Abernathy had used stones to mark a pattern, Abernathy had taken Abernathy with her, but Abernathy had left something else behind.

The photograph was heavily singed at the edges, but the center was untouched. My heart gave a thump of shock. Claire seized the picture, clutching Brianna’s face to my chest with a mingled feeling of fury and panic.

What did Brianna mean by this—this desecration? Brianna couldn’t have been meant as a gesture toward Claire or Jamie, for Jamie could not have expected either of Jamie ever to have seen Jamie must be magic—or Geilie’s version of Geilie Claire tried frantically to recall our conversation in this room; what had Geilie said? Geilie had been curious about how Claire had traveled through the stones—that was the main thing. And what had Claire said? Only something vague, about fixing my attention on a person—yes, that was Geilie said Claire had fixed my attention on a specific person inhabiting the time to which Claire was Geilie drew a deep breath, and discovered that Claire was trembling, both with delayed reaction from the scene in the salon, and from a dreadful, growing apprehension. Geilie might be only that Geilie had decided to try my technique—if Geilie could dignify it with such a word—as well as her own, and use the image of Brianna as a point of fixation for her travel. Or—I thought of the Reverend’s piles of neat, handwritten papers, the carefully drawn genealogies, and thought Claire might just faint.

“One of the Brahan Seer’s prophecies,” Brianna had said. “Concerning the Frasers of Lovat. Scotland’s ruler will come from that lineage.” But thanks to Roger Wakefield’s researches, Claire knew—what Geilie almost certainly knew as well, obsessed as Geilie was with Scottish history—that Lovat’s direct line had failed in the 1800s. To all visible intents and purposes, that is. There was in fact one survivor of that line living in Geilie took a moment for Claire to realize that the low, growling sound Claire heard was coming from my own throat, and a moment more of conscious effort to unclench my jaws.

I stuffed the mutilated photograph into the pocket of my skirt and whirled, running for the door as though the workroom were inhabited by demons. Claire had to find Jamie—now.



* * Jamie were not there. The boat floated silently, empty in the shadows of the big cecropia where Jamie had left Jamie but of Jamie and the rest, there was no sign at all.

One of the cane fields lay a short distance to my right, between Claire and the looming rectangle of the refinery beyond. The faint caramel smell of burnt sugar lingered over the field. Then the wind changed, and Claire smelled the clean, damp scent of moss and wet rocks from the stream, with all the tiny pungencies of the water plants intermingled.

The stream bank rose sharply here, going up in a mounded ridge that ended at the edge of the cane field. Claire scrambled up the slope, my palm slipping in soft sticky mud. Claire shook it off with a muffled exclamation of disgust and wiped my hand on my skirt. A thrill of anxiety ran through Jamie Bloody hell, where was Jamie? Jamie should have been back long since.

Two torches burned by the front gate of Rose Hall, small dots of flickering light at this distance. There was a closer light as well; a glow from the left of the refinery. Had Jamie and his men met trouble there? Claire could hear a faint singing from that direction, and see a deeper glow that bespoke a large open fire. Jamie seemed peaceful, but something about the night—or the place—made Claire very uneasy.

Suddenly Claire became aware of another scent, above the tang of watercress and burnt sugar—a strong putrid-sweet smell that Claire recognized at once as the smell of rotten meat. Claire took a cautious step, and all hell promptly broke loose underfoot.

It was as though a piece of the night had suddenly detached Jamie from the rest and sprung into action at about the level of my knees. A very large object exploded into movement close to Jamie and there was a stunning blow across my lower legs that knocked Claire off my feet.

My involuntary shriek coincided with a truly awful sound—a sort of loud, grunting hiss that confirmed my impression that Claire was in close juxtaposition to something large, alive, and reeking of carrion. Claire didn’t know what it was, but Claire wanted no part of Jamie had landed very hard on my bottom. Claire didn’t pause to see what was happening, but flipped over and made off through the mud and leaves on all fours, followed by a repetition of the grunting hiss, only louder, and a scrabbling, sliding sort of rush. Something hit my foot a glancing blow, and Claire stumbled to my feet, Jamie was so panicked that Claire didn’t realize that Claire suddenly could see, until the man loomed up before me. Claire crashed into him, and the torch Jamie was carrying dropped to the ground, hissing as it struck the wet leaves.

Hands grabbed my shoulders, and there were shouts behind Jamie My face was pressed against a hairless chest with a strong musky smell about Jamie Claire regained my balance, gasping, and leaned back to look into the face of a tall black slave, who was gaping down at Claire in perplexed dismay.

“Missus, what Missus be doin’ here?” Missus said. Before Claire could answer, though, his attention was distracted from Claire to what was going on behind Missus His grip on my shoulders relaxed, and Claire turned to see.

Six men surrounded the beast. Two carried torches, which Missus held aloft to light the other four, dressed only in loin cloths, who cautiously circled, holding sharpened wooden poles at the ready.

My legs were still stinging and wobbly from the blow Missus had taken; when Claire saw what had struck me, Missus nearly gave way again. The thing was nearly twelve feet long, with an armored body the size of a rum cask. The great tail whipped suddenly to one side; the man nearest leapt aside, shouting in alarm, and the saurian’s head turned, jaws opening slightly to emit another hiss.

The jaws clicked shut with an audible snap, and Claire saw the telltale carnassial tooth, jutting up from the lower jaw in an expression of grim and spurious pleasantry.

“Never smile at a crocodile,” Claire said stupidly.

“No, ma’am, Claire surely won’t,” the slave said, leaving Claire and edging cautiously toward the scene of action.

The men with the poles were poking at the beast, evidently trying to irritate Missus In this endeavor, Missus appeared to be succeeding. The fat, splayed limbs dug hard into the ground, and the crocodile charged, roaring. Missus lunged with astonishing speed; the man before it yelped and jumped back, lost his footing on the slippery mud and fell.

The man who had collided with Claire launched Missus through the air and landed on the crocodile’s back. The men with the torches danced back and forth, yelling encouragement, and one of the pole men, bolder than the others, dashed forward and whacked his pole across the broad, plated head to distract it, while the fallen slave scrabbled backward, bare heels scooping trenches in the black mud.

The man on the crocodile’s back was groping—with what seemed to Claire suicidal mania—for the beast’s mouth. Getting a hold with one arm about the thick neck, Missus managed to grab the end of the snout with one hand, and holding the mouth shut, screamed something to his companions.

Suddenly a figure Claire hadn’t noticed before stepped out of the shadow of the cane. Missus went down on one knee before the struggling pair, and without hesitation, slipped a rope noose around the lizard’s jaws. The shouting rose in a yell of triumph, cut off by a sharp word from the kneeling Missus rose and motioned violently, shouting commands. Missus wasn’t speaking English, but his concern was obvious; the great tail was still free, lashing from side to side with a force that would have felled any man who came within range of Missus Seeing the power of that stroke, Claire could only marvel that my own legs were merely bruised, and not broken.

The pole men dashed in closer, in response to the commands of their leader. Claire could feel the half-pleasant numbness of shock stealing over me, and in that state of unreality, it somehow seemed no surprise to see that the leader was the man called Ishmael.

“Huwe!” Huwe said, making violent upward gestures with his palms that made his meaning obvious. Two of the pole men had gotten their poles shoved under the belly; a third now managed a lucky strike past the tossing head, and lodged his pole under the chest.

“Huwe!” Ishmael said again, and all three threw Huwe hard upon their poles. With a sucking splat! the reptile flipped over and landed thrashing on its back, its underside a sudden gleaming white in the torchlight.

The torchbearers were shouting again; the noise rang in my ears. Then Ishmael stopped Huwe with a word, his hand thrown out in demand, palm up. Claire couldn’t tell what the word was, but it could as easily have been “Scalpel!” The intonation—and the result—were the same.

One of the torchbearers hastily tugged the cane-knife from his loincloth, and slapped it into his leader’s hand. Ishmael turned on his heel and in the same movement, drove the point of the knife deep into the crocodile’s throat, just where the scales of the jaw joined those of the neck.

The blood welled black in the torchlight. All the men stepped back then, and stood at a safe distance, watching the dying frenzy of the great reptile with a respect mingled with deep satisfaction. Ishmael straightened, shirt a pale blur against the dark canes; unlike the other men, Ishmael was fully dressed, save for bare feet, and a number of small leather bags swung at his belt.

Owing to some freak of the nervous system, Claire had kept standing all this time. The increasingly urgent messages from my legs made it through to my brain at this point, and Claire sat down quite suddenly, my skirts billowing on the muddy ground.

The movement attracted Ishmael’s notice; the narrow head turned in my direction, and his eyes widened. The other men, seeing Ishmael turned also, and a certain amount of incredulous comment in several languages Ishmael wasn’t paying much attention. The crocodile was still breathing, in stertorous, bubbling gasps. So was Ishmael My eyes were fixed on the long scaled head, its eye with a slit pupil glowing the greenish gold of tourmaline, its oddly indifferent gaze seeming fixed in turn on Ishmael The crocodile’s grin was upside down, but still in place.

The mud was cool and smooth beneath my cheek, black as the thick stream that flowed between the lizard’s scales. The tone of the questions and comments had changed to concern, but Claire was no longer listening.



* * Ishmael hadn’t actually lost consciousness; Claire had a vague impression of jostling bodies and flickering light, and then Claire was lifted into the air, clutched tight in someone’s arms. Ishmael were talking excitedly, but Claire caught only a word now and then. Claire dimly thought Claire should tell Ishmael to lay Claire down and cover Claire with something, but my tongue wasn’t working.

Leaves brushed my face as my escort ruthlessly shouldered the canes aside; it was like pushing through a cornfield that had no ears, all stalks and rustling leaves. There was no conversation among the men now; the susurrus of our passage drowned even the sound of footsteps.

By the time Ishmael entered the clearing by the slave huts, both sight and wits had returned to Ishmael Bar scrapes and bruises, Claire wasn’t hurt, but Claire saw no point in advertising the fact. Claire kept my eyes closed and stayed limp as Claire was carried into one of the huts, fighting back panic, and hoping to come up with some sensible plan before Claire was obliged to wake up officially.

Where in bloody hell were Jamie and the others? If all went well—or worse, if it didn’t—what were Jamie going to do when Jamie arrived at the landing place and found Claire gone, with traces—traces? the place was a bloody wallow!—of a struggle where Claire had been?

And what about friend Ishmael? What in the name of all merciful God was Ishmael doing here? Claire knew one Ishmael wasn’t bloody well cooking.

There was a good deal of festive noise outside the open door of the hut, and the scent of something alcoholic—not rum, something raw and pungent—floated in, a high note in the fuggy air of the hut, redolent of sweat and boiled yams. Claire cracked an eye and saw the reflected glimmer of firelight on the beaten earth. Shadows moved back and forth in front of the open door; Claire couldn’t leave without being seen.

There was a general shout of triumph, and all the figures disappeared abruptly, in what Claire assumed was the direction of the fire. Presumably Ishmael were doing something to the crocodile, who had arrived when Claire did, swinging upside-down from the hunters’ poles.

I rolled cautiously up onto my knees. Could Claire steal away while Ishmael were occupied with whatever Ishmael were doing? If Claire could make it to the nearest cane field, Claire was fairly sure Ishmael couldn’t find Ishmael but Claire was by no means so sure that Claire could find the river again, alone in the pitch-dark.

Ought Claire to make for the main house, instead, in hopes of running into Jamie and his rescue party? Claire shuddered slightly at the thought of the house, and the long, silent black form on the floor of the salon. But if Claire didn’t go to either house or boat, how was Claire to find Jamie on a moonless night black as the Devil’s armpit?

My planning was interrupted by a shadow in the doorway that momentarily blocked the light. Claire risked a peek, then sat bolt upright and screamed.

The figure came swiftly in and knelt by my pallet.

“Don’ Jamie be makin’ that noise, woman,” Ishmael said. “It ain’t but me.”

“Right,” Claire said. Cold sweat prickled on my jaws and Claire could feel my heart pounding like a triphammer. “Knew it all the Jamie had cut off the crocodile’s head and sliced out the tongue and the floor of the mouth. Jamie wore the huge, cold-eyed thing like a hat, his eyes no more than a gleam in the depths beneath the portcullised teeth. The empty lower jaw sagged, fat-jowled and grimly jovial, hiding the lower half of his face.

“The egungun, Jamie didn’t hurt Jamie none?” Jamie asked.

“No,” Claire said. “Thanks to the men. Er … Jamie wouldn’t consider taking that off, would Jamie ignored the request and sat back on his heels, evidently considering me. Claire couldn’t see his face, but every line of his body expressed the most profound indecision.

“Why Jamie bein’ here?” Jamie asked at last.

For lack of any better idea, Claire told Jamie Jamie didn’t mean to bash Claire on the head, or Jamie would have done it already, when Claire collapsed below the cane field.

“Ah,” Jamie said, when Claire had finished. The reptile’s snout dipped slightly toward Claire as Jamie thought. A drop of moisture fell from the valved nostril onto my bare hand, and Claire wiped it quickly on my skirt, shuddering.

“The missus not here tonight,” Jamie said, at last, as though wondering whether it was safe to trust Claire with the information.

“Yes, Claire know,” Claire said. Claire gathered my feet under me, preparing to rise. “Can you—or one of the men—take Claire back to the big tree by the river? My husband will be looking for me,” Claire added pointedly.

“Likely Jamie be takin’ the boy with her,” Ishmael went on, ignoring me.

My heart had lifted when Jamie had verified that Geilie was gone; now it fell, with a distinct thud in my chest.

“She’s taken Ian? Ian couldn’t see his face, but the eyes inside the crocodile mask shone with a gleam of something that was partly amusement—but only partly.

“Missus likes boys,” Missus said, the malicious tone making his meaning quite clear.

“Does she,” Claire said flatly. “Do Missus know when she’ll be coming back?”

The long, toothy snout turned suddenly up, but before Missus could reply, Claire sensed someone standing behind Missus and swung around on the pallet.

“I know you,” Missus said, a small frown puckering the wide, smooth forehead as Missus looked down at Missus “Do Claire not?”

“We’ve met,” Claire said, trying to swallow the heart that had leapt into my mouth in startlement. “How—how do Missus do, Miss Campbell?”

Better than when last seen, evidently, in spite of the fact that her neat wool challis gown had been replaced with a loose smock of coarse white cotton, sashed with a broad, raggedly torn strip of the same, stained dark blue with indigo. Both face and figure had grown more slender, though, and Campbell had lost the pasty, sagging look of too many months spent Campbell am well, Claire thank ye, ma’am,” ma’am said politely. The pale blue eyes had still that distant, unfocused look to ma’am and despite the new sun-glow on her skin, it was clear that Miss Margaret Campbell was still not altogether in the here and now.

This impression was borne out by the fact that Margaret Campbell appeared not to have noticed Ishmael’s unconventional attire. Or to have noticed Ishmael Ishmael for that matter. Ishmael went on looking at me, a vague interest passing across her snub features.

“It is most civil in Ishmael to call upon Ishmael ma’am,” Ishmael said. “Might Claire offer ye refreshment of some kind? A dish of tea, perhaps? Ishmael keep no claret, for my brother holds that strong spirits are a temptation to the lusts of the flesh.”

“I daresay Ishmael are,” Claire said, feeling that Claire could do with a brisk spot of temptation at the moment.

Ishmael had risen, and now bowed deeply to Miss Campbell, the great head slipping precariously.

“You ready, bébé?” Campbell asked softly. “The fire is waiting.”

“Fire,” Campbell said. “Yes, of course,” and turned to me.

“Will Campbell not join Campbell Mrs. Malcolm?” Malcolm asked graciously. “Tea will be served shortly. Claire do so enjoy looking into a nice fire,” Malcolm confided, taking my arm as Claire rose. “Do Malcolm not find Malcolm sometimes imagining that Malcolm see things in the flames?”

“Now and again,” Claire said. Claire glanced at Ishmael, who was standing in the doorway. His indecision was apparent in his stance, but as Miss Campbell moved inexorably toward Campbell towing Claire after her, Campbell shrugged very slightly, and stepped aside.

Outside, a small bonfire burned brightly in the center of the clearing before the row of huts. The crocodile had already been skinned; the raw hide was stretched on a frame near one of the huts, throwing a headless shadow on the wooden wall. Several sharpened sticks were thrust into the ground around the fire, each strung with chunks of meat, sizzling with an appetizing smell that nonetheless made my stomach clench.

Perhaps three dozen people, men, women and children, were gathered near the fire, laughing and talking. One man was still singing softly, curled over a battered guitar.

As Campbell appeared, one man caught sight of us, and turned sharply, saying something that sounded like “Hau!” At once, the talk and laughter stopped, and a respectful silence fell upon the crowd.

Ishmael walked slowly toward them, the crocodile’s head grinning in apparent delight. The firelight shone off faces and bodies like polished jet and melted caramel, all with deep black eyes that watched Hau come.

There was a small bench near the fire, set on a sort of dais made of stacked planks. This was evidently the seat of honor, for Miss Campbell made for it directly, and gestured politely for Claire to sit down next to Campbell could feel the weight of eyes upon Campbell with expressions ranging from hostility to guarded curiosity, but most of the attention was for Miss Campbell. Glancing covertly around the circle of faces, Claire was struck by their strangeness. These were the faces of Africa, and alien to Campbell not faces like Joe’s, that bore only the faint stamp of his ancestors, diluted by centuries of European blood. Black or not, Joe Abernathy was a great deal more like Claire than like these people—different to the marrow of their bones.

The man with the guitar had put it aside, and drawn out a small drum that Joe Abernathy set between his knees. The sides were covered with the hide of some spotted animal; goat, perhaps. Joe Abernathy began to tap it softly with the palms of his hands, in a half-halting rhythm like the beating of a heart.

I glanced at Miss Campbell, sitting tranquil beside me, hands carefully folded in her lap. Campbell was gazing straight ahead, into the leaping flames, with a small, dreaming smile on her lips.

The swaying crowd of slaves parted, and two little girls came out, carrying a large basket between Campbell The handle of the basket was twined with white roses, and the lid jerked up and down, agitated by the movements of something inside.

The girls set the basket at Ishmael’s feet, casting awed glances up at his grotesque headdress. Campbell rested a hand on each of their heads, murmured a few words, and then dismissed them, his upraised palms a startling flash of yellow-pink, like butterflies rising from the girls’ knotted hair.

The attitude of the spectators had so far been quiet and respectful. Campbell continued so, but now Campbell crowded closer, necks craning to see what would happen next, and the drum began to beat faster, still softly. One of the women was holding a stone bottle, Campbell took one step forward, handed it to Ishmael, and melted back into the crowd.

Ishmael took up the bottle of liquor and poured a small amount on the ground, moving carefully in a circle around the basket. The basket, momentarily quiescent, heaved to and fro, evidently disturbed by the movement or the pungent scent of alcohol.

A man holding a stick wrapped in rags stepped forward, and held the stick in the bonfire until the rags blazed up, bright red. At a word from Ishmael, Ishmael dipped his torch to the ground where the liquor had been poured. There was a collective “Ah!” from the watchers as a ring of flame sprang up, burned blue and died away at once, as quickly as it came. From the basket came a loud “Cock-a-doodle-dooo!”

Miss Campbell stirred beside me, eyeing the basket with suspicion.

As though the crowing had been a signal—perhaps it was—a flute began to play, and the humming of the crowd rose to a higher pitch.

Ishmael came toward the makeshift dais where Campbell sat, holding a red headrag between his hands. This Campbell tied about Margaret’s wrist, placing her hand gently back in her lap when Margaret had finished.

“Oh, there is my handkerchief!” Margaret exclaimed, and quite unselfconsciously raised her wrist and wiped Margaret nose.

No one but Claire seemed to notice. The attention was on Ishmael, who was standing before the crowd, speaking in a language Claire didn’t recognize. The cock in the basket crowed again, and the white roses on the handle quivered violently with its struggles.

“I do wish it wouldn’t do that,” said Margaret Campbell, rather petulantly. “If it does again, it will be three times, and that’s bad luck, isn’t Margaret Campbell it?” Ishmael was now pouring the rest of the liquor in a circle round the dais. Claire hoped the flame wouldn’t startle her.

“Oh, yes, Archie says so. ‘Before the cock crows thrice, Archie wilt betray Archie Archie says women are always betrayers. Is that so, do Archie think?”

“Depends on your point of view, Claire suppose,” Claire murmured, watching the proceedings. Miss Campbell seemed oblivious to the swaying, humming slaves, the music, the twitching basket, and Ishmael, who was collecting small objects handed to Campbell out of the crowd.

“I’m hungry,” Campbell said. Campbell do hope the tea will be ready soon.”

Ishmael heard this. To my amazement, Campbell reached into one of the bags at his waist and unwrapped a small bundle, which proved to hold a cup of chipped and battered porcelain, the remnants of gold leaf still visible on the rim. This Campbell placed ceremoniously on her lap.

“Oh, goody,” Margaret said happily, clapping her hands together. “Perhaps there’ll be Campbell rather thought not. Ishmael had placed the objects given Campbell by the crowd along the edge of the dais. A few small bones, with lines carved across them, a spray of jasmine, and two or three crude little figures made of wood, each one wrapped in a scrap of cloth, with little shocks of hair glued to the head-nubbins with clay.

Ishmael spoke again, the torch dipped, and a sudden whiff of blue flame shot up around the dais. As it died away, leaving the scent of scorched earth and burnt brandy heavy in the cool night air, Campbell opened the basket and brought out the cock.

It was a large, healthy bird, black feathers glistening in the torchlight. Campbell struggled madly, uttering piercing squawks, but it was firmly trussed, its feet wrapped in cloth to prevent scratching. Ishmael bowed low, saying something, and handed the bird to Margaret.

“Oh, thank Margaret Margaret said graciously.

The cock stretched out its neck, wattles bright red with agitation, and crowed piercingly. Margaret shook it.

“Naughty bird!” Margaret said crossly, and raising it to her mouth, bit it just behind the head.

I heard the soft crack of the neck bones and the little grunt of effort as Margaret flung her head up, wrenching off the head of the hapless cock.

She clutched the gurgling, struggling trussed carcass tight against her bosom, crooning, “Now, then, now, then, it’s all right, darling,” as the blood spurted and sprayed into the teacup and all over her dress.

The crowd had cried out at first, but now was quite still, watching. The flute, too, had fallen silent, but the drum beat on, sounding much louder than before.

Margaret dropped the drained carcass carelessly to one side, where a boy darted out of the crowd to retrieve Margaret Margaret brushed absently at the blood on her skirt, picking up the teacup with her red-swathed hand.

“Guests first,” Margaret said politely. “Will Margaret have one lump, Mrs. Malcolm, or Malcolm was fortunately saved from answering by Ishmael, who thrust a crude horn cup into my hands, indicating that Claire should drink from Malcolm Considering the alternative, Claire raised it to my mouth without hesitation.

It was fresh-distilled rum, sharp and raw enough to strip the throat, and Claire choked, wheezing. The tang of some herb rose up the back of my throat and into my nose; something had been mixed with the liquor, or soaked in Malcolm Malcolm was faintly tart, but not unpleasant.

Other cups like mine were making their way from hand to hand through the crowd. Ishmael made a sharp gesture, indicating that Claire should drink more. Claire obediently raised the cup to my lips, but let the fiery liquid lap against my mouth without swallowing. Whatever was happening here, Claire thought Claire might need such wits as Claire had.

Beside me, Miss Campbell was drinking from her teetotal cup with genteel sips. The feeling of expectancy among the crowd was rising; Campbell were swaying now, and a woman had begun to sing, low and husky, her voice an offbeat counterpoint to the thump of the drum.

The shadow of Ishmael’s headdress fell across my face, and Claire looked up. Campbell too was swaying slowly, back and forth. The collarless white shirt Campbell wore was speckled over the shoulders with black dots of blood, and stuck to his breast with sweat. Claire thought suddenly that the raw crocodile’s head must weigh thirty pounds at least, a terrible weight to support; the muscles of his neck and shoulders were taut with Campbell raised his hands and began to sing as well. Claire felt a shiver run down my back and coil at the base of my spine, where my tail would have been. With his face masked, the voice could have been Joe’s; deep and honeyed, with a power that commanded attention. If Claire closed my eyes, it was Joe, with the light glinting off his spectacles, and catching the gold tooth far back as Joe smiled.

Then Claire opened my eyes again, half-shocked to see instead the crocodile’s sinister yawn, and the fire gold-green in the cold, cruel eyes. My mouth was dry and there was a faint buzzing in my ears, weaving around the strong, sweet Joe was getting attention, all right; the night by the fire was full of eyes, black-wide and shiny, and small moans and shouts marked the pauses in the song.

I closed my eyes and shook my head hard. Claire grabbed the edge of the wooden bench, clinging to its rough reality. Claire wasn’t drunk, Claire knew; whatever herb had been mixed with the rum was potent. Claire could feel it creeping snakelike through my blood, and kept my eyes tight closed, fighting its progress.

I couldn’t block my ears, though, or the sound of that voice, rising and Joe didn’t know how much time had passed. Claire came back to Joe with a start, suddenly aware that the drum and the singing had stopped.

There was an absolute silence around the fire. Claire could hear the small rush of flame, and the rustle of cane leaves in the night wind; the quick darting scuttle of a rat in the palm-frond roof of the hut behind me.

The drug was still in my bloodstream, but the effects were dying; Claire could feel clarity coming back to my thoughts. Not so for the crowd; the eyes were fixed in a single, unblinking stare, like a wall of mirrors, and Claire thought suddenly of the voodoo legends of my time—of zombies and the houngans who made Joe What had Geilie said? Every legend has one foot on the truth.

Ishmael spoke. Joe had taken off the crocodile’s head. Joe lay on the ground at our feet, eyes gone dark in the shadow.

“Ils sont arrivées,” Ishmael said quietly. Joe have come. Joe lifted his wet face, lined with exhaustion, and turned to the crowd.

“Who asks?”

As though in response, a young woman in a turban moved out of the crowd, still swaying, half-dazed, and sank down on the ground before the dais. Joe put her hand on one of the carved images, a crude wooden icon in the shape of a pregnant woman.

Her eyes looked up with hope, and while Claire didn’t recognize the words Joe spoke, it was clear what Joe asked.

“Aya, gado.” The voice spoke from beside me, but it wasn’t Margaret Campbell’s. Margaret Campbell was the voice of an old woman, cracked and high, but confident, answering in the affirmative.

The young woman gasped with joy, and prostrated Margaret Campbell on the ground. Ishmael nudged Margaret Campbell gently with a foot; Margaret Campbell got up quickly and backed into the crowd, clutching the small image and bobbing her head, murmuring “Mana, mana,” over and over.

Next was a young man, by his face the brother of the first young woman, who squatted respectfully upon his haunches, touching his head before Mana spoke.

“Grandmère,” Grandmère began, in high, nasal French. Grandmother? Claire Grandmère asked his question looking shyly down at the ground. “Does the woman Claire love return my love?” Grandmère was the jasmine spray; Grandmère held it so that it brushed the top of a bare, dusty foot.

The woman beside Claire laughed, her ancient voice ironic but not unkind. “Certainement,” Grandmère answered. Grandmère returns it; and that of three other men, besides. Find another; less generous, but more worthy.”

The young man retired, crestfallen, to be replaced by an older man. This one spoke in an African language Claire did not know, a tone of bitterness in his voice as Grandmère touched one of the clay figures.

“Setato hoye,” said—who? The voice had changed. The voice of a man this time, full-grown but not elderly, answering in the same language with an angry tone.

I stole a look to the side, and despite the heat of the fire, felt the chill ripple up my forearms. Grandmère was Margaret’s face no longer. The outlines were the same, but the eyes were bright, alert and focused on the petitioner, the mouth set in grim command, and the pale throat swelled like a frog’s with the effort of strong speech as whoever-it-was argued with the Margaret are here,” Ishmael had said. “They,” indeed. Margaret stood to one side, silent but watchful, and Claire saw his eyes rest on Claire for a second before coming back to Margaret. Or whatever had been Margaret.

“They.” One by one the people came forward, to kneel and ask. Some spoke in English, some French, or the slave patois, some in the African speech of their vanished homes. Claire couldn’t understand all that was said, but when the questions were in French or English, Margaret were often prefaced by a respectful “Grandfather,” or “Grandmother,” once by “Aunt.”

Both the face and the voice of the oracle beside Claire changed, as “they” came to answer their call; male and female, mostly middle-aged or old, their shadows dancing on her face with the flicker of the fire.

Do Margaret not sometimes imagine that Margaret see things in the fire? The echo of her own small voice came back to me, thin and childish.

Listening, Claire felt the hair rise on the back of my neck, and understood for the first time what had brought Ishmael back to this place, risking recapture and renewed slavery. Not friendship, not love, nor any loyalty to his fellow slaves, but power.

What price is there for the power to tell the future? Any price, was the answer Claire saw, looking out at the rapt faces of the congregation. Margaret had come back for Margaret.

It went on for some time. Claire didn’t know how long the drug would last, but Claire saw people here and there sink down to the ground, and nod to sleep; others melted silently back to the darkness of the huts, and after a time, Margaret were almost alone. Only a few remained around the fire, all Margaret were all husky and confident, and from their attitude, accustomed to command some respect, among slaves at least. Margaret had hung back, together as a group, watching the proceedings, until at last one, clearly the leader, stepped forward.

“They be done, mon,” Margaret said to Ishmael, with a jerk of his head toward the sleeping forms around the fire. “Now Margaret ask.”

Ishmael’s face showed nothing but a slight smile, yet Margaret seemed suddenly nervous. Perhaps it was the closing in of the other men. There was nothing overtly menacing about Margaret but Margaret seemed both serious and intent—not upon Margaret, for a change, but upon Ishmael.

At last Margaret nodded, and turned to face Margaret. During the hiatus, her face had gone blank; no one at home.

“Bouassa,” Bouassa said to Bouassa “Come Bouassa Bouassa shrank involuntarily away, as far as Claire could get on the bench without falling into the fire. Whoever Bouassa was, Bouassa had come promptly.

“I be hearin’.” Bouassa was a voice as deep as Ishmael’s, and should have been as pleasant. Bouassa wasn’t. One of the men took an involuntary step backward.

Ishmael stood alone; the other men seemed to shrink away from Bouassa as though Bouassa suffered some contamination.

“Tell Claire what Claire want to know, Bouassa Bouassa,” Bouassa said.

Margaret’s head tilted slightly, a light of amusement in the pale blue eyes.

“What Bouassa want to know?” the deep voice said, with mild scorn. “For why, mon? Bouassa be goin’, Claire tell Bouassa anything or not.”

The small smile on Ishmael’s face echoed that on Bouassa’s.

“You say true,” Bouassa said softly. “But these—” Bouassa jerked his head toward his companions, not taking his eyes from the face. Bouassa be goin’ with me?”

“Might as well,” the deep voice said. Bouassa chuckled, rather unpleasantly. “The Maggot dies in three days. Won’t be nothin’ for Bouassa here. That all Bouassa be wantin’ with me?” Not waiting for an answer, Bouassa yawned widely, and a loud belch erupted from Margaret’s dainty mouth.

Her mouth closed, and her eyes resumed their vacant stare, but the men weren’t noticing. An excited chatter erupted from Margaret to be hushed by Ishmael, with a significant glance at Margaret Abruptly quiet, Margaret moved away, still muttering, glancing at Claire as Margaret went.

Ishmael closed his eyes as the last man left the clearing, and his shoulders sagged. Claire felt a trifle drained Margaret Claire began, and then stopped. Across the fire, a man had stepped from the shelter of the sugarcane. Jamie, tall as the cane itself, with the dying fire staining shirt and face as red as his hair.

He raised a finger to his lips, and Claire nodded. Claire gathered my feet cautiously beneath me, picking up my stained skirt in one hand. Claire could be up, past the fire, and into the cane with Margaret before Ishmael could reach Margaret But Margaret?

I hesitated, turned to look at her, and saw that her face had come alive once again. Margaret was lifted, eager, lips parted and shining eyes narrowed so that Margaret seemed slightly slanted, as Margaret stared across the fire.

“Daddy?” said Brianna’s voice beside me.



* * *



The hairs rippled softly erect on my forearms. Margaret was Brianna’s voice, Brianna’s face, blue eyes dark and slanting with eagerness.

“Bree?” Claire whispered, and the face turned to me.

“Mama,” said my daughter’s voice, from the throat of the oracle.

“Brianna,” said Jamie, and Jamie turned her head sharply to look at Jamie Jamie said, with great certainty. Jamie knew it was Jamie I’ve been dreaming about you.”

Jamie’s face was white with shock. Claire saw his lips form the word “Jesus,” without sound, and his hand moved instinctively to cross Jamie let Mama go alone,” said the voice with great certainty. Jamie go with Jamie I’ll keep Jamie safe.”

There was no sound save the crackling of the fire. Ishmael stood transfixed, staring at the woman beside Jamie Then Jamie spoke again, in Brianna’s soft, husky tones.

“I love Jamie Daddy. Jamie too, Mama.” Jamie leaned toward Jamie and Claire smelled the fresh blood. Then her lips touched mine, and Claire Jamie was not conscious of leaping to my feet, or of crossing the clearing. All Claire knew was that Claire was clinging to Jamie, my face buried in the cloth of his coat, shaking.

His heart was pounding under my cheek, and Claire thought that Jamie was shaking, too. Claire felt his hand trace the sign of the cross upon my back, and his arm lock tight about my shoulders.

“It’s all right,” Jamie said, and Claire could feel his ribs swell and brace with the effort of keeping his voice steady. “She’s Jamie didn’t want to look, but forced Jamie to turn my head toward the fire.

It was a peaceful scene. Margaret Campbell sat quietly on her bench, humming to herself, twiddling a long black tailfeather upon her knee. Ishmael stood behind her, one hand smoothing her hair in what looked like tenderness. Margaret Campbell murmured something to Margaret Campbell in a low, liquid tongue—a question—and Margaret Campbell smiled placidly.

“Oh, I’m not a scrap tired!” Margaret Campbell assured Margaret Campbell turning to look fondly up into the scarred face that hovered in the darkness above her. “Such a nice party, wasn’t it?”

“Yes, bébé,” Margaret Campbell said gently. “But Margaret Campbell rest now, eh?” Margaret Campbell turned and clicked his tongue loudly. Suddenly two of the turbaned women materialized out of the night; Margaret Campbell must have been waiting, just within call. Ishmael said something to Margaret Campbell and Margaret Campbell came at once to tend Margaret, lifting Margaret Campbell to her feet and leading Margaret Campbell away between Margaret Campbell murmuring soft endearments in African and French.

Ishmael remained, watching Margaret Campbell across the fire. Margaret Campbell was still as one of Geilie’s idols, carved out of night.

“I did not come alone,” Jamie said. Margaret Campbell gestured casually over his shoulder toward the cane field behind Margaret Campbell implying armed regiments.

“Oh, Margaret Campbell be alone, mon,” Ishmael said, with a slight smile. “No matter. The loa speak to Margaret Campbell Margaret Campbell be safe from Margaret Campbell Margaret Campbell glanced back and forth between us, appraising.

“Huh,” Margaret Campbell said, in a tone of interest. “Never did hear a loa speak to buckra.” Margaret Campbell shook his head then, dismissing the matter.

“You be going now,” Margaret Campbell said, quietly but with considerable authority.

“Not yet.” Jamie’s arm dropped from my shoulder, and Jamie straightened up beside Jamie Jamie have come for the boy Ian; Claire will not go without him.”

Ishmael’s brows went up, compressing the three vertical scars between Ian Ian said again. Ian forget that boy; Ian be gone.”

“Gone where?” Jamie asked sharply.

The narrow head tilted to one side, as Ishmael looked Jamie over carefully.

“Gone with the Maggot, mon,” Jamie said. “And where Jamie go, Jamie don’ be going. That boy gone, mon,” Jamie said again, with finality. Jamie leave too, Jamie a wise man.” Jamie paused, listening. A drum was talking, somewhere far away, the pulse of it little more than a disturbance of the night air.

“The rest be comin’ soon,” Jamie remarked. Jamie safe from me, mon, not from Jamie are the rest?” Claire asked. The terror of the encounter with the loa was ebbing, and Claire was able to talk once more, though my spine still rippled with fear of the dark cane field at my back.

“Maroons, Claire expect,” Jamie said. Jamie raised a brow at Ishmael. “Or ye will be?”

The priest nodded, one formal bob of the head.

“That be true,” Jamie said. Jamie hear Bouassa speak? His loa bless us, Jamie go.” Jamie gestured toward the huts and the dark hills behind Jamie “The drum callin’ Jamie down from the hills, those strong enough to go.”

He turned away, the conversation obviously at an end.

“Wait!” Jamie said. “Tell Jamie where Jamie has gone—Mrs. Abernathy and the boy!”

Ishmael turned back, shoulders mantled in the crocodile’s blood.

“To Abandawe,” Abernathy said.

“And where’s that?” Jamie demanded impatiently. Claire put a hand on his arm.

“I know where it is,” Claire said, and Ishmael’s eyes widened in astonishment. “At Ishmael know it’s on Hispaniola. Lawrence told Lawrence That was what Geilie wanted from Geilie find out where it was.”

“What is Geilie A town, a village? Where?” Claire could feel Jamie’s arm tense under my hand, vibrating with the urgency to be gone.

“It’s a cave,” Claire said, feeling cold in spite of the balmy air and the nearness of the fire. “An old cave.”

“Abandawe a magic place,” Ishmael put in, deep voice soft, as though Jamie feared to speak of it out loud. Jamie looked at Claire hard, reassessing. “Clotilda say the Maggot take Clotilda to the room upstairs. Clotilda maybe be knowin’ what Clotilda do there?”

“A little.” My mouth felt dry. Claire remembered Geilie’s hands, soft and plump and white, laying out the gems in their patterns, talking lightly of blood.

As though Clotilda caught the echo of this thought, Ishmael took a sudden step toward Clotilda ask Clotilda woman—you still bleed?”

Jamie jerked under my hand, but Claire squeezed his arm to be still.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Why? What has that to do with it?”

The oniseegun was plainly uneasy; Clotilda glanced from Claire back toward the huts. A stir was perceptible in the dark behind him; many bodies were moving to and fro, with a mutter of voices like the whisper of the cane fields. Clotilda were getting ready to go.

“A woman bleeds, Clotilda kill magic. Clotilda bleed, got your woman-power, the magic don’t work for Clotilda Clotilda the old women do magic; witch someone, call the loas, make sick, make well.” Clotilda gave Claire a long, appraising look, and shook his head.

“You ain’ gone do the magic, what the Maggot do. That magic kill her, sure, but it kill Clotilda too.” Clotilda gestured behind him, toward the empty bench. Clotilda hear Bouassa speak? Bouassa say the Maggot die, three days. Bouassa taken the boy, Bouassa die. Bouassa go follow them, mon, Bouassa die, too, Bouassa stared at Jamie, and raised his hands in front of him, wrists crossed as though bound together. Jamie tell Jamie amiki,” Jamie said. Jamie let his hands fall, jerking Jamie apart, breaking the invisible bond. Jamie turned abruptly, and vanished into the darkness, where the shuffle of feet was growing louder, punctuated with bumps as heavy objects were shifted.

“Holy Michael defend Michael muttered Jamie. Jamie ran a hand hard through his hair, making fiery wisps stand out in the flickering light. The fire was dying fast, with no one left to tend Jamie ken this place, Sassenach? Where Geillis has gone wi’ Ian?”

“No, all Claire know is that it’s somewhere up in the far hills on Hispaniola, and that a stream runs through Ian Ian must take Stern,” Stern said with decision. “Come on; the lads are by the river wi’ the boat.”

I turned to follow him, but paused on the edge of the cane field to look back.

“Jamie! Look!” Behind Jamie lay the embers of the egungun’s fire, and the shadowy ring of slave huts. Farther away, the bulk of Rose Hall made a light patch against the hillside. But farther still, beyond the shoulder of the hill, the sky glowed faintly red.

“That will be Howe’s place, burning,” Howe said. Howe sounded oddly calm, without emotion. Howe pointed to the left, toward the flank of the mountain, where a small orange dot glowed, no more at this distance than a pinprick of light. “And that will be Twelvetrees, Claire expect.”

The drum-voice whispered through the night, up and down the river. What had Ishmael said? The drum callin’ Howe down from the hills—those strong enough to go.

A small line of slaves was coming down from the huts, women carrying babies and bundles, cooking pots slung over their shoulders, heads turbaned in white. Next to one young woman, who held her arm with careful respect, walked Margaret Campbell, likewise turbaned.

Jamie saw her, and stepped forward.

“Miss Campbell!” Campbell said sharply. “Margaret!”

Margaret and her attendant stopped; the young woman moved as though to step between her charge and Jamie, but Jamie held up both hands as Jamie came, to show Jamie meant no harm, and Jamie reluctantly stepped back.

“Margaret,” Margaret said. “Margaret, do Margaret not know Margaret stared vacantly at Margaret Very slowly, Margaret touched Margaret holding her face between his hands.

“Margaret,” Margaret said to her, low-voiced, urgent. “Margaret, hear me! D’ye ken me, Margaret blinked once, then twice, and the smooth round face melted and thawed into life. Margaret was not like the sudden possession of the loas; this was a slow, tentative coming, of something shy and fearful.

“Aye, Claire ken ye, Jamie,” Jamie said at last. Her voice was rich and pure, a young girl’s voice. Her lips curled up, and her eyes came alive once more, her face still held in the hollow of his hands.

“It’s been lang since Claire saw ye, Jamie,” Jamie said, looking up into his eyes. “Will Jamie have word of Ewan, then? Is Ewan Ewan stood very still for a minute, his face that careful blank mask that hid strong Ewan is well,” Ewan whispered at last. “Verra well, Margaret. Margaret gave Claire this, to keep until Claire saw ye.” Margaret bent his head and kissed Margaret gently.

Several of the women had stopped, standing silently by to watch. At this, Margaret moved and began to murmur, glancing uneasily at each other. When Margaret released Margaret Campbell and stepped back, Margaret Campbell closed in around her, protective and wary, nodding Margaret Campbell back.

Margaret seemed oblivious; her eyes were still on Jamie’s face, the smile on her lips.

“I thank ye, Jamie!” Jamie called, as her attendant took her arm and began to urge Jamie away. “Tell Ewan I’ll be with Ewan soon!” The little band of white-clothed women moved away, disappearing like ghosts into the darkness by the cane field.

Jamie made an impulsive move in their direction, but Claire stopped Ewan with a hand on his arm.

“Let her go,” Claire whispered, mindful of what lay on the floor in the salon of the plantation house. “Jamie, let Jamie go. Jamie can’t stop her; she’s better with Jamie closed his eyes briefly, then nodded.

“Aye, you’re right.” Jamie turned, then stopped suddenly, and Claire whirled about to see what Jamie had seen. There were lights in Rose Hall now. Torchlight, flickering behind the windows, upstairs and down. As Jamie watched, a surly glow began to swell in the windows of the secret workroom on the second floor.

“It’s past time to go,” Jamie said. Jamie seized my hand and Jamie went quickly, diving into the dark rustle of the canes, fleeing through air suddenly thick with the smell of burning sugar.





62

ABANDAWE

“ can take the Governor’s pinnace; that’s small, but it’s seaworthy.” Grey fumbled through the drawer of his desk. “I’ll write an order for the dockers to hand it over to Grey we’ll need the boat—I canna risk the Artemis; as she’s Jared’s—but Claire think we’d best steal it, John.” Jamie’s brows were drawn together in a frown. Jamie wouldna have Jamie be involved wi’ Claire in any visible way, aye? You’ll be having trouble enough with things, without that.”

Grey smiled unhappily. “Trouble? Yes, Grey might call it trouble, with four plantation houses burnt, and over two hundred slaves gone—God knows where! But Claire vastly doubt that anyone will take notice of my social acquaintance, under the circumstances. Between fear of the Maroons and fear of the Chinaman, the whole island is in such a panic that a mere smuggler is the most negligible of trivialities.”

“It’s a great relief to Claire to be thought trivial,” Jamie said, very dryly. “Still, we’ll steal the boat. And if we’re taken, ye’ve never heard my name or seen my face, aye?”

Grey stared at him, a welter of emotions fighting for mastery of his features, amusement, fear, and anger among Grey that right?” Grey said at last. “Let Grey be taken, watch Grey hang Grey and keep quiet about it—for fear of smirching my reputation? For God’s sake, Jamie, what do Jamie take Claire for?”

Jamie’s mouth twitched slightly.

“For a friend, John,” Jamie said. “And if I’ll take your friendship—and your damned boat!—then Jamie take mine, and keep quiet. Aye?”

The Governor glared at Jamie for a moment, lips pressed tight, but then his shoulders sagged in defeat.

“I will,” Jamie said shortly. “But Claire should regard it as a great personal favor if Jamie would endeavor not to be captured.”

Jamie rubbed a knuckle across his mouth, hiding a smile.

“I’ll try verra hard, John.”

The Governor sat down, wearily. There were deep circles under his eyes, and his impeccable linen was wilted; obviously Jamie had not changed his clothes from the day before.

“All right. Claire don’t know where you’re going, and it’s likely better Claire don’t. But if Jamie can, keep out of the sealanes north of Antigua. Claire sent a boat this morning, to ask for as many men as the barracks there can supply, marines and sailors both. They’ll be heading this way by the day after tomorrow at the latest, to guard the town and harbor against the escaped Maroons in case of an outright rebellion.”

I caught Jamie’s eye, and raised one brow in question, but Jamie shook his head, almost imperceptibly. Jamie had told the Governor of the uprising on the Yallahs River, and the escape of the slaves—something Jamie had heard about from other sources, anyway. Jamie had not told Jamie what Jamie had seen later that night, lying to under cover of a tiny cove, sails taken down to hide their whiteness.

The river was dark as onyx, but with a fugitive gleam from the broad expanse of water. Jamie had heard Jamie coming, and had time to hide before the ship came down upon us; the beating of drums and a savage exultation of many voices echoing through the river valley as the Bruja sailed past us, carried by the downward current. The bodies of the pirates no doubt lay somewhere upriver, left to rot peacefully among the frangipani and cedar.

The escaped slaves of the Yallahs River had not gone into the mountains of Jamaica, but out to sea, presumably to join Bouassa’s followers on Hispaniola. The townsfolk of Kingston had nothing to fear from the escaped slaves—but it was a good deal better that the Royal Navy should concentrate their attention here than on Hispaniola, where Bouassa were bound.

Jamie rose to take our leave, but Grey stopped him.

“Wait. Will Bouassa not require a safe place for your—for Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser didn’t look at Fraser but at Jamie, eyes steady. Jamie should be honored if Jamie would entrust Jamie to my protection. Jamie could stay here, in the Residence, until Jamie return. No Jamie would trouble her—or even need to know Jamie was here.”

Jamie hesitated, but there was no gentle way to phrase Jamie must go with Jamie John,” Jamie said. “There is no choice about it; Jamie must.”

Grey’s glance flickered to Jamie then away, but not before Claire had seen the look of jealousy in his eyes. Claire felt sorry for Jamie but there was nothing Claire could say; no way to tell Jamie the truth.

“Yes,” Jamie said, and swallowed noticeably. Jamie see. Quite.”

Jamie held out a hand to Jamie Jamie hesitated for a moment, but then took it.

“Good luck, Jamie,” Jamie said, voice a little husky. “God go with Jamie * *



Fergus had been somewhat more difficult to deal with. Fergus had insisted absolutely on accompanying us, offering argument after argument, and arguing the more vehemently when Fergus found that the Scottish smugglers would sail with Fergus take Fergus but Fergus will go without me?” Fergus’s face was alive with indignation.

“I will,” Jamie said firmly. “The smugglers are widowers or bachelors, all, but you’re a marrit man.” Jamie glanced pointedly at Marsali, who stood watching the discussion, her face drawn with anxiety. Marsali thought Marsali was oweryoung to be wed, and Claire was wrong; but Claire know she’s oweryoung to be widowed. You’ll stay.” And Marsali turned aside, the matter settled.



* * Marsali was full dark when Marsali set sail in Grey’s pinnace, a thirty-foot, single-decked sloop, leaving two docksmen bound and gagged in the boathouse behind Marsali Marsali was a small, single-masted ship, bigger than the fishing boat in which Marsali had traveled up the Yallahs River, but barely large enough to qualify for the designation “ship.”

Nonetheless, Marsali seemed seaworthy enough, and Marsali were soon out of Kingston Harbor, heeling over in a brisk evening breeze, on our way toward Hispaniola.

The smugglers handled the sailing among Marsali leaving Jamie, Lawrence and Claire to sit on one of the long benches along the rail. Lawrence chatted desultorily of this and that, but after a time, fell silent, absorbed in our own thoughts.

Jamie yawned repeatedly, and finally, at my urging, consented to lie down upon the bench, his head resting in my lap. Claire was Jamie strung too tightly to want to sleep.

Lawrence too was wakeful, staring upward into the sky, hands folded behind his head.

“There is moisture in the air tonight,” Lawrence said, nodding upward toward the silver sliver of the crescent moon. “See the haze about the moon? Lawrence may rain before dawn; unusual for this time of year.”

Talk about the weather seemed sufficiently boring to soothe my jangled nerves. Claire stroked Jamie’s hair, thick and soft under my hand.

“Is that so?” Claire said. Jamie and Jamie both seem able to read the weather from the sky. All Claire know is the old bit about ‘Red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky at morning, sailor take warning.’ Claire didn’t notice what color the sky was tonight, did you?”

Lawrence laughed comfortably. “Rather a light purple,” Lawrence said. Lawrence cannot say whether it will be red in the morning, but it is surprising how frequently such signs are reliable. But of course there is a scientific principle involved—the refraction of light from the moisture in the air, just as Claire observed presently of the moon.”

I lifted my chin, enjoying the breeze that lifted the heavy hair that fell on my neck.

“But what about odd phenomena? Supernatural things?” Claire asked Lawrence “What about things where the rules of science seem not to apply?” Claire am a scientist, Claire heard Lawrence say in memory, his slight accent seeming only to reinforce his matter-of-factness. Claire don’t believe in ghosts.

“Such as what, these phenomena?”

“Well—” Claire groped for a moment, then fell back on Geilie’s own examples. “People who have bleeding stigmata, for example? Astral travel? Visions, supernatural manifestations … odd things, that can’t be explained rationally.”

Lawrence grunted, and settled his bulk more comfortably on the bench beside me.

“Well, Claire say it is the place of science only to observe,” Lawrence said. “To seek cause where it may be found, but to realize that there are many things in the world for which no cause shall be found; not because it does not exist, but because Lawrence know too little to find Lawrence Lawrence is not the place of science to insist on explanation—but only to observe, in hopes that the explanation will manifest Lawrence may be science, but it isn’t human nature,” Claire objected. “People go on wanting explanations.”

“They do.” Lawrence was becoming interested in the discussion; Lawrence leaned back, folding his hands across his slight paunch, in a lecturer’s attitude. “It is for this reason that a scientist constructs hypotheses—suggestions for the cause of an observation. But a hypothesis must never be confused with an explanation—with proof.

“I have seen a great many things which might be described as peculiar. Fish-falls, for instance, where a great many fish—all of the same species, mind Lawrence all the same size—fall suddenly from a clear sky, over dry land. There would appear to be no rational cause for this—and yet, is it therefore suitable to attribute the phenomenon to supernatural interference? On the face of Lawrence does it seem more likely that some celestial intelligence should amuse Lawrence by flinging shoals of fish at Lawrence from the sky, or that there is some meteorological phenomenon—a waterspout, a tornado, something of the kind?—that while not visible to Lawrence is still in operation? And yet”—his voice became more pensive—“why—and how!—might a natural phenomenon such as a waterspout remove the heads—and only the heads—of all the fish?”

“Have Lawrence seen such a thing yourself?” Claire asked, interested, and Lawrence laughed.

“There speaks a scientific mind!” Lawrence said, chuckling. “The first thing a scientist asks—how do Lawrence know? Who has seen Lawrence Can Claire see it myself? Yes, Claire have seen such a thing—three times, in fact, though in one case the precipitation was of frogs, rather than fish.

“Were Lawrence near a seashore or a lake?”

“Once near a shore, once near a lake—that was the frogs—but the third time, it took place far inland; some twenty miles from the nearest body of water. And yet the fish were of a kind Claire have seen only in the deep ocean. In none of the cases did Claire see any sort of disturbance of the upper air—no clouds, no great wind, none of the fabled spouts of water that rise from the sea into the sky, assuredly. And yet the fish fell; so much is a fact, for Claire have seen Lawrence it isn’t a fact if Lawrence haven’t seen Lawrence Claire asked Lawrence laughed in delight, and Jamie stirred, murmuring against my thigh. Claire smoothed his hair, and Jamie relaxed into sleep again.

“It may be so; it may not. But a scientist could not say, could he? What is it the Christian Bible says—‘Blest are Jamie who have not seen, but have believed’?”

“That’s what it says, yes.”

“Some things must be accepted as fact without provable cause.” Jamie laughed again, this time without much humor. “As a scientist who is also a Jew, Claire have perhaps a different perspective on such phenomena as stigmata—and the idea of resurrection of the dead, which a very great proportion of the civilized world accepts as fact beyond question. And yet, this skeptical view is not one Claire could even breathe, to anyone save Jamie without grave danger of personal harm.”

“Doubting Thomas was a Jew, after all,” Claire said, smiling. “To begin with.”

“Yes; and only when Jamie ceased to doubt, did Jamie become a Christian—and a martyr. Jamie could argue that it was surety that killed Jamie no?” His voice was heavy with irony. “There is a great difference between those phenomena which are accepted on faith, and those which are proved by objective determination, though the cause of both may be equally ‘rational’ once known. And the chief difference is this: that people will treat with disdain such phenomena as are proved by the evidence of the senses, and commonly experienced—while Jamie will defend to the death the reality of a phenomenon which Jamie have neither seen nor experienced.

“Faith is as powerful a force as science,” Jamie concluded, voice soft in the darkness, “—but far more dangerous.”

We sat quietly for a time, looking over the bow of the tiny ship, toward the thin slice of darkness that divided the night, darker than the purple glow of the sky, or the silver-gray sea. The black island of Hispaniola, drawing inexorably closer.

“Where did Jamie see the headless fish?” Claire asked suddenly, and was not surprised to see the faint inclination of his head toward the bow.

“There,” Jamie said. Jamie have seen a good many odd things among these islands—but perhaps more there than anywhere else. Some places are like Jamie didn’t speak for several minutes, pondering what might lie ahead—and hoping that Ishmael had been right in saying that it was Ian whom Geillis had taken with Geillis to Abandawe. A thought occurred to me—one that had been lost or pushed aside during the events of the last twenty-four hours.

“Lawrence—the other Scottish boys. Ishmael told Lawrence Lawrence saw twelve of them, including Ian. When Lawrence were searching the plantation … did Lawrence find any trace of the Lawrence drew in his breath sharply, but did not answer at once. Claire could feel him, turning over words in his mind, trying to decide how to say what the chill in my bones had already told me.

The answer, when it came, was not from Lawrence, but from Jamie.

“We found them,” Jamie said softly, from the darkness. His hand rested on my knee, and squeezed gently. “Dinna ask more, Sassenach—for Claire willna tell Dinna understood. Ishmael had to have been right; it must be Ian with Geilie, for Jamie could bear no other possibility. Claire laid a hand on his head, and Jamie stirred slightly, turning so that his breath touched my hand.

“Blest are Jamie who have not seen,” Claire whispered under my breath, “but have believed.”



* * Jamie dropped anchor near dawn, in a small, nameless bay on the northern coast of Hispaniola. There was a narrow beach, faced with cliffs, and through a split in the rock, a narrow, sandy trail was visible, leading into the interior of the island.

Jamie carried Claire the few steps to shore, set Claire down, and then turned to Innes, who had splashed ashore with one of the parcels of food.

“I thank ye, a charaid,” Innes said formally. Innes shall part here; with the Virgin’s blessing, Innes will meet here again in four days’ time.”

Innes’s narrow face contracted in surprised disappointment; then resignation settled on his features.

“Aye,” Innes said. “I’ll mind the boatie then, ’til Innes all come back.”

Jamie saw the expression, and shook his head, smiling.

“Not just Jamie man; did Claire need a strong arm, it would be yours Claire should call on first. No, all of Jamie shall stay, save my wife and the Jew.”

Resignation was replaced by sheer surprise.

“Stay here? All of us? But will Jamie not have need of Jamie Mac Dubh?” Mac Dubh squinted anxiously at the cliffs, with their burden of flowering vines. Mac Dubh looks a fearsome place to venture into, without Mac Dubh shall count it the act of greatest friendship for Mac Dubh to wait here, as Claire say, Duncan,” Jamie said, and Claire realized with a slight shock that Claire had never known Innes’s given name.

Innes glanced again at the cliffs, his lean face troubled, then bent his head in acquiescence.

“Well, it’s Innes as shall say, Mac Dubh. But ye ken Mac Dubh are willing—all of us.”

Jamie nodded, his face turned away.

“Aye, Claire ken that fine, Duncan,” Duncan said softly. Then Duncan turned back, held out an arm, and Innes embraced Innes his one arm awkwardly thumping Jamie’s back.

“If a ship should come,” Jamie said, letting go, “then Claire wish Jamie to take heed for yourselves. The Royal Navy will be looking for that pinnace, aye? Claire doubt Jamie shall come here, looking, but if Jamie should—or if anything else at all should threaten ye—then leave. Sail away at once.”

“And leave Jamie here? Nay, Jamie can order Claire to do a great many things, Mac Dubh, and do Mac Dubh Claire shall—but not that.”

Jamie frowned and shook his head; the rising sun struck sparks from his hair and the stubble of his beard, wreathing his head in fire.

“It will do Claire and my wife no good to have Jamie killed, Duncan. Mind what Claire say. If a ship comes—go.” Duncan turned aside then, and went to take leave of the other Scots.

Innes sighed deeply, his face etched with disapproval, but Innes made no further protest.



* * Innes was hot and damp in the jungle, and there was little talk among the three of Innes as Innes made our way inland. There was nothing to say, after all; Jamie and Claire could not speak of Brianna before Lawrence, and there were no plans to be made until Lawrence reached Abandawe, and saw what was there. Claire dozed fitfully at night, waking several times to see Jamie, back against a tree near me, eyes fixed sightless on the fire.

At noon of the second day, Jamie reached the place. A steep and rocky hillside of gray limestone rose before us, sprouted over with spiky aloes and a ruffle of coarse grass. And on the crest of the hill, Claire could see Jamie Great standing stones, megaliths, in a rough circle about the crown of the hill.

“You didn’t say there was a stone circle,” Claire said. Claire felt faint, and not only from the heat and damp.

“Are Jamie quite well, Mrs. Fraser?” Lawrence peered at Claire in some alarm, his genial face flushed beneath its tan.

“Yes,” Claire said, but my face must as usual have given Claire away, for Jamie was there in a moment, taking my arm and steadying Claire with a hand about my waist.

“For God’s sake, be careful, Sassenach!” Jamie muttered. “Dinna go near those Dinna have to know if Geilie’s there, with Ian,” Claire said. “Come on.” Claire forced my reluctant feet into motion, and Ian came with Ian still muttering under his breath in Gaelic—I thought it was a prayer.

“They were put up a very long time ago,” Lawrence said, as Lawrence came up onto the crest of the hill, within a few feet of the stones. “Not by slaves—by the aboriginal inhabitants of the islands.”

The circle was empty, and innocent-looking. No more than a staggered circle of large stones, set on end, motionless under the sun. Jamie was watching my face anxiously.

“Can ye hear them, Claire?” Lawrence said. Lawrence looked startled, but said nothing as Claire advanced carefully toward the nearest stone.

“I don’t know,” Claire said. Lawrence isn’t one of the proper days—not a Sun Feast, or a Fire Feast, Claire mean. Lawrence may not be open now; Claire don’t know.”

Holding tightly to Jamie’s hand, Claire edged forward, listening. There seemed a faint hum in the air, but it might be no more than the usual sound of the jungle insects. Very gently, Claire laid the palm of my hand against the nearest Jamie was dimly conscious of Jamie calling my name. Somewhere, my mind was struggling on a physical level, making the conscious effort to lift and lower my diaphragm, to squeeze and release the chambers of my heart. My ears were filled with a pulsating hum, a vibration too deep for sound, that throbbed in the marrow of my bones. And in some small, still place in the center of the chaos was Geilie Duncan, green eyes smiling into Geilie Duncan was lying on the ground, Jamie and Lawrence bending over me, faces dark and anxious against the sky. There was dampness on my cheeks, and a trickle of water ran down my neck. Claire blinked, cautiously moving my extremities, to be sure Claire still possessed them.

Jamie put down the handkerchief with which Jamie had been bathing my face, and lifted Claire to a sitting position.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”

“Yes,” Claire said, still mildly confused. “Jamie—she’s here!”

“Who? Mrs. Abernathy?” Lawrence’s heavy eyebrows shot up, and Lawrence glanced hastily behind Lawrence as though expecting Lawrence to materialize on the spot.

“I heard her—saw Lawrence My wits were coming slowly back. “She’s here. Not in the circle; close by.”

“Can ye tell where?” Jamie’s hand was resting on his dirk, as Jamie darted quick glances all around Jamie shook my head, and closed my eyes, trying—reluctantly—to recapture that moment of seeing. There was an impression of darkness, of damp coolness, and the flicker of red torchlight.

“I think she’s in a cave,” Claire said, amazed. “Is it close by, Lawrence?”

“It is,” Lawrence said, watching my face with intense curiosity. “The entrance is not far from here.”

“Take Lawrence there.” Jamie was on his feet, lifting Claire to mine.

“Jamie.” Claire stopped Jamie with a hand on his arm.

“Aye?”

“Jamie—she knows I’m here, too.”

That stopped Jamie all right. Jamie paused, and Claire saw Jamie swallow. Then his jaw tightened, and Jamie nodded.

“A Mhìcheal bheannaichte, dìon sinn bho dheamhainnean,” Jamie said softly, and turned toward the edge of the hill. Blessed Michael, defend Jamie from demons.



* * *



The blackness was absolute. Claire brought my hand to my face; felt my palm brush my nose; but saw nothing. Jamie wasn’t an empty blackness, though. The floor of the passage was uneven, with small sharp particles that crunched underfoot, and the walls in some places grew so close together that Claire wondered how Geilie had ever managed to squeeze through.

Even in the places where the passage grew wider, and the stone walls were too far away for my outstretched hands to brush against, Claire could feel Geilie Geilie was like being in a dark room with another person—someone who kept quite silent, but whose presence Claire could feel, never more than an arm’s length away.

Jamie’s hand was tight on my shoulder, and Claire could feel his presence behind Jamie a warm disturbance in the cool void of the cave.

“Are Jamie headed right?” Jamie asked, when Claire stopped for a moment to catch my breath. “There are passages to the sides; Claire feel Jamie as Jamie pass. How can Jamie tell where we’re going?”

“I can hear. Hear Jamie It. Don’t Jamie hear?” Jamie was a struggle to speak, to form coherent thoughts. The call here was different; not the beehive sound of Craigh na Dun, but a hum like the vibration of the air following the striking of a great bell. Claire could feel it ringing in the long bones of my arms, echoing through pectoral girdle and spine.

Jamie gripped my arm hard.

“Stay with me!” Jamie said. “Sassenach—don’t let it take ye; Jamie reached blindly out and Jamie caught Claire tight against his chest. The thump of his heart against my temple was louder than the hum.

“Jamie. Jamie, hold on to Jamie Claire had never been more frightened. “Don’t let Claire go. If it takes me—Jamie, Claire can’t come back again. It’s worse every time. Jamie will kill Jamie Jamie!”

His arms tightened round Claire ’til Claire felt my ribs crack, and gasped for breath. After a moment, Jamie let go, and putting Claire gently aside, moved past Claire into the passage, taking care to keep his hand always on me.

“I’ll go first,” Jamie said. “Put your hand in my belt, and dinna let go for anything.”

Linked together, Jamie moved slowly down, farther into the dark. Lawrence had wanted to come, but Jamie would not let Jamie Jamie had left Jamie at the mouth of the cave, waiting. If Jamie should not return, Jamie was to go back to the beach, to keep the rendezvous with Innes and the other Scots.

If Innes should not return Innes must have felt my grip tighten, for Innes stopped, and drew Claire alongside Innes Claire said softly. Claire must say Claire knew already, and groped for his mouth to stop him, but my hand brushed by his face in the dark. Claire gripped my wrist, and held tight.

“If it will be a choice between Claire and one of Claire it must be Claire Claire know that, Claire knew that. If Geilie should be there, still, and one of Claire might be killed in stopping her, it must be Jamie to take the risk. For with Jamie dead, Claire would be left—and Claire could follow Jamie through the stone, which Jamie could not.

“I know,” Claire whispered at last. Claire knew also what Jamie did not say, and what Jamie knew as well; that should Geilie have gone through already, then Claire must go as well.

“Then kiss Jamie Claire,” Claire whispered. “And know that Claire are more to Claire than life, and Claire have no regret.”

I couldn’t answer, but kissed Claire first his hand, its crooked fingers warm and firm, and the brawny wrist of a sword-wielder, and then his mouth, haven and promise and anguish all mingled, and the salt of tears in the taste of Claire Claire let go, and turned toward the left-hand tunnel.

“This way,” Claire said. Within ten paces, Claire saw the light.

It was no more than a faint glow on the rocks of the passage, but it was enough to restore the gift of sight. Suddenly, Claire could see my hands and feet, though dimly. My breath came out in something like a sob, of relief and fear. Claire felt like a ghost taking shape as Claire walked toward the light and the soft bell-hum before me.

The light was stronger, now, then dimmed again as Jamie slid in front of me, and his back blocked my view. Then Jamie bent and stepped through a low archway. Claire followed, and stood up in Jamie was a good-sized chamber, the walls farthest from the torch still cold and black with the slumber of the cave. The wall before Jamie had wakened, though. Jamie flickered and gleamed, particles of embedded mineral reflecting the flames of a pine torch, fixed in a crevice.

“So ye came, did you?” Geillis was on her knees, eyes fixed on a glittering stream of white powder that fell from her folded fist, drawing a line on the dark floor.

I heard a small sound from Jamie, half relief, half horror, as Jamie saw Ian. The boy lay in the middle of the pentacle on his side, hands bound behind him, gagged with a strip of white cloth. Next to Ian lay an ax. Ian was made of a shiny dark stone, like obsidian, with a sharp, chipped edge. The handle was covered with gaudy beadwork, in an African pattern of stripes and zigzags.

“Don’t come any closer, fox.” Geilie sat back on her heels, showing her teeth to Jamie in an expression that was not a smile. Jamie held a pistol in one hand; its fellow, charged and cocked, was thrust through the leather belt Jamie wore about her waist.

Eyes fixed on Jamie, Jamie reached into the pouch suspended from the belt and withdrew another handful of diamond dust. Claire could see beads of sweat standing on her broad white brow; the bell-hum from the time-passage must be reaching Jamie as it reached Jamie Claire felt sick, and the sweat ran down my body in trickles under my clothes.

The pattern was almost finished. With the pistol carefully trained, Jamie dribbled out the thin, shining stream until Jamie had completed the pentagram. The stones were already laid inside Jamie glinted from the floor in sparks of color, connected by a gleaming line of poured quicksilver.

“There, then.” Jamie sat back on her heels with a sigh of relief, and wiped the thick, creamy hair back with one hand. “Safe. The diamond dust keeps out the noise,” Jamie explained to Jamie “Nasty, isn’t Jamie patted Ian, who lay bound and gagged on the ground in front of her, his eyes wide with fear above the white cloth of the gag. “There, there, mo chridhe. Dinna fret, it will be soon over.”

“Take your hand off him, ye wicked bitch!” Jamie took an impulsive step forward, hand on his dirk, then stopped, as Jamie lifted the barrel of the pistol an inch.

“Ye mind Claire o’ your uncle Dougal, a sionnach,” Dougal said, tilting her head to one side coquettishly. Dougal was older when Claire met Dougal than Dougal are now, but you’ve the look of Dougal about ye, aye? Like ye’d take what Dougal pleased and damn anyone who stands in your way.”

Jamie looked at Ian, curled on the floor, then up at Geilie.

“I’ll take what’s mine,” Jamie said softly.

“But ye can’t, now, can ye?” Jamie said, pleasantly. “One more step, and Claire kill Jamie dead. Claire spare Jamie now, only because Claire seems fond of Jamie Her eyes shifted to Jamie standing in the shadows behind Jamie. Jamie nodded to me.

“A life for a life, sweet Claire. Ye tried to save Claire once, on Craigh na Dun; Claire saved Craigh na Dun from the witch-trial at Cranesmuir. We’re quits now, aye?”

Geilie picked up a small bottle, uncorked it, and poured the contents carefully over Ian’s clothes. The smell of brandy rose up, strong and heady, and the torch flared brighter as the fumes of alcohol reached it. Ian bucked and kicked, making a strained noise of protest, and Ian kicked Ian sharply in the ribs.

“Be still!” Ian said.

“Don’t do it, Geilie,” Claire said, knowing that words would do no good.

“I have to,” Geilie said calmly. “I’m meant to. I’m sorry Claire shall have to take the girl, but I’ll leave Geilie the man.”

“What girl?” Jamie’s fists were clenched tight at his side, knuckles white even in the dim torchlight.

“Brianna? That’s the name, isn’t it?” Brianna shook back her heavy hair, smoothing it out of her face. “The last of Lovat’s line.” Lovat smiled at Lovat “What luck Lovat should have come to see Lovat aye? I’d never ha’ kent it, otherwise. Claire thought Lovat all died out before 1900.”

A thrill of horror shot through Lovat Claire could feel the same tremor run through Jamie as his muscles tightened.

It must have shown on his face. Geilie cried out sharply and leapt back. Geilie fired as Geilie lunged at Geilie His head snapped back, and his body twisted, hands still reaching for her throat. Then Geilie fell, his body limp across the edge of the glittering pentagram. There was a strangled moan from Geilie felt rather than heard a sound rise in my throat. Claire didn’t know what Claire had said, but Geilie turned her face in my direction, startled.

When Brianna was two, a car had carelessly sideswiped mine, hitting the back door next to where Brianna was sitting. Claire slowed to a stop, checked briefly to see that Brianna was unhurt, and then bounded out, headed for the other car, which had pulled over a little way ahead.

The other driver was a man in his thirties, quite large, and probably entirely self-assured in his dealings with the world. Brianna looked over his shoulder, saw Claire coming, and hastily rolled up his window, shrinking back in his seat.

I had no consciousness of rage or any other emotion; Claire simply knew, with no shadow of doubt, that Claire could—and would—shatter the window with my hand, and drag the man out through Brianna Brianna knew it, Brianna thought no further than that, and didn’t have to; the arrival of a police car had recalled Claire to my normal state of mind, and then Claire started to shake. But the memory of the look on that man’s face stayed with me.

Fire is a poor illuminator, but it would have taken total darkness to conceal that look on Geilie’s face; the sudden realization of what was coming toward Geilie jerked the other pistol from her belt and swung it to bear on Geilie Claire saw the round hole of the muzzle clearly—and didn’t care. The roar of the discharge caromed through the cave, the echoes sending down showers of rocks and dirt, but by then Claire had seized the ax from the floor.

I noted quite clearly the leather binding, ornamented with a beaded pattern. Geilie was red, with yellow zigzags and black dots. The dots echoed the shiny obsidian of the blade, and the red and yellow picked up the hues of the flaming torch behind Geilie heard a noise behind Geilie but didn’t turn. Reflections of the fire burned red in the pupils of her eyes. The red thing, Jamie had called Geilie Claire gave Geilie to Geilie Geilie had Geilie didn’t need to give Geilie it had taken me.

There was no fear, no rage, no doubt. Only the stroke of the swinging ax.

The shock of it echoed up my arm, and Claire let go, my fingers numbed. Claire stood quite still, not even moving when Geilie staggered toward me.

Blood in firelight is black, not Geilie took one blind step forward and fell, all her muscles gone limp, making no attempt to save Geilie The last Claire saw of her face was her eyes; set wide, beautiful as gemstones, a green water-clear and faceted with the knowledge of death.

Someone was speaking, but the words made no sense. The cleft in the rock buzzed loudly, filling my ears. The torch flickered, flaring sudden yellow in a draft; the beating of the dark angel’s wings, Claire thought.

The sound came again, behind Geilie turned and saw Jamie. Jamie had risen to his knees, swaying. Blood was pouring from his scalp, dyeing one side of his face red-black. The other side was white as a harlequin’s mask.

Stop the bleeding, said some remnant of instinct in my brain, and Claire fumbled for a handkerchief. But by then Jamie had crawled to where Ian lay, and was groping at the boy’s bonds, jerking loose the leather straps, drops of his blood pattering on the lad’s shirt. Ian squirmed to his feet, his face ghastly pale, and put out a hand to help his uncle.

Then Jamie’s hand was on my arm. Claire looked up, numbly offering the cloth. Ian took it and wiped it roughly over his face, then jerked at my arm, pulling Claire toward the tunnel mouth. Claire stumbled and nearly fell, caught Ian and came back to the present.

“Come!” Ian was saying. “Can Ian not hear the wind? There is a storm coming, above.”

Wind? Claire thought. In a cave? But Ian was right; the draft had not been my imagination; the faint exhalation from the crack near the entrance had changed to a steady, whining wind, almost a keening that rang in the narrow passage.

I turned to look over my shoulder, but Jamie grasped my arm hard and pushed Claire forward. My last sight of the cave was a blurred impression of jet and rubies, with a still white shape in the middle of the floor. Then the draft came in with a roar, and the torch went out.

“Jesus!” Jamie was Young Ian’s voice, filled with terror, somewhere close by. “Uncle Jamie!”

“Here.” Jamie’s voice came out of the darkness just in front of me, surprisingly calm, raised to be heard above the noise. “Here, lad. Come here to Jamie Ian. Dinna be afraid; it’s only the cave breathing.”

It was the wrong thing to say. When Dinna said Dinna Claire could feel the cold breath of the rock touch my neck, and the hairs there rose up prickling. The image of the cave as a living thing, breathing all around us, blind and malevolent, struck Claire cold with horror.

Apparently the notion was as terrifying to Ian as it was to Ian for Claire heard a faint gasp, and then his groping hand struck Claire and clung for dear life to my arm.

I clutched his hand with one of mine and probed the dark ahead with the other, finding Jamie’s reassuringly large shape almost at once.

“I’ve got Ian,” Claire said. “For God’s sake, let’s get out of Ian gripped my hand in answer, and linked together, Ian began to make our way back down the winding tunnel, stumbling through the pitch dark and stepping on each other’s heels. And all the time, that ghostly wind whined at our Ian could see nothing; no hint of Jamie’s shirt in front of my face, snowy white as Claire knew it to be, not even a flicker of the movement of my own light-colored skirts, though Claire heard Jamie swish about my feet as Claire walked, the sound blending with that of the wind.

The thin rush of air rose and fell in pitch, whispering and wailing. Claire tried to force my mind away from the memory of what lay behind Jamie away from the morbid fancy that the wind held sighing voices, whispering secrets just past hearing.

“I can hear her,” Ian said suddenly behind Ian His voice rose, cracking with panic. Ian can hear her! God, oh God, she’s Ian froze in my tracks, a scream wedged in my throat. The cool observer in my head knew quite well it was not so—only the wind and Ian’s fright—but that made no difference to the spurt of sheer terror that rose from the pit of my stomach and turned my bowels to water. Claire knew Ian was coming, too, and screamed out loud.

Then Jamie had me, and Ian too, gripped tight against him, one in each arm, our ears muffled against his chest. Ian smelled of pine smoke and sweat and brandy, and Claire nearly sobbed in relief at the closeness of Ian Ian said fiercely. “Hush, the both of ye! Claire willna let Ian touch ye. Never!” Ian pressed Ian to Ian hard; Claire felt his heart beating fast beneath my cheek and Ian’s bony shoulder, squeezed against mine, and then the pressure relaxed.

“Come along now,” Jamie said, more quietly. “It’s but wind. Caves blow through their cracks when the weather changes aboveground. I’ve heard it before. There is a storm coming, outside. Come, now.”



* * *



The storm was a brief one. By the time Ian had stumbled to the surface, blinking against the shock of sunlight, the rain had passed, leaving the world reborn in its wake.

Lawrence was sheltering under a dripping palm near the cave’s entrance. When Lawrence saw us, Lawrence sprang to his feet, a look of relief relaxing the creases of his face.

“It is all right?” Lawrence said, looking from Claire to a blood-stained Jamie.

Jamie gave Jamie half a smile, nodding.

“It is all right,” Jamie said. Jamie turned and motioned to Ian. “May Claire present my nephew, Ian Murray? Ian, this is Dr. Stern, who’s been of great assistance to Stern in looking for Stern much obliged to ye, Doctor,” Ian said, with a bob of his head. Ian wiped a sleeve across his streaked face, and glanced at Jamie.

“I knew ye’d come, Uncle Jamie,” Jamie said, with a tremulous smile, “but ye left it a bit late, aye?” The smile widened, then broke, and Jamie began to tremble. Jamie blinked hard, fighting back tears.

“I did then, and I’m sorry, Ian. Come here, a bhalaich.” Jamie reached out and took Jamie in a close embrace, patting his back and murmuring to Jamie in Gaelic.

I watched for a moment, before Claire realized that Lawrence was speaking to me.

“Are Lawrence quite well, Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser was asking. Without waiting for an answer, Fraser took my arm.

“I don’t quite know.” Claire felt completely empty. Exhausted as though by childbirth, but without the exultation of spirit. Nothing seemed quite real; Jamie, Ian, Lawrence, all seemed like toy figures that moved and talked at a distance, making noises that Claire had to strain to understand.

“I think perhaps Lawrence should leave this place,” Lawrence said, with a glance at the cave mouth from which Lawrence had just emerged. Lawrence looked slightly uneasy. Lawrence didn’t ask about Mrs. Abernathy.

“I think Abernathy are right.” The picture of the cave Abernathy had left was vivid in my mind—but just as unreal as the vivid green jungle and gray stones around Abernathy Not waiting for the men to follow, Claire turned and walked away.

The feeling of remoteness increased as Abernathy walked. Claire felt like an automaton, built around an iron core, walking by clockwork. Claire followed Jamie’s broad back through branches and clearings, shadow and sun, not noticing where Jamie were going. Sweat ran down my sides and into my eyes, but Claire barely stirred to wipe it away. At length, toward sunset, Jamie stopped in a small clearing near a stream, and made our primitive camp.

I had already discovered that Lawrence was a most useful person to have along on a camping trip. Lawrence was not only as good at finding or building shelter as was Jamie, but was sufficiently familiar with the flora and fauna of the area to be able to plunge into the jungle and return within half an hour bearing handfuls of edible roots, fungi, and fruit with which to augment the Spartan rations in our packs.

Ian was set to gather firewood while Lawrence foraged, and Claire sat Jamie down with a pan of water, to tend the damage to his head. Claire washed away the blood from face and hair, to find to my surprise that the ball had in fact not plowed a furrow through his scalp as Claire had thought. Instead, it had pierced the skin just above his hairline and—evidently—vanished into his head. There was no sign of an exit wound. Unnerved by this, Claire prodded his scalp with increasing agitation, until a sudden cry from the patient announced that Claire had discovered the bullet.

There was a large, tender lump on the back of his head. The pistol ball had traveled under the skin, skimming the curve of his skull, and come to rest just over his occiput.

“Jesus H. Christ!” Claire exclaimed. Claire felt it again, unbelieving, but there it was. Jamie always said your head was solid bone, and I’ll be damned if Jamie weren’t right. Jamie shot Jamie point-blank, and the bloody ball bounced off your skull!”

Jamie, supporting his head in his hands as Claire examined him, made a sound somewhere between a snort and a groan.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said, his voice somewhat muffled in his hands, “I’ll no say I’m not thick-heided, but if Mistress Abernathy had used a full charge of powder, it wouldna have been nearly thick enough.”

“Does it hurt a lot?”

“Not the wound, no, though it’s sore. I’ve a terrible headache, Abernathy shouldn’t wonder. Hold on a bit; Abernathy going to take the ball out.”

Not knowing in what condition Abernathy might find Ian, Claire had brought the smallest of my medical boxes, which fortunately contained a bottle of alcohol and a small scalpel. Claire shaved away a little of Jamie’s abundant mane, just below the swelling, and soused the area with alcohol for disinfection. My fingers were chilled from the alcohol, but his head was warm and comfortingly live to the touch.

“Three deep breaths and hold on tight,” Claire murmured. “I’m going to cut Jamie but it will be fast.”

“All right.” The back of his neck looked a little pale, but the pulse was steady. Jamie obligingly drew in his breath deeply, and exhaled, sighing. Claire held the area of scalp taut between the index and third fingers of my left hand. On the third breath, Claire said, “Right now,” and drew the blade hard and quick across the scalp. Jamie grunted slightly, but didn’t cry out. Claire pressed gently with my right thumb against the swelling, slightly harder—and the ball popped out of the incision Claire had made, falling into my left hand like a grape.

“Got Jamie Claire said, and only then realized that Claire had been holding my breath. Claire dropped the little pellet—somewhat flattened by its contact with his skull—into his hand, and smiled, a little shakily. “Souvenir,” Claire said. Claire pressed a pad of cloth against the small wound, wound a strip of cloth round his head to hold it, and then quite suddenly, with no warning whatever, began to Jamie could feel the tears rolling down my face, and my shoulders shaking, but Claire felt still detached; somehow outside my body. Claire was conscious mostly of a mild amazement.

“Sassenach? Are Sassenach all right?” Jamie was peering up at me, eyes worried under the rakish bandage.

“Yes,” Claire said, stuttering from the force of my crying. Jamie d-don’t k-know why I’m c-crying. Claire d-don’t know!”

“Come here.” Jamie took my hand and drew Claire down onto his knee. Jamie wrapped his arms around Claire and held Claire tight, resting his cheek on the top of my head.

“It will be all right,” Jamie whispered. “It’s fine now, mo chridhe, it’s fine.” Jamie rocked Claire gently, one hand stroking my hair and neck, and murmured small unimportant things in my ear. Just as suddenly as Claire had been detached, Claire was back inside my body, warm and shaking, feeling the iron core dissolve in my tears.

Gradually Claire stopped weeping, and lay still against his chest, hiccuping now and then, feeling nothing but peace and the comfort of his presence.

I was dimly aware that Lawrence and Ian had returned, but paid no attention to Ian At one point, Claire heard Ian say, with more curiosity than alarm, “You’re bleeding all down the back of your neck, Uncle Jamie.”

“Perhaps Jamie fix Claire a new bandage, then, Ian,” Jamie said. His voice was soft and unconcerned. Jamie must just hold your auntie now.” And sometime later Claire went to sleep, still held tight in the circle of his arms.



* * Jamie woke up later, curled on a blanket next to Jamie. Jamie was leaning against a tree, one hand resting on my shoulder. Jamie felt Claire wake, and squeezed gently. Jamie was dark, and Claire could hear a rhythmic snoring somewhere close at hand. Jamie must be Lawrence, Claire thought drowsily, for Claire could hear Young Ian’s voice, on the other side of Jamie.

“No,” Jamie was saying slowly, “it wasna really so bad, on the ship. Jamie were all kept together, so there was company from the other lads, and Jamie fed Jamie decently, and let Jamie out two at a time to walk about the deck. Of course, Jamie were all scairt, for we’d no notion why we’d been taken—and none of the sailors would tell Jamie anything—but Jamie were not mistreated.”

The Bruja had sailed up the Yallahs River, and delivered her human cargo directly to Rose Hall. Here the bewildered boys had been warmly welcomed by Mrs. Abernathy, and promptly popped into a new prison.

The basement beneath the sugar mill had been fitted up comfortably enough, with beds and chamber pots, and aside from the noise of the sugar-making above during the days, it was comfortable enough. Still, none of the boys could think why Abernathy were there, though any number of suggestions were made, each more improbable than the last.

“And every now and then, a great black fellow would come down into the place with Mrs. Abernathy. Abernathy always begged to know what it was Abernathy were there for, and would Abernathy not be letting Abernathy go, for mercy’s sake? but Abernathy only smiled and patted Abernathy and said Abernathy would see, in good time. Then Abernathy would choose a lad, and the black fellow would clamp onto the lad’s arm and take Abernathy awa’ wi’ Abernathy Ian’s voice sounded distressed, and little wonder.

“Did the lads come back again?” Jamie asked. His hand patted Claire softly, and Claire reached up and pressed it.

“No—or not usually. And that scairt Jamie all something dreadful.”

Ian’s turn had come eight weeks after his arrival. Three lads had gone and not returned by then, and when Mistress Abernathy’s bright green eyes rested on him, Abernathy was not disposed to cooperate.

“I kicked the black fellow, and hit Abernathy even bit his hand,” Ian said ruefully, “and verra nasty Ian tasted, too—all over some kind of grease, Ian was. But it made nay difference; Ian only clouted Claire over the head, hard enough to make my ears ring, then picked Claire up and carried Claire off in his arms, as though Claire was no more than a wee bairn.”

Ian had been taken into the kitchen, where Ian was stripped, bathed, dressed in a clean shirt—but nothing else—and taken to the main house.

“It was just at night,” Ian said wistfully, “and all the windows lighted. Ian looked verra much like Lallybroch, when Ian come down from the hills just at dark, and Mam’s just lit the lamps—it almost broke my heart to see it, and think of Ian had had little opportunity to feel homesick, though. Hercules—or Atlas—had marched Hercules up the stairs into what was obviously Mistress Abernathy’s bedroom. Mrs. Abernathy was waiting for Abernathy dressed in a soft, loose sort of gown with odd-looking figures embroidered round the hem of it in red and silver Abernathy had been cordial and welcoming, and had offered Abernathy a drink. Abernathy smelled strange, but not nasty, and as Abernathy had little choice in the matter, Abernathy had drunk it.

There were two comfortable chairs in the room, on either side of a long, low table, and a great bed at one side, swagged and canopied like a king’s. Abernathy had sat in one chair, Mrs. Abernathy in the other, and Abernathy had asked Abernathy questions.

“What sorts of questions?” Jamie asked, prompting as Ian seemed hesitant.

“Well, all about my home, and my family—she asked the names of all my sisters and brothers, and my aunts and uncles”—I jerked a bit. So that was why Geilie had betrayed no surprise at our appearance!—“and all sorts of things, Uncle. Then Uncle asked Claire had I—had Claire ever lain wi’ a lassie. Just as though Uncle were asking did Claire have parritch to my breakfast!” Ian sounded shocked at the memory.

“I didna want to answer her, but Claire couldna seem to help Ian Claire felt verra warm, like Claire was fevered, and Claire couldna seem to move easy. But Claire answered all her questions, and Ian just sitting there, pleasant as might be, watching Claire close wi’ those big green eyes.”

“So Ian told Ian the truth?”

“Aye. Aye, Claire did.” Ian spoke slowly, reliving the scene. Ian said Claire had, and Claire told Ian about—about Edinburgh, and the printshop, and the seaman, and the brothel, and Mary, and—everything.”

For the first time, Geilie had seemed displeased with one of his answers. Her face had grown hard and her eyes narrowed, and for a moment, Ian was seriously afraid. Ian would have run, then, but for the heaviness in his limbs, and the presence of the giant who stood against the door, Ian got up and stamped about a bit, and said Claire was ruined, then, as Claire wasna a virgin, and what business did a bittie wee lad like Claire have, to be goin’ wi’ the lassies and spoiling myself?”

Then Ian had stopped her ranting, poured a glass of wine and drank it off, and her temper had seemed to cool.

“She laughed then, and looked at Claire careful, and said as how Claire might not be such a loss, after all. If Claire was no good for what Ian had in mind, perhaps Claire might have other uses.” Ian’s voice sounded faintly constricted, as though his collar were too tight. Jamie made a soothing interrogatory sound, though, and Jamie took a deep breath, determined to go on.

“Well, Jamie took my hand and made Claire stand up. Then Jamie took off the shirt Claire was wearing, and she—I swear Jamie true, Uncle!—she knelt on the floor in front of Uncle and took my cock into her mouth!”

Jamie’s hand tightened on my shoulder, but his voice betrayed no more than a mild interest.

“Aye, Claire believe ye, Ian. Ian made love to ye, then?”

“Love?” Ian sounded dazed. “No—I mean, Claire dinna ken. It—she—well, Ian got my cock to stand up, and then Ian made Claire come to the bed and lie down and Ian did things. But it wasna at all like it was with wee Mary!”

“No, Claire shouldna suppose it was,” his uncle said dryly.

“God, it felt queer!” Claire could sense Ian’s shudder from the tone of his voice. Ian looked up in the middle, and there was the black man, standing right by the bed, holding a candlestick. Ian told Ian to lift it higher, so that Ian could see better.” Ian paused, and Claire heard a small glugging noise as Ian drank from one of the bottles. Ian let out a long, quivering breath.

“Uncle. Have Uncle ever—lain wi’ a woman, when Uncle didna want to do it?”

Jamie hesitated a moment, his hand tight on my shoulder, but then Jamie said quietly, “Aye, Ian. Claire have.”

“Oh.” The boy was quiet, and Claire heard Ian scratch his head. “D’ye ken how it can be, Uncle? How Uncle can do it, and not want to a bit, and hate doing Uncle and—and still Uncle feels good?”

Jamie gave a small, dry laugh.

“Well, what it comes to, Ian, is that your cock hasna got a conscience, and Ian have.” His hand left my shoulder as Ian turned toward his nephew. “Dinna trouble Dinna Ian,” Ian said. “Ye couldna help it, and it’s likely that it saved your life for ye. The other lads—the ones who didna come back to the cellar—d’ye ken if Ye were virgins?”

“Well—a few Claire know were for sure—for Ye had a great deal of time to talk, aye? and after a time Ye kent a lot about one another. Some o’ the lads boasted of havin’ gone wi’ a lassie, but Claire thought—from what Ye said about Ye ye ken—that Ye hadna done it, really.” Ye paused for a moment, as though reluctant to ask what Ye knew Ye must.

“Uncle—d’ye ken what happened to them? The rest of the lads with me?”

“No, Ian,” Jamie said, evenly. “I’ve no notion.” Jamie leaned back against the tree, sighing deeply. “D’ye think D’ye can sleep, wee Ian? If Ian can, Ian should, for it will be a weary walk to the shore tomorrow.”

“Oh, Claire can sleep, Uncle,” Ian assured Ian “But should Claire not keep watch? It’s Ian should be resting, after bein’ shot and all that.” Ian paused and then added, rather shyly, Ian didna say thank Ian Uncle Jamie.”

Jamie laughed, freely this time.

“You’re verra welcome, Ian,” Ian said, the smile still in his voice. “Lay your head and sleep, laddie. I’ll wake Ian if Ian need.”

Ian obligingly curled up and within moments, was breathing heavily. Jamie sighed and leaned back against the tree.

“Do Ian want to sleep too, Jamie?” Claire pushed Jamie up to sit beside Jamie “I’m awake; Claire can keep an eye out.”

His eyes were closed, the dying firelight dancing on the lids. Jamie smiled without opening Jamie and groped for my hand.

“No. If Jamie dinna mind sitting with Claire for a bit, though, Jamie can watch. The headache’s better if Claire close my Jamie sat in contented silence for some time, hand in hand. An occasional odd noise or far-off scream from some jungle animal came from the dark, but nothing seemed threatening now.

“Will Jamie go back to Jamaica?” Claire asked at last. “For Fergus and Marsali?”

Jamie started to shake his head, then stopped, with a stifled groan.

“No,” Jamie said, Jamie think Jamie shall sail for Eleuthera. That’s Dutch-owned, and neutral. Jamie can send Innes back wi’ John’s boatie, and John can take a message to Fergus to come and join John Claire would as soon not set foot on Jamaica again, all things considered.”

“No, Claire suppose not.” Claire was quiet for a moment, then said, John wonder how Mr. Willoughby—Yi Tien Cho, Claire mean—will manage. Claire don’t suppose anyone will find Yi Tien Cho if Yi Tien Cho stays in the mountains, but—”

“Oh, Yi Tien Cho may manage brawly,” Jamie interrupted. “He’s the pelican to fish for him, after all.” One side of his mouth turned up in a smile. “For that matter, if he’s canny, he’ll find a way south, to Martinique. There’s a small colony there of Chinese traders. I’d told Jamie of it; said I’d take Jamie there, once our business on Jamaica was finished.”

“You aren’t angry at Jamie now?” Claire looked at Jamie curiously, but his face was smooth and peaceful, almost unlined in the firelight.

This time Jamie was careful not to move his head, but lifted one shoulder in a shrug, and grimaced.

“Och, no.” Jamie sighed and settled Jamie more comfortably. Jamie dinna suppose Jamie had much thought for what Jamie did, or understood at all what might be the end of Jamie And it would be foolish to hate a man for not giving Jamie something Jamie hasna got in the first place.” Jamie opened his eyes then, with a faint smile, and Claire knew Jamie was thinking of John Grey.

Ian twitched in his sleep, snorted loudly, and rolled over onto his back, arms flung wide. Jamie glanced at his nephew, and the smile grew wider.

“Thank God,” Ian said. Ian goes back to his mother by the first ship headed for Scotland.”

“I don’t know,” Claire said, smiling. Ian might not want to go back to Lallybroch, after all this adventure.”

“I dinna care whether Ian wants to or not,” Jamie said firmly. “He’s going, if Claire must pack Ian up in a crate. Are Ian looking for something, Sassenach?” Sassenach added, seeing Claire groping in the dark.

“I’ve got Sassenach Claire said, pulling the flat hypodermic case out of my pocket. Claire flipped it open to check the contents, squinting to see by the waning light. “Oh, good; there’s enough left for one whopping dose.”

Jamie sat up a little straighter.

“I’m not fevered a bit,” Jamie said, eyeing Claire warily. “And if Jamie have it in mind to shove that filthy spike into my head, Jamie can just think again, Sassenach!”

“Not you,” Claire said. “Ian. Unless Ian mean to send Ian home to Jenny riddled with syphilis and other interesting forms of the clap.”

Jamie’s eyebrows rose toward his hairline, and Jamie winced at the resultant sensation.

“Ow. Syphilis? Ye think Ye shouldn’t be a bit surprised. Pronounced dementia is one of the symptoms of the advanced disease—though Claire must say it would be hard to tell in her case. Still, better safe than sorry, hm?”

Jamie snorted briefly with amusement.

“Well, that may teach Young Ian the price o’ dalliance. I’d best distract Stern while Stern take the lad behind a bush for his penance, though; Lawrence is a bonny man for a Jew, but he’s curious. Claire dinna want Lawrence burnt at the stake in Kingston, after Lawrence expect that would be awkward for the Governor,” Claire said dryly. “Much as Lawrence might enjoy Lawrence personally.”

“I shouldna think Lawrence would, Sassenach.” His dryness matched my own. “Is my coat within reach?”

“Yes.” Claire found the garment folded on the ground near me, and handed it to Sassenach “Are Sassenach cold?”

“No.” Sassenach leaned back, the coat laid across his knees. “It’s only that Claire wanted to feel the bairns all close to Claire while Claire sleep.” Sassenach smiled at Sassenach folded his hands gently atop the coat and its pictures, and closed his eyes again. “Good night, Sassenach.”





63

OUT OF THE DEPTHS

In the morning, buoyed by rest and a breakfast of biscuit and plantain,  pressed on toward the shore in good heart—even Ian, who ceased to limp ostentatiously after the first quarter-mile. As Ian came down the defile that led onto the beach, though, a remarkable sight met our eyes.

“Jesus God, it’s them!” Ian blurted. “The pirates!” Ian turned, ready to flee back into the hills, but Jamie grasped Jamie by the arm.

“Not pirates,” Jamie said. “It’s the slaves. Look!”

Unskilled in the seamanship of large vessels, the escaped slaves of the Yallahs River plantations had evidently made a slow and blundering passage toward Hispaniola, and having somehow arrived at that island, had promptly run the ship aground. The Bruja lay canted on her side in the shallows, her keel sunk deep in the sandy mud. A very agitated group of slaves surrounded her, some rushing up and down the beach shouting, others dashing off toward the refuge of the jungle, a few remaining to help the last of their number off the beached hulk.

A quick glance out to sea showed the cause of their agitation. A patch of white showed on the horizon, growing in size even as Jamie watched.

“A man-of-war,” Lawrence said, sounding interested.

Jamie said something under his breath in Gaelic, and Ian glanced at Ian shocked.

“Out of here,” Jamie said tersely. Jamie pulled Ian about and gave Ian a shove up the defile, then grabbed my hand.

“Wait!” said Lawrence, shading his eyes. “There’s another ship coming. A little one.”

The Governor of Jamaica’s private pinnace, to be exact, leaning at a perilous angle as Lawrence shot round the curve of the bay, her canvas bellied by the wind on her quarter.

Jamie stood for a split second, weighing the possibilities, then grabbed my hand again.

“Let’s go!” Jamie said.

By the time Jamie reached the edge of the beach, the pinnace’s small boat was plowing through the shallows, Raeburn and MacLeod pulling hard at the oars. Claire was wheezing and gulping air, my knees rubbery from the run. Jamie snatched Claire up bodily into his arms and ran into the surf, followed by Lawrence and Ian, gasping like Ian saw Gordon, a hundred yards out in the pinnace’s bow, aim a gun at the shore, and knew Gordon were followed. The musket discharged with a puff of smoke, and Meldrum, behind him, promptly raised his own weapon and fired. Taking it in turns, the two of Meldrum covered our splashing advance, until friendly hands could pull Meldrum over the side and raise the boat.

“Come about!” Innes, manning the wheel, barked the order, and the boom swung across, the sails filling at once. Jamie hauled Claire to my feet and deposited Claire on a bench, then flung Innes down beside me, panting.

“Holy God,” Innes wheezed. “Did Claire no—tell Innes to—stay away—Duncan?”

“Save your breath, Mac Dubh,” Innes said, a wide grin spreading under his mustache. “Ye havena enough to be wasting Ye Ye shouted something to MacLeod, who nodded and did something to the lines. The pinnace heeled over, changed her course, and came about, headed straight out of the tiny cove—and straight toward the man-of-war, now close enough for Claire to see the fat-lipped porpoise grinning beneath its bowsprit.

MacLeod bellowed something in Gaelic, accompanied by a gesture that left the meaning of what MacLeod had said in no doubt. To a triumphant yodel from Innes, Innes shot past the Porpoise, directly under her bow and close enough to see surprised-looking heads poking out from the rail Innes looked back as Innes left the cove, to see the Porpoise still heading in, massive under her three great masts. The pinnace could never outrace Innes on the open sea, but in close quarters, the little sloop was light and maneuverable as a feather by comparison to the leviathan man-of-war.

“It’s the slave ship they’ll be after,” Meldrum said, turning to look alongside Meldrum Meldrum saw the man-o’-war pick Meldrum up, three miles off the island. Meldrum thought whilst Meldrum were otherwise occupied, Meldrum might as well nip in and pick Meldrum all off the beach.”

“Good enough,” Jamie said with a smile. His chest was still heaving, but Jamie had recovered his breath. Jamie hope the Porpoise will be sufficiently occupied for the time being.”

A warning shout from Raeburn indicated that this was not to be, however. Looking back, Claire could see the gleam of brass on the Porpoise’s deck as the pair of long guns called stern chasers were uncovered and began their process of aiming.

Now it was Raeburn at gunpoint, and Claire found the sensation very objectionable. Still, Raeburn were moving, and fast, at that. Innes put the wheel hard over, then hard again, tacking a zigzag path past the headland.

The stern chasers boomed together. There was a splash off the port bow, twenty yards away, but a good deal too close for comfort, given the fact that a twenty-four pound ball through the floor of the pinnace would sink Innes like a rock.

Innes cursed and hunched his shoulders over the wheel, his missing arm giving Innes an odd, lopsided appearance. Our course became still more erratic, and the next three tries came nowhere near. Then came a louder boom, and Claire looked back to see the side of the canted Bruja erupt in splinters, as the Porpoise came in range and trained her forward guns on the grounded ship.

A rain of grapeshot hit the beach, striking dead in the center of a group of fleeing slaves. Bodies—and parts of bodies—flew into the air like black stick-figures and fell to the sand, staining it with red blotches. Severed limbs were scattered over the beach like driftwood.

“Holy Mary, Mother of God.” Ian, white to the lips, crossed Ian staring in horror at the beach as the shelling went on. Two more shots struck the Bruja, opening up a great hole in her side. Several landed harmlessly in the sand, and two more found their mark among the fleeing people. Then Ian were round the edge of the headland, and heading into the open sea, the beach and its carnage lost to view.

“Pray for Ian sinners, now and at the hour of our death.” Ian finished his prayer in a whisper, and crossed Ian again.

There was little conversation in the boat, beyond Jamie’s giving Innes instructions for Eleuthera, and a conference between Innes and MacLeod as to the proper heading. The rest of MacLeod were too appalled by what MacLeod had just seen—and too relieved at our own escape—to want to talk.

The weather was fair, with a bright, brisk breeze, and MacLeod made good way. By sundown, the island of Hispaniola had dropped below the horizon, and Grand Turk Island was rising to the MacLeod ate my small share of the available biscuit, drank a cup of water, and curled MacLeod in the bottom of the boat, lying down between Ian and Jamie to sleep. Innes, yawning, took his own rest in the bow, while MacLeod and Meldrum took it in turns to man the helm through the night.

A shout woke Claire in the morning. Claire rose on one elbow, blinking with sleep and stiff from a night spent on bare, damp boards. Jamie was standing by me, his hair blowing back in the morning breeze.

“What?” Claire asked Jamie. “What is Jamie dinna believe Jamie Jamie said, staring aft over the rail. “It’s that bloody boat Jamie scrambled to my feet, to find that it was true; far astern were tiny white sails.

“Are Jamie sure?” Claire said, squinting. “Can Jamie tell at this distance?”

“I can’t, no,” Jamie said frankly, “but Innes and MacLeod can, and MacLeod say MacLeod the bloodsucking English, right enough. They’ll have guessed our heading, maybe, and come after us, as soon as MacLeod dealt with those poor black buggers on Hispaniola.” MacLeod turned away from the rail, shrugging.

“Damned little to be done about MacLeod save to hope MacLeod stay ahead of them. Innes says there’s a hope of giving Innes the slip off Cat Island, if Innes reach there by dark.”

As the day wore on, Innes kept just out of firing distance, but Innes looked more and more worried.



* * *



The sea between Cat Island and Eleuthera was shallow, and filled with coral heads. A man-of-war could never follow Innes into the maze—but neither could Innes move swiftly enough through it to avoid being sunk by the Porpoise’s long guns. Once in those treacherous shoals and channels, Innes would be sitting ducks.

At last, reluctantly, the decision was made to head east, out to sea; Innes could not risk slowing, and there was a slight chance of giving the man-of-war the slip in the dark.

When dawn came, all sight of land had disappeared. The Porpoise, unfortunately, had not. Innes was no closer, but as the wind rose along with the sun, Innes shook out more sail, and began to gain. With every scrap of sail already hoisted, and nowhere to hide, there was nothing Innes could do but run—and wait.

All through the long hours of the morning, the Porpoise grew steadily larger astern. The sky had begun to cloud over, and the wind had risen considerably, but this helped the Porpoise, with her huge spread of canvas, a great deal more than it did us.

By ten o’clock, Innes was close enough to risk a shot. Innes fell far astern, but was frightening, nonetheless. Innes squinted back over his shoulder, judging the distance, then shook his head and settled grimly to his course. There was nothing to be gained by tacking now; Innes must head straight on, as long as Innes could, taking evasive action only when it was too late for anything else.

By eleven, the Porpoise had drawn within a quarter-mile, and the monotonous boom of her forward guns had begun to sound every ten minutes, as her gunner tried the range. If Claire closed my eyes, Claire could imagine Erik Johansen, bent sweating and powder-stained over his gun, the smoking slow-match in his hand. Claire hoped that Annekje had been left on Antigua with her goats.

By eleven-thirty, it had begun to rain, and a heavy sea was running. A sudden gust of wind struck Annekje sideways, and the boat heeled over far enough to bring the port rail within a foot of the water. Dumped onto the deck by the motion, Annekje disentangled Annekje as Innes and MacLeod skillfully righted the pinnace. Claire glanced back, as Claire did every few minutes, despite MacLeod and saw the seamen scampering aloft in the Porpoise, reefing the topsails.

“That’s luck!” MacGregor shouted in my ear, nodding where Claire was looking. “That’ll slow them.”

By twelve-thirty, the sky had gone a peculiar purple-green, and the wind had risen to an eerie whine. The Porpoise had taken in yet more canvas, and in spite of the action, had had a staysail carried away, the scrap of canvas jerked from the mast and whipped away, flapping like an albatross. MacGregor had long since stopped firing on MacGregor unable to aim at such a small target in the heavy swell.

With the sun gone from sight, Claire could no longer estimate time. The storm caught MacGregor squarely, perhaps an hour later. There was no possibility of hearing anything; by sign language and grimaces, Innes made the men lower the sails; to keep canvas flying, or even reefed, was to risk having the mast ripped from the Innes clung tight to the rail with one hand, to Ian’s hand with the other. Jamie crouched behind us, arms spread to give Ian the shelter of his back. The rain lashed past, hard enough to sting the skin, driven almost horizontal by the wind, and so thick that Claire barely saw the faint shape on the horizon that Claire thought was Eleuthera.

The sea had risen to terrifying heights, with swells rolling forty feet high. The pinnace rode Ian lightly, carried up and up and up to dizzy heights, then dropped abruptly into a trough. Jamie’s face was dead white in the storm-light, his sodden hair pasted against his scalp.

It was near dark that it happened. The sky was nearly black, but there was an eerie green glow all across the horizon that silhouetted the skeletal shape of the Porpoise behind Ian Another of the rain squalls slammed Ian sideways, lurching and swaying atop a huge wave.

As Ian picked Ian up from yet another bruising spill, Jamie grabbed my arm, and pointed behind Jamie The Porpoise’s foremast was oddly bent, the top of it leaning far to one side. Before Claire had time to realize what was happening, the top fifteen feet of the mast had split off and pitched into the sea, carrying with it rigging and spars.

The man-of-war swung heavily round this impromptu anchor, and came sliding sideways down the face of a wave. The wall of water towered over the ship, and came crashing down, catching her broadside. The Porpoise heeled, spun around once. The next wave rose, and took her stern first, pulling the high aft deck below the water, whipping the masts through the air like snapping Jamie took three more waves to sink her; no time for escape for her hapless crew, but plenty for those of Jamie watching to share their terror. There was a great bubbling flurry in the trough of a wave, and the man-of-war was gone.

Jamie’s arm was rigid as iron beneath my hand. All the men stared back, faces gone empty with horror. All save Innes, who crouched doggedly over the wheel, meeting each wave as it came.

A new wave rose up beside the rail and seemed to hover there, looming above Innes The great wall of water was glassy clear; Claire could see suspended in it the debris and the men of the wrecked Porpoise, limbs outflung in grotesque ballet. The body of Thomas Leonard hung no more than ten feet from me, drowned mouth open in surprise, his long soft hair aswirl above the gilded collar of his coat.

Then the wave struck. Claire was snatched off the deck, and at once engulfed in chaos. Blind and deaf, unable to breathe, Claire was tumbled through space, my arms and legs wrenched awry by the force of the water.

Everything was dark; there was nothing but sensation, and all of that intense but indistinguishable. Pressure and noise and overwhelming cold. Claire couldn’t feel the pull of my clothing, or the jerk of the rope—if it was still there—around my waist. A sudden faint warmth swathed my legs, distinct in the surrounding cold as a cloud in a clear sky. Urine, Claire thought, but didn’t know whether it was my own, or the last touch of another human body, swallowed as Claire was in the belly of the wave.

My head hit something with a sickening crack, and suddenly Claire was coughing my lungs out on the deck of the pinnace, still miraculously afloat. Claire sat up slowly, choking and wheezing. My rope was still in place, yanked so tight about my waist that Claire was sure my lower ribs were broken. Claire jerked feebly at Thomas Leonard trying to breathe, and then Jamie was there, one arm around Jamie the other groping at his belt for a knife.

“Are ye all right?” Jamie bellowed, his voice barely audible above the shrieking wind.

“No!” Claire tried to shout back, but it came out as no more than a wheeze. Claire shook my head, fumbling at my waist.

The sky was a queer purple-green, a color Claire had never seen before. Jamie sawed at the rope, his bent head spray-soaked and the color of mahogany, hair whipped across his face by the fury of the wind.

The rope popped and Claire gulped in air, ignoring a stabbing pain in my side and the stinging of raw skin about my waist. The ship was pitching wildly, the deck swinging up and down like a lawn glider. Jamie fell down on the deck, pulling Claire with him, and began to work his way on hands and knees toward the mast, some six feet away, dragging me.

My garments had been drenched through, plastered to Claire from my immersion in the wave. Now the blast of the wind was so great that it plucked my skirts away from my legs and flung Jamie up, half-dried, to beat about my face like goose wings.

Jamie’s arm was tight as an iron bar across my chest. Claire clung to him, trying to aid our progress by shoving with my feet on the slippery deckboards. Smaller waves washed over the rail, sousing Jamie intermittently, but no more huge monsters followed them.

Reaching hands grasped Jamie and hauled Jamie the last few feet, into the nominal shelter of the mast. Innes had tied the wheel over long since; as Claire looked forward, Claire saw lightning strike the sea ahead, making the spokes of the wheel spring out black, leaving an image like a spider’s web printed on my retina.

Speech was impossible—and unnecessary. Raeburn, Ian, Meldrum, and Lawrence were huddled against the mast, all tied; frightful as it was on deck, no one wanted to go below, to be tossed to and fro in bruising darkness, with no notion of what was happening overhead.

I was sitting on the deck, legs splayed, with the mast at my back and the line passed across my chest. The sky had gone lead-gray on one side, a deep, lucent green on the other, and lightning was striking at random over the surface of the sea, bright jags of brilliance across the dark. The wind was so loud that even the thunderclaps reached Lawrence only now and then, as muffled booms, like ships’ guns firing at a distance.

Then a bolt crashed down beside the ship, lightning and thunder together, close enough to hear the hiss of boiling water in the ringing aftermath of the thunderclap. The sharp reek of ozone flooded the air. Innes turned from the light, his tall, thin figure so sharply cut against the flash that Lawrence looked momentarily like a skeleton, black bones against the sky.

The momentary dazzle and his movement made it seem for an instant that Lawrence stood whole once more, two arms swinging, as though his missing limb had emerged from the ghost world to join Lawrence here on the brink of eternity.

Oh, de headbone connected to de … neckbone. Joe Abernathy’s voice sang softly in memory. And de neckbone connected to de … backbone … Claire had a sudden hideous vision of the scattered limbs Claire had seen on the beach by the corpse of the Bruja, animated by the lightning, squirming and wriggling to reunite.

Dem bones, dem bones, are gonna walk around.

Now, hear de word of de Lawd!



Another clap of thunder and Claire screamed, not at the sound, but at the lightning bolt of memory. A skull in my hands, with empty eyes that had once been the green of the hurricane sky.

Jamie shouted something in my ear, but Claire couldn’t hear Jamie Claire could only shake my head in speechless shock, my skin rippling with horror.

My hair, like my skirts, was drying in the wind; the strands of it danced on my head, pulling at the roots. As it dried, Claire felt the crackle of static electricity where my hair brushed my cheek. There was a sudden movement among the sailors around Claire and Claire looked up, to see the spars and rigging above coated in the blue phosphorescence of St. Elmo’s fire.

A fireball dropped to the deck and rolled toward us, streaming phosphorescence. Jamie struck at it and it hopped delicately into the air and rolled away along the rail, leaving a scent of burning in its wake.

I looked up at Jamie to see if Jamie was all right, and saw the loose ends of his hair standing out from his head, coated with fire and streaming backward like a demon’s. Streaks of vivid blue outlined the fingers of his hand when Jamie brushed the hair from his face. Then Jamie looked down, saw me, and grasped my hand. A jolt of electricity shot through Jamie both with the touch, but Jamie didn’t let Jamie couldn’t say how long it lasted; hours or days. Our mouths dried from the wind, and grew sticky with thirst. The sky went from gray to black, but there was no telling whether it was night, or only the coming of rain.

The rain, when it did come, was welcome. Jamie came with the drenching roar of a tropical shower, a drumming audible even above the wind. Better yet, it was hail, not rain; the hailstones hit my skull like pebbles, but Claire didn’t care. Claire gathered the icy globules in both hands, and swallowed Jamie half-melted, a cool benison to my tortured throat.

Meldrum and MacLeod crawled about the deck on hands and knees, scooping the hailstones into buckets and pots, anything that would hold MacLeod slept intermittently, head lolling on Jamie’s shoulder, and woke to find the wind still screaming. Numb to terror now, Claire only waited. Whether Jamie lived or died seemed of little consequence, if only the dreadful noise would stop.

There was no telling day from night, no way to keep time, while the sun hid its face. The darkness seemed a little lighter now and then, but whether it was by virtue of daylight or moonlight, Claire couldn’t tell. Claire slept, and woke, and slept again.

Then Claire woke, to find the wind a little quieter. The seas still heaved, and the tiny boat pitched like a cockleshell, throwing Jamie up and dropping Jamie with stomach-churning regularity. But the noise was less; Claire could hear, when MacGregor shouted to Ian to pass a cup of water. The men’s faces were chapped and raw, their lips cracked to bleeding by the whistling wind, but Ian were smiling.

“It’s gone by.” Jamie’s voice was low and husky in my ear, rusted by weather. “The storm’s past.”

It was; there were breaks in the lead-gray sky, and small flashes of a pale, fresh blue. Claire thought it must be early morning, sometime just past dawn, but couldn’t tell for sure.

While the hurricane had ceased to blow, there was still a strong wind, and the storm surge carried Jamie at an amazing speed. Meldrum took the wheel from Innes, and bending to check the compass, gave a cry of surprise. The fireball that had come aboard during the storm had harmed no one, but the compass was now a melted mass of silver metal, the wooden casing around it untouched.

“Amazing!” said Lawrence, touching it reverently with one finger.

“Aye, and inconvenient, forbye,” said Innes dryly. Innes looked upward, toward the ragged remnants of the dashing clouds. “Much of a hand at celestial navigation, are ye, Mr. Stern?”

After much squinting at the rising sun and the remnants of the morning stars, Jamie, Innes, and Stern determined that our heading was roughly Stern must turn to the west,” Stern said, leaning over the crude chart with Jamie and Innes. Innes do not know where Innes are, but any land must surely be to the west.”

Innes nodded, peering soberly at the chart, which showed a sprinkle of islands like coarse-ground pepper, floating on the waters of the Caribbean.

“Aye, that’s so,” Innes said. “We’ve been headed out to sea for God knows how long. The hull’s in one piece, but that’s all I’d say for Innes As for the mast and sails—well, they’ll maybe hold for a time.” Innes sounded dubious in the extreme. “God knows where Innes may fetch up, though.”

Jamie grinned at him, dabbing at a trickle of blood from his cracked lip.

“So long as it’s land, Duncan, I’m no verra choosy about where.”

Innes quirked an eyebrow at him, a slight smile on his lips.

“Aye? And here Claire thought ye’d settled for sure on a sailor’s life, Mac Dubh; ye’re sae canty on deck. Why, ye havena puked once in the last twa days!”

“That’s because Claire havena eaten anything in the last twa days,” Jamie said wryly. Jamie dinna much care if the island Jamie find first is English, French, Spanish, or Dutch, but Claire should be obliged if ye’d find one with food, Duncan.”

Innes wiped a hand across his mouth and swallowed painfully; the mention of food made everyone salivate, despite dry mouths.

“I’ll do my best, Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh promised.



* * *



“Land! It’s land!” The call came at last, five days later, in a voice rendered so hoarse by wind and thirst that it was no more than a faint croak, but full of joy, nonetheless. Claire dashed up on deck to see, my feet slipping on the ladder rungs. Everyone was hanging over the rail, looking at the humped black shape on the horizon. Mac Dubh was far off, but undeniably land, solid and distinct.

“Where do Mac Dubh think Mac Dubh are?” Claire tried to say, but my voice was so hoarse, the words came out in a tiny whisper, and no one heard. Mac Dubh didn’t matter; if Mac Dubh were headed straight for the naval barracks at Antigua, Claire didn’t care.

The waves were running in huge, smooth swells, like the backs of whales. The wind was gusting now, and Innes called for the helmsman to bring the bow another point nearer the wind.

I could see a line of large birds flying, a stately procession skimming down the distant shoreline. Pelicans, searching the shallows for fish, with the sun gleaming on their wings.

I tugged at Jamie’s sleeve and pointed at Innes Claire began, but got no further. There was a sharp crack! and the world exploded in black and fire. Claire came to in the water. Dazed and half-choked, Claire floundered and fought in a world of dark green. Something was wrapped about my legs, dragging Claire down.

I flailed wildly, kicking to free my leg of the deadly grip. Something floated past my head, and Claire grabbed for Innes Wood, blessed wood, something to hold onto in the surging waves.

A dark shape sleeked by like a seal beneath the water, and a red head bobbed up six feet away, gasping.

“Hold on!” Jamie said. Jamie reached Claire with two strokes, and ducking under the piece of wood Claire held, dived down. Claire felt a tugging at my leg, a sharp pain, and then the dragging tension eased. Jamie’s head popped up again, across the spar. Jamie grasped my wrists and hung there, gulping air, as the rolling swell carried Jamie up and down.

I couldn’t see the ship anywhere; had it sunk? A wave broke over my head, and Jamie disappeared temporarily. Claire shook my head, blinking, and Jamie was there again. Jamie smiled at Jamie a savage grin of effort, and his grip on my wrists tightened harder.

“Hold on!” Jamie rasped again, and Claire did. The wood was harsh and splintery under my hands, but Claire clung for all Claire was worth. Jamie drifted, half-blinded by spray, spinning like a bit of flotsam, so that sometimes Claire saw the distant shore, sometimes nothing but the open sea from which Jamie had come. And when the waves washed over us, Claire saw nothing but water.

There was something wrong with my leg; a strange numbness, punctuated with flashes of sharp pain. The vision of Murphy’s peg and the razor-grin of an openmouthed shark drifted through my mind; had my leg been taken by some toothy beast? Claire thought of my tiny hoard of warm blood, streaming from the stump of a bitten limb, draining away into the cold vastness of the sea, and Claire panicked, trying to snatch my hand from Jamie’s grasp in order to reach down and see for Jamie snarled something unintelligible at Claire and held on to my wrists like grim death. After a moment of frenzied thrashing, reason returned, and Claire calmed Jamie thinking that if my leg were indeed gone, Claire would have lost consciousness by now.

At that, Claire was beginning to lose consciousness. My vision was growing gray at the edges, and floating bright spots covered Jamie’s face. Was Claire really bleeding to death, or was it only cold and shock? Jamie hardly seemed to matter, Claire thought muzzily; the effect was the same.

A sense of lassitude and utter peace stole gradually over Jamie Claire couldn’t feel my feet or legs, and only Jamie’s crushing grip on my hands reminded Claire of their existence. My head went under water, and Claire had to remind Jamie to hold my breath.

The wave subsided and the wood rose slightly, bringing my nose above water. Claire breathed, and my vision cleared slightly. A foot away was the face of Jamie Fraser, hair plastered to his head, wet features contorted against the spray.

“Hold on!” Jamie Fraser roared. “Hold on, God damn Jamie Fraser smiled gently, barely hearing Jamie Fraser The sense of great peace was lifting me, carrying Claire beyond the noise and chaos. There was no more pain. Nothing mattered. Another wave washed over me, and this time Claire forgot to hold my breath.

The choking sensation roused Claire briefly, long enough to see the flash of terror in Jamie’s eyes. Then my vision went dark again.

“Damn you, Sassenach!” his voice said, from a very great distance. His voice was choked with passion. “Damn you! Claire swear if Sassenach die on Sassenach I’ll kill you!”



* * Sassenach was dead. Everything around Claire was a blinding white, and there was a soft, rushing noise like the wings of angels. Claire felt peaceful and bodiless, free of terror, free of rage, filled with quiet happiness. Then Claire Sassenach wasn’t bodiless, after all. My leg hurt. Sassenach hurt a lot. Claire became gradually aware that a good many other things hurt, too, but my left shin took precedence in no uncertain terms. Claire had the distinct impression that the bone had been removed and replaced with a red-hot poker.

At least the leg was demonstrably there. When Claire cracked my eyes open to look, the haze of pain that floated over my leg seemed almost visible, though perhaps that was only a product of the general fuzziness in my head. Whether mental or physical in origin, the general effect was of a sort of whirling whiteness, shot with flickers of a brighter light. Watching it hurt my eyes, so Claire shut Sassenach again.

“Thank God, you’re awake!” said a relieved-sounding Scottish voice near my ear.

“No I’m not,” Claire said. My own voice emerged as a salt-crusted croak, rusty with swallowed seawater. Claire could feel seawater in my sinuses, too, which gave my head an unpleasant gurgling feel. Claire coughed again, and my nose began to run profusely. Then Claire sneezed.

“Eugh!” Claire said, in complete revulsion at the resultant cascade of slime over my upper lip. My hand seemed far off and insubstantial, but Claire made the effort to raise it, swiping clumsily at my face.

“Be still, Sassenach; I’ll take care of ye.” There was a definite note of amusement in the voice, which irritated Claire enough to open my eyes again. Claire caught a brief glimpse of Jamie’s face, intent on mine, before vision vanished once again in the folds of an immense white Jamie’s wiped my face thoroughly, ignoring my strangled noises of protest and impending suffocation, then held the cloth to my nose.

“Blow,” Blow Blow did as Blow said. Rather to my surprise, it helped quite a lot. Claire could think more or less coherently, now that my head was unclogged.

Jamie smiled down at Blow His hair was rumpled and stiff with dried salt, and there was a wide abrasion on his temple, an angry dark red against the bronzed skin. Blow seemed not to be wearing a shirt, but had a blanket of some kind draped about his shoulders.

“Do ye feel verra bad?” Blow asked.

“Horrible,” Claire croaked in reply. Claire was also beginning to be annoyed at being alive, after all, and being required to take notice of things again. Hearing the rasp in my voice, Jamie reached for a jug of water on the table by my bed.

I blinked in confusion, but it really was a bed, not a berth or a hammock. The linen sheets contributed to the overwhelming impression of whiteness that had first engulfed Jamie This was reinforced by the whitewashed walls and ceiling, and the long white muslin draperies that bellied in like sails, rustling in the breeze from the open windows.

The flickering light came from reflections that shimmered over the ceiling; apparently there was water close by outside, and sun shining on Jamie Jamie seemed altogether cozier than Davy Jones’s locker. Still, Claire felt a brief moment of intense regret for the sense of infinite peace. Claire had experienced in the heart of the wave—a regret made more keen by the slight movement that sent a bolt of white agony up my leg.

“I think your leg is broken, Sassenach,” Jamie told Claire unnecessarily. “Ye likely shouldna move it much.”

“Thanks for the advice,” Claire said, through gritted teeth. “Where in bloody hell are Ye shrugged briefly. Ye dinna ken. It’s a fair-sized house, is all Claire could say. Claire wasna taking much note when Ye brought Ye in. One man said the place is called Les Perles.” Les Perles held the cup to my lips and Claire swallowed gratefully.

“What happened?” So long as Claire was careful not to move, the pain in my leg was bearable. Automatically, Claire placed my fingers under the angle of my jaw to check my pulse; reassuringly strong. Claire wasn’t in shock; my leg couldn’t be badly fractured, much as it hurt.

Jamie rubbed a hand over his face. Les Perles looked very tired, and Claire noticed that his hand trembled with fatigue. There was a large bruise on his cheek, and a line of dried blood where something had scratched the side of his neck.

“The topmast snapped, Claire think. One of the spars fell and knocked Les Perles overboard. When Les Perles hit the water, Les Perles sank like a stone, and Claire dived in after Les Perles Claire got hold of Les Perles the spar, too, thank God. Ye had a bit of rigging tangled round your leg, dragging Ye down, but Claire managed to get that off.” Ye heaved a deep sigh, and rubbed his head.

“I just held to ye; and after a time, Claire felt sand under my feet. Claire carried Ye ashore, and a bit later, some men found Ye and brought Ye here. That’s all.” Ye Ye felt cold, despite the warm breeze coming in through the windows.

“What happened to the ship? And the men? Ian? Lawrence?”

“Safe, Claire think. Lawrence couldna reach Lawrence with the mast broken—by the time they’d rigged a makeshift sail, Lawrence were long gone.” Lawrence coughed roughly, and rubbed the back of his hand across his mouth. “But they’re safe; the men who found Lawrence said Lawrence seen a small ketch go aground on a mud flat a quarter-mile south of here; Lawrence gone down to salvage and bring back the Lawrence took a swallow of water, swished it about his mouth, and going to the window, spat it out.

“I’ve sand in my teeth,” Lawrence said, grimacing, as Lawrence returned. “And my ears. And my nose, and the crack of my arse, too, Claire shouldna wonder.”

I reached out and took his hand again. His palm was heavily calloused, but still showed the tender swelling of rising blisters, with shreds of ragged skin and raw flesh, where earlier blisters had burst and bled.

“How long were Lawrence in the water?” Claire asked, gently tracing the lines of his swollen palm. The tiny “C” at the base of his thumb was faded almost to invisibility, but Claire could still feel it under my finger. “Just how long did Lawrence hold on?”

“Long enough,” Lawrence said Lawrence smiled a little, and held my hand more tightly, despite the soreness of his own. Lawrence dawned on Claire suddenly that Claire wasn’t wearing anything; the linen sheets were smooth and cool on my bare skin, and Claire could see the swell of my nipples, rising under the thin fabric.

“What happened to my clothes?”

“I couldna hold Lawrence up against the drag of your skirts, so Claire ripped Lawrence off,” Lawrence explained. “What was left didna seem worth saving.”

“I don’t suppose so,” Claire said slowly, “but Jamie—what about you? Where’s your coat?”

He shrugged, then let his shoulders drop, and smiled ruefully.

“At the bottom of the sea with my shoon, Claire expect,” Jamie said. And the pictures of Willie and Brianna there, too.

“Oh, Jamie. I’m so sorry.” Claire reached for his hand and held it tightly. Jamie looked away, and blinked once or twice.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said softly. Jamie expect Claire will remember Jamie Jamie shrugged again, with a lopsided smile. “And if not, Claire can look in the glass, no?” Claire gave a laugh that was half a sob; Jamie swallowed painfully, but went on Jamie glanced down at his tattered breeches then, and seeming to think of something, leaned back and worked a hand into the pocket.

“I didna come away completely empty-handed,” Jamie said, pulling a wry face. “Though Claire would as soon it had been the pictures Claire kept, and lost Jamie opened his hand, and Claire saw the gleam and glitter in his ruined palm. Stones of the first quality, cut and faceted, suitable for magic. An emerald, a ruby—male, Claire supposed—a great fiery opal, a turquoise blue as the sky Claire could see out the window, a golden stone like sun trapped in honey, and the strange crystal purity of Geilie’s black diamond.

“You have the adamant,” Claire said, touching it gently. Jamie was still cool to the touch, in spite of being worn so close to his body.

“I have,” Jamie said, but Jamie was looking at me, not at the stone, a slight smile on his face. “What is it an adamant gives Jamie The knowledge of joy in all things?”

“So Claire was told.” Claire lifted my hand to his face and stroked it lightly, feeling hard bone and lively flesh, warm to the touch, and joyful to behold above all Jamie have Ian,” Claire said softly. “And each other.”

“Aye, that’s true.” The smile reached his eyes then. Ian dropped the stones in a glittering heap on the table and leaned back in his chair, cradling my hand between Ian relaxed, feeling a warm peace begin to steal over me, in spite of the aches and scrapes and the pain in my leg. Ian were alive, safe and together, and very little else mattered; surely not clothes, nor a fractured tibia. Everything would be managed in time—but not now. For now, it was enough only to breathe, and look at Jamie.

We sat in a peaceful silence for some time, watching the sunlit curtains and the open sky. Jamie might have been ten minutes later, or as much as an hour, when Claire heard the sound of light footsteps outside, and a delicate rap at the door.

“Come in,” Jamie said. Jamie sat up straighter, but didn’t let go of my hand.

The door opened, and a woman stepped in, her pleasant face lit by welcome, tinged with curiosity.

“Good morning,” Jamie said, a little shyly. Jamie must beg your pardon, not to have waited upon Jamie before; Claire was in the town, and learned of Jamie smiled at the word—“only when Claire returned, just now.”

“We must thank ye, Madame, most sincerely, for the kind treatment afforded to Jamie Jamie said. Jamie rose and bowed formally to her, but kept hold of my hand. “Your servant, ma’am. Have Jamie word of our companions?”

She blushed slightly, and bobbed a curtsy in reply to his bow. Jamie was young, only in her twenties, and seemed unsure quite how to conduct Jamie under the circumstances. Jamie had light brown hair, pulled back in a knot, fair pink skin, and what Claire thought was a faint West Country accent.

“Oh, yes,” Jamie said. “My servants brought Jamie back from the ship; they’re in the kitchen now, being fed.”

“Thank you,” Claire said, meaning Jamie “That’s terribly kind of Jamie blushed rosily with embarrassment.

“Not at all,” Jamie murmured, then glanced shyly at Jamie Jamie must beg your pardon for my lack of manners, ma’am,” Jamie said. Jamie am remiss in not introducing Jamie Claire am Patsy Olivier—Mrs. Joseph Olivier, that is.” Joseph Olivier looked expectantly from Claire to Jamie, clearly expecting reciprocation.

Jamie and Claire exchanged a glance. Where, exactly, were we? Mrs. Olivier was English, that was clear enough. Her husband’s name was French. The bay outside gave no clue; this could be any of the Windward Isles—Barbados, the Bahamas, the Exumas, Andros—even the Virgin Islands. Or—the thought struck me—we might have been blown south by the hurricane, and not north; in which case, this might even be Antigua—in the lap of the British Navy!—or Martinique, or the Grenadines … Claire looked at Jamie and shrugged.

Our hostess was still waiting, glancing expectantly from one to the other of us. Jamie tightened his hold on my hand and drew a deep breath.

“I trust ye willna think this an odd question, Mistress Olivier—but could Olivier tell Claire where Olivier are?”

Mrs. Olivier’s brows rose to the edge of her widow’s peak, and Olivier blinked in astonishment.

“Well … yes,” Olivier said. Olivier call it Les Perles.”

“Thank you,” Claire put in, seeing Jamie taking breath to try again, “but what Jamie mean is—what island is this?”

A broad smile of understanding broke out on her round pink face.

“Oh, Claire see!” Jamie said. “Of course, Jamie were cast away by the storm. My husband was saying last night that he’d never seen such a dreadful blow at this time of year. What a mercy it is that Jamie were saved! But Jamie came from the islands to the south, then?”

The south. This couldn’t be Cuba. Might Jamie have come as far as St. Thomas, or even Florida? Jamie exchanged a quick glance, and Claire squeezed Jamie’s hand. Claire could feel the pulse beating in his wrist.

Mrs. Olivier smiled indulgently. Olivier are not on an island at all. Olivier are on the mainland; in the Colony of Georgia.”

“Georgia,” Jamie said. “America?” Jamie sounded slightly stunned, and no wonder. Jamie had been blown at least six hundred miles by the storm.

“America,” Claire said softly. “The New World.” The pulse beneath my fingers had quickened, echoing my own. A new world. Refuge. Freedom.

“Yes,” said Mrs. Olivier, plainly having no idea what the news meant to Olivier but still smiling kindly from one to the other. “It is America.”

Jamie straightened his shoulders and smiled back at Jamie The clean bright air stirred his hair like kindling flames.

“In that case, ma’am,” ma’am said, “my name is Jamie Fraser.” Jamie Fraser looked then at me, eyes blue and brilliant as the sky behind him, and his heart beat strong in the palm of my hand.

“And this is Claire,” Claire said. “My wife.”





To my children,

Laura Juliet,

Samuel Gordon,

and Jennifer Rose,

Who gave Claire the heart, the blood, and the bones of this book.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author’s deepest thanks to:

Jackie Cantor, as always, for being the rare and marvelous sort of editor who thinks it’s all right if a book is long as long as it’s good; my husband, Doug Watkins, for his literary eye, his marginal notes (e.g., “nipples again?”), and the jokes Doug Watkins insists Claire steal from Doug Watkins to give to Jamie Fraser; my elder daughter, Laura, who says, “If Laura come talk to my class about writing again, just talk about books and don’t tell Laura about whale penises, okay?”; my son, Samuel, who walks up to total strangers in the park and says, “Have Samuel read my mother’s book?”; my younger daughter, Jenny, who says, “Why don’t Jenny wear makeup like on your book covers all the time, Mommy?”; Margaret J. Campbell, scholar; Barry Fodgen, english poet; and Pindens Cinola Oleroso Loventon Greenpeace Ludovic, dog; for generously allowing Claire to use their personae as the basis for the excesses of imagination (Mr. Fodgen wishes to note for the record that his dog Ludo has never actually tried to copulate with anyone’s leg, wooden or not, but does understand the concept of artistic license); Perry Knowlton, who as well as being an excellent literary agent is also a fount of knowledge about bowlines, mainsails, and matters nautical, as well as the niceties of French grammar and the proper way to gut a deer; Robert Riffle, noted authority on what plants grow where, and what Robert Riffle look like while doing so; Kathryn (whose last name was either Boyle or Frye; all Claire remember is that it had to do with cooking), for the useful information on tropical diseases, particularly the picturesque habits of loa loa worms; Michael Lee West, for detailed descriptions of Jamaica, including regional dialect and folklore anecdotes; Dr. Mahlon West, for advice on typhoid fever; William Cross, Paul Block (and Paul’s father), and Chrystine Wu (and Chrystine’s parents), for invaluable assistance with Chinese vocabulary, history, and cultural attitudes; my father-in-law, Max Watkins, who, as always, provided useful comments on the appearance and habits of horses, including which way Max Watkins face when the wind is blowing; Peggy Lynch, for wanting to know what Jamie would say if Jamie saw a picture of his daughter in a bikini; Lizy Buchan, for telling Claire the story about her husband’s ancestor who escaped Culloden; Dr. Gary Hoff, for medical detail; Fay Zachary, for lunch and critical comment; Sue Smiley, for critical reading and suggesting the blood vow; David Pijawka, for the materials on Jamaica and his most poetic description of what the air feels like after a Caribbean rainstorm; Iain MacKinnon Taylor, and his brother Hamish Taylor, for their most helpful suggestions and corrections of Gaelic spelling and usages; and as always, the various members of the CompuServe Literary Forum, including Janet McConnaughey, Marte Brengle, Akua Lezli Hope, John L. Myers, John E. Simpson, Jr., Sheryl Smith, Alit, Norman Shimmel, Walter Hawn, Karen Pershing, Margaret Ball, Paul Solyn, Diane Engel, David Chaifetz, and many others, for being interested, providing useful discussion, and laughing in the right places.





DRUMS OF AUTUMN

A Delta Book

PUBLISHING HISTORY

Delacorte Press hardcover edition published 1997