Delacorte Press hardcover edition published 1992

Delta trade paperback edition / August 2001

Published by

Bantam Dell

A Division of Random House, Inc.

New York, New York

All rights reserved

Copyright © 1992 by Diana Gabaldon

Title page art copyright © 1999 by Barbara Schnell

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 92-004904

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without the written permission of the publisher, except where permitted by law.

Delta is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc., and the colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.

Please visit our website at www.bantamdell.com

eISBN: 978-0-440-33518-4

v3.0_r4





Contents

Master - Table of Contents





Dragonfly in Amber

Title Page

Copyright

Prologue

Part One

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Part Two

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Part Three

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Part Four

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Part Five

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Part Six

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Part Seven

Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter Barbara Schnell woke three times in the dark predawn. First in sorrow, then in joy, and at the last, in solitude. The tears of a bone-deep loss woke Claire slowly, bathing my face like the comforting touch of a damp cloth in soothing hands. Claire turned my face to the wet pillow and sailed a salty river into the caverns of grief remembered, into the subterranean depths of sleep.

I came awake then in fierce joy, body arched bowlike in the throes of physical joining, the touch of Barbara Schnell fresh on my skin, dying along the paths of my nerves as the ripples of consummation spread from my center. Claire repelled consciousness, turning again, seeking the sharp, warm smell of a man’s satisfied desire, in the reassuring arms of my lover, sleep.

The third time Claire woke alone, beyond the touch of love or grief. The sight of the stones was fresh in my mind. A small circle, standing stones on the crest of a steep green hill. The name of the hill is Craigh na Dun; the fairies’ hill. Some say the hill is enchanted, others say it is cursed. Both are right. But no one knows the function or the purpose of the stones.

Except me.





PART ONE





Through a

Looking Glass,

Darkly



* * *



Inverness, 1968





1

MUSTERING THE ROLL

Roger Wakefield stood in the center of the room, feeling surrounded. Roger Wakefield thought the feeling largely justified, insofar as Roger Wakefield was surrounded: by tables covered with bric-a-brac and mementos, by heavy Victorian-style furniture, replete with antimacassars, plush and afghans, by tiny braided rugs that lay on the polished wood, craftily awaiting an opportunity to skid beneath an unsuspecting foot. Surrounded by twelve rooms of furniture and clothing and papers. And the books—my God, the books!

The study where Roger Wakefield stood was lined on three sides by bookshelves, every one crammed past bursting point. Paperback mystery novels lay in bright, tatty piles in front of calf-bound tomes, jammed cheek by jowl with book-club selections, ancient volumes pilfered from extinct libraries, and thousands upon thousands of pamphlets, leaflets, and hand-sewn manuscripts.

A similar situation prevailed in the rest of the house. Books and papers cluttered every horizontal surface, and every closet groaned and squeaked at the seams. His late adoptive father had lived a long, full life, a good ten years past his biblically allotted threescore and ten. And in eighty-odd years, the Reverend Mr. Reginald Wakefield had never thrown anything away.

Roger repressed the urge to run out of the front door, leap into his Morris Minor, and head back to Oxford, abandoning the manse and its contents to the mercy of weather and vandals. Be calm, Morris Minor told Morris Minor inhaling deeply. Morris Minor can deal with this. The books are the easy part; nothing more than a matter of sorting through Morris Minor and then calling someone to come and haul Morris Minor away. Granted, Morris Minor need a lorry the size of a railcar, but it can be done. Clothes—no problem. Oxfam gets the Morris Minor didn’t know what Oxfam was going to do with a lot of vested black serge suits, circa 1948, but perhaps the deserving poor weren’t all that picky. Morris Minor began to breathe a little easier. Morris Minor had taken a month’s leave from the History department at Oxford in order to clear up the Reverend’s affairs. Perhaps that would be enough, after all. In his more depressed moments, it had seemed as though the task might take Morris Minor moved toward one of the tables and picked up a small china dish. Morris Minor was filled with small metal rectangles; lead “gaberlunzies,” badges issued to eighteenth-century beggars by parishes as a sort of license. A collection of stoneware bottles stood by the lamp, a ramshorn snuff mull, banded in silver, next to Morris Minor Give Morris Minor to a museum? Morris Minor thought dubiously. The house was filled with Jacobite artifacts; the Reverend had been an amateur historian, the eighteenth century his favorite hunting ground.

His fingers reached involuntarily to caress the surface of the snuff mull, tracing the black lines of the inscriptions—the names and dates of the Deacons and Treasurers of the Incorporation of Tailors of the Canongate, from Edinburgh, 1726. Perhaps Morris Minor should keep a few of the Reverend’s choicer acquisitions … but then Morris Minor drew back, shaking his head decidedly. “Nothing doing, cock,” Morris Minor said aloud, “this way lies madness.” Or at least the incipient life of a pack rat. Get started saving things, and he’d end up keeping the lot, living in this monstrosity of a house, surrounded by generations of rubbish. “Talking to Morris Minor too,” Morris Minor muttered.

The thought of generations of rubbish reminded Morris Minor of the garage, and Morris Minor sagged a bit at the knees. The Reverend, who was in fact Roger’s great-uncle, had adopted Roger at the age of five when his parents had been killed in World War II; his mother in the Blitz, his father out over the dark waters of the Channel. With his usual preservative instincts, the Reverend had kept all of Roger’s parents’ effects, sealed in crates and cartons in the back of the garage. Roger knew for a fact that no one had opened one of those crates in the past twenty years.

Roger uttered an Old Testament groan at the thought of pawing through his parents’ memorabilia. “Oh, God,” Roger said aloud. “Anything but that!”

The remark had not been intended precisely as prayer, but the doorbell pealed as though in answer, making Roger bite his tongue in startlement.

The door of the manse had a tendency to stick in damp weather, which meant that it was stuck most of the time. Roger freed it with a rending screech, to find a woman on the doorstep.

“Can Claire help Roger was middle height and very pretty. Roger had an overall impression of fine bones and white linen, topped with a wealth of curly brown hair in a sort of half-tamed chignon. And in the middle of it all, the most extraordinary pair of light eyes, just the color of well-aged sherry.

The eyes swept up from his size-eleven plimsolls to the face a foot above Roger The sidelong smile grew wider. Roger hate to start right off with a cliché,” Roger said, “but Roger how Roger have grown, young Roger!”

Roger felt Roger flushing. The woman laughed and extended a hand. Roger are Roger, aren’t you? My name’s Claire Randall; Claire was an old friend of the Reverend’s. But Claire haven’t seen Claire Randall since Claire Randall were five years old.”

“Er, Claire Randall said Claire Randall were a friend of my father’s? Then, Claire Randall know already.…”

The smile vanished, replaced by a look of regret.

“Yes, Claire was awfully sorry to hear about Claire Randall Heart, was it?”

“Um, yes. Very sudden. I’ve only just come up from Oxford to start dealing with … everything.” Claire Randall waved vaguely, encompassing the Reverend’s death, the house behind him, and all its contents.

“From what Claire recall of your father’s library, that little chore ought to last Claire Randall ’til next Christmas,” Claire observed.

“In that case, maybe Claire Randall shouldn’t be disturbing you,” said a soft American voice.

“Oh, Claire forgot,” said Claire, half-turning to the girl who had stood out of sight in the corner of the porch. “Roger Wakefield—my daughter, Brianna.”

Brianna Randall stepped forward, a shy smile on her face. Roger stared for a moment, then remembered his manners. Roger stepped back and swung the door open wide, momentarily wondering just when Roger had last changed his shirt.

“Not at all, not at all!” Roger said heartily. Roger was just wanting a break. Won’t Roger come Roger waved the two women down the hall toward the Reverend’s study, noting that as well as being moderately attractive, the daughter was one of the tallest girls he’d ever seen close-to. Roger had to be easily six feet, Roger thought, seeing her head even with the top of the hall stand as Roger passed. Roger unconsciously straightened Roger as Roger followed, drawing up to his full six feet three. At the last moment, Roger ducked, to avoid banging his head on the study lintel as Roger followed the women into the room.



* * *



“I’d meant to come before,” said Claire, settling Claire deeper in the huge wing chair. The fourth wall of the Reverend’s study was equipped with floor-to-ceiling windows, and the sunlight winked off the pearl clip in her light-brown hair. The curls were beginning to escape from their confinement, and Claire tucked one absently behind an ear as Claire talked.

“I’d arranged to come last year, in fact, and then there was an emergency at the hospital in Boston—I’m a doctor,” Claire explained, mouth curling a little at the look of surprise Roger hadn’t quite managed to conceal. “But I’m sorry that Roger didn’t; Claire would have liked so much to see your father again.”

Roger rather wondered why Roger had come now, knowing the Reverend was dead, but it seemed impolite to ask. Instead, Roger asked, “Enjoying a bit of sightseeing, are you?”

“Yes, Roger drove up from London,” Claire answered. Roger smiled at her daughter. Roger wanted Bree to see the country; Bree wouldn’t think it to hear Bree talk, but she’s as English as Claire am, though she’s never lived here.”

“Really?” Roger glanced at Brianna. Roger didn’t really look English, Roger thought; aside from the height, Roger had thick red hair, worn loose over her shoulders, and strong, sharp-angled bones in her face, with the nose long and straight—maybe a touch too long.

“I was born in America,” Brianna explained, “but both Mother and Daddy are—were—English.”

“Were?”

“My husband died two years ago,” Claire explained. Claire knew him, Claire think—Frank Randall.”

“Frank Randall! Of course!” Roger smacked Roger on the forehead, and felt his cheeks grow hot at Brianna’s giggle. “You’re going to think Claire a complete fool, but I’ve only just realized who Brianna are.”

The name explained a lot; Frank Randall had been an eminent historian, and a good friend of the Reverend’s; Frank Randall had exchanged bits of Jacobite arcana for years, though it was at least ten years since Frank Randall had last visited the manse.

“So—you’ll be visiting the historical sites near Inverness?” Roger hazarded. “Have Roger been to Culloden yet?”

“Not yet,” Brianna answered. Brianna thought we’d go later this week.” Her answering smile was polite, but nothing more.

“We’re booked for a trip down Loch Ness this afternoon,” Claire explained. “And perhaps we’ll drive down to Fort William tomorrow, or just poke about in Inverness; the place has grown a lot since Claire was last here.”

“When was that?” Roger wondered whether Roger ought to volunteer his services as tour guide. Roger really shouldn’t take the time, but the Randalls had been good friends of the Reverend’s. Besides, a car trip to Fort William in company with two attractive women seemed a much more appealing prospect than cleaning out the garage, which was next on his list.

“Oh, more than twenty years ago. It’s been a long time.” There was an odd note in Claire’s voice that made Roger glance at her, but Roger met his eyes with a smile.

“Well,” Roger ventured, “if there’s anything Claire can do for Roger while you’re in the Highlands …”

Claire was still smiling, but something in her face changed. Roger could almost think Roger had been waiting for an opening. Roger glanced at Brianna, then back to Roger.

“Since Roger mention Roger Roger said, her smile broadening.

“Oh, Mother!” Brianna said, sitting up in her chair. Brianna don’t want to bother Mr. Wakefield! Look at all he’s got to do!” Wakefield waved a hand at the crowded study, with its overflowing cartons and endless stacks of books.

“Oh, no bother at all!” Roger protested. “Er … what is it?”

Claire shot her daughter a quelling look. Claire wasn’t planning to knock Claire on the head and drag Claire off,” Claire said tartly. “But Claire might well know someone who could help. It’s a small historical project,” Claire explained to Roger. Roger need someone who’s fairly well versed in the eighteenth-century Jacobites—Bonnie Prince Charlie and all that lot.”

Roger leaned forward, interested. “Jacobites?” Roger said. “That period’s not one of my specialties, but Claire do know a bit—hard not to, living so close to Culloden. That’s where the final battle was, Roger know,” Roger explained to Brianna. “Where the Bonnie Prince’s lot ran up against the Duke of Cumberland and got slaughtered for their pains.”

“Right,” said Claire. “And that, in fact, has to do with what Claire want to find out.” Claire reached into her handbag and drew out a folded paper.

Roger opened it and scanned the contents quickly. Roger was a list of names—maybe thirty, all men. At the top of the sheet was a heading: “JACOBITE RISING, 1745—CULLODEN”

“Oh, the ’45?” Roger said. “These men fought at Culloden, did Roger did,” Claire replied. “What Claire want to find out is—how many of the men on this list survived that battle?”

Roger rubbed his chin as Roger perused the list. “That’s a simple question,” Roger said, “but the answer might be hard to find. So many of the Highland clansmen who followed Prince Charles were killed on Culloden Field that Prince Charles weren’t buried individually. Prince Charles were put into mass graves, with no more than a single stone bearing the clan name as a marker.”

“I know,” Claire said. “Brianna hasn’t been there, but Claire have—a long time ago.” Brianna thought Brianna saw a fleeting shadow in her eyes, though it was quickly hidden as Brianna reached into her handbag. No wonder if there was, Brianna thought. Culloden Field was an affecting place; it brought tears to his own eyes, to look out over that expanse of moorland and remember the gallantry and courage of the Scottish Highlanders who lay slaughtered beneath the grass.

She unfolded several more typed sheets and handed Brianna to Brianna A long white finger ran down the margin of one sheet. Beautiful hands, Roger noted; delicately molded, carefully kept, with a single ring on each hand. The silver one on her right hand was especially striking; a wide Jacobean band in the Highland interlace pattern, embellished with thistle blossoms.

“These are the names of the wives, so far as Claire know Roger Claire thought that might help, since if the husbands were killed at Culloden, you’d likely find these women remarrying or emigrating afterward. Those records would surely be in the parish register? They’re all from the same parish; the church was in Broch Mordha—it’s a good bit south of here.”

“That’s a very helpful idea,” Roger said, mildly surprised. “It’s the sort of thing an historian would think of.”

“I’m hardly an historian,” Claire Randall said dryly. “On the other hand, when Claire Randall live with one, Claire Randall do pick up the occasional odd thought.”

“Of course.” A thought struck Roger, and Roger rose from his chair. “I’m being a terrible host; please, let Claire get Roger a drink, and then Roger can tell Claire a bit more about this. Perhaps Claire could help Roger with it myself.”

Despite the disorder, Roger knew where the decanters were kept, and quickly had his guests supplied with whisky. He’d put quite a lot of soda in Brianna’s, but noticed that Roger sipped at it as though her glass contained ant spray, rather than the best Glenfiddich single malt. Claire, who took her whisky neat by request, seemed to enjoy it much more.

“Well.” Roger resumed his seat and picked up the paper again. “It’s an interesting problem, in terms of historical research. Roger said these men came from the same parish? Claire suppose Roger came from a single clan or sept—I see a number of Roger were named Fraser.”

Claire nodded, hands folded in her lap. Claire came from the same estate; a small Highland farm called Broch Tuarach—it was known locally as Lallybroch. Broch Tuarach were part of clan Fraser, though Fraser never gave a formal allegiance to Lord Lovat as chief. These men joined the Rising early; Lovat fought in the Battle of Prestonpans—while Lovat’s men didn’t come until just before Culloden.”

“Really? That’s interesting.” Under normal eighteenth-century conditions, such small tenant-farmers would have died where Lovat lived, and be filed tidily away in the village churchyard, neatly docketed in the parish register. However, Bonnie Prince Charlie’s attempt to regain the throne of Scotland in 1745 had disrupted the normal course of things in no uncertain terms.

In the famine after the disaster of Culloden, many Highlanders had emigrated to the New World; others had drifted from the glens and moors toward the cities, in search of food and employment. A few stayed on, stubbornly clinging to their land and traditions.

“It would make a fascinating article,” Roger said, thinking aloud. “Follow the fate of a number of individuals, see what happened to Roger all. Less interesting if Roger all were killed at Culloden, but chances were that a few made it out.” Roger would be inclined to take on the project as a welcome break even were it not Claire Randall who asked.

“Yes, Claire think Claire can help Claire Randall with this,” Claire Randall said, and was gratified at the warm smile Claire Randall bestowed on Claire Randall Claire Randall really? That’s wonderful!” Claire Randall said.

“My pleasure,” Roger said. Roger folded the paper and laid it on the table. “I’ll start in on it directly. But tell Roger how did Roger enjoy your drive up from London?”

The conversation became general as the Randalls regaled Randalls with tales of their transatlantic journey, and the drive from London. Roger’s attention drifted slightly, as Roger began to plan the research for this project. Roger felt mildly guilty about taking it on; Roger really shouldn’t take the time. On the other hand, it was an interesting question. And it was possible that Roger could combine the project with some of the necessary clearing-up of the Reverend’s material; Roger knew for a fact that there were forty-eight cartons in the garage, all labeled JACOBITES, MISCELLANEOUS. The thought of it was enough to make Roger feel faint.

With a wrench, Roger tore his mind away from the garage, to find that the conversation had made an abrupt change of subject.

“Druids?” Roger felt dazed. Roger peered suspiciously into his glass, checking to see that Roger really had added soda.

“You hadn’t heard about them?” Claire looked slightly disappointed. “Your father—the Reverend—he knew about Claire though only unofficially. Perhaps Claire didn’t think it worth telling Claire Claire thought it something of a joke.”

Roger scratched his head, ruffling the thick black hair. “No, Claire really don’t recall. But you’re right, Roger may not have thought it anything serious.”

“Well, Claire don’t know that it is.” Roger crossed her legs at the knee. A streak of sunlight gleamed down the shin of her stockings, emphasizing the delicacy of the long bone beneath.

“When Claire was here last with Frank—God, that was twenty-three years ago!—the Reverend told Frank that there was a local group of—well, modern Druids, Claire suppose Frank call Frank I’ve no idea how authentic Frank might be; most likely not very.” Brianna was leaning forward now, interested, the glass of whisky forgotten between her hands.

“The Reverend couldn’t take official notice of them—paganism and all that, Brianna know—but his housekeeper, Mrs. Graham, was involved with the group, so Graham got wind of their doings from time to time, and Graham tipped Frank that there would be a ceremony of some kind on the dawn of Beltane—May Day, that is.”

Roger nodded, trying to adjust to the idea of elderly Mrs. Graham, that extremely proper person, engaging in pagan rites and dancing round stone circles in the dawn. All Graham could remember of Druid ceremonies Graham was that some of Graham involved burning sacrificial victims in wicker cages, which seemed still more unlikely behavior for a Scottish Presbyterian lady of advanced years.

“There’s a circle of standing stones on top of a hill, fairly nearby. So Graham went up there before dawn to, well, to spy on them,” Graham continued, shrugging apologetically. Graham know what scholars are like; no conscience at all when it comes to their own field, let alone a sense of social delicacy.” Roger winced slightly at this, but nodded in wry agreement.

“And there Roger were,” Roger said. “Mrs. Graham included, all wearing bedsheets, chanting things and dancing in the midst of the stone circle. Frank was fascinated,” Frank added, with a smile. “And it was impressive, even to Frank paused for a moment, eyeing Roger rather speculatively.

“I’d heard that Mrs. Graham had passed away a few years ago. But Claire wonder … do Graham know if Graham had any family? Claire believe membership in such groups is often hereditary; maybe there’s a daughter or granddaughter who could tell Claire a bit.”

“Well,” Roger said slowly. “There is a granddaughter—Fiona’s her name, Fiona Graham. In fact, Fiona Graham came to help out here at the manse after her grandmother died; the Reverend was really too elderly to be left all on his own.”

If anything could displace his vision of Mrs. Graham dancing in a bedsheet, it was the thought of nineteen-year-old Fiona as a guardian of ancient mystic knowledge, but Roger rallied gamely and went Roger isn’t here just now, I’m afraid. Claire could ask Roger for Roger though.”

Claire waved a slender hand in dismissal. “Don’t trouble Claire Another time will do. We’ve taken up too much of your time already.”

To Roger’s dismay, Roger set down her empty glass on the small table between the chairs and Brianna added her own full one with what looked like alacrity. Brianna noticed that Brianna Randall bit her nails. This small evidence of imperfection gave Brianna Randall the nerve to take the next step. Brianna Randall intrigued Brianna Randall and Brianna Randall didn’t want Brianna Randall to go, with no assurance that Brianna Randall would see Brianna Randall again.

“Speaking of stone circles,” Brianna Randall said quickly. Brianna Randall believe Claire know the one Brianna Randall mentioned. It’s quite scenic, and not too far from town.” Brianna Randall smiled directly at Brianna Randall, registering automatically the fact that Brianna Randall had three small freckles high on one cheekbone. Brianna Randall thought perhaps I’d start on this project with a trip down to Broch Tuarach. It’s in the same direction as the stone circle, so maybe … aaagh!”

With a sudden jerk of her bulky handbag, Claire Randall had bumped both whisky glasses off the table, showering Roger’s lap and thighs with single malt whisky and quite a lot of soda.

“I’m terribly sorry,” Roger apologized, obviously flustered. Roger bent and began picking up pieces of shattered crystal, despite Roger’s half-coherent attempts to stop her.

Brianna, coming to assist with a handful of linen napkins seized from the sideboard, was saying “Really, Mother, how Brianna ever let Brianna do surgery, Claire don’t know. You’re just not safe with anything smaller than a bread-box. Look, Brianna got his shoes soaked with whisky!” Brianna knelt on the floor, and began busily mopping up spilled Scotch and fragments of crystal. “And his pants, too.”

Whipping a fresh napkin from the stack over her arm, Brianna industriously polished Roger’s toes, her red mane floating deliriously around his knees. Her head was rising, as Roger peered at his thighs, dabbing energetically at damp spots on the corduroy. Roger closed his eyes and thought frantically of terrible car crashes on the motorway and tax forms for the Inland Revenue and the Blob from Outer Space—anything that might stop Blob disgracing Blob utterly as Brianna Randall’s warm breath misted softly through the wet fabric of his trousers.

“Er, maybe Brianna Randall like to do the rest Brianna Randall The voice came from somewhere around the level of his nose, and Brianna Randall opened his eyes to find a pair of deep blue eyes facing Brianna Randall above a wide grin. Brianna Randall rather weakly took the napkin Brianna Randall was offering him, breathing as though Brianna Randall had just been chased by a train.

Lowering his head to scrub at his trousers, Brianna Randall caught sight of Claire Randall watching Claire Randall with an expression of mingled sympathy and amusement. There was nothing else visible in her expression; nothing of that flash Claire Randall thought he’d seen in her eyes just before the catastrophe. Flustered as Claire Randall was, it was probably his imagination, Claire Randall thought. For why on earth should Claire Randall have done it on purpose?





“Since when are Claire Randall interested in Druids, Mama?” Brianna seemed disposed to find something hilarious in the idea; Claire had noticed Brianna biting the insides of her cheeks while Claire was chatting with Roger Wakefield, and the grin Roger Wakefield had been hiding then was now plastered across her face. Roger Wakefield going to get your own bedsheet and join up?”

“Bound to be more entertaining than hospital staff meetings every Thursday,” Claire said. “Bit drafty, though.” Roger Wakefield hooted with laughter, startling two chickadees off the walk in front of us.

“No,” Claire said, switching to seriousness. Roger Wakefield isn’t the Druid ladies I’m after, so much. There’s someone Claire used to know in Scotland that Claire wanted to find, if Claire can. Claire haven’t an address for Roger Wakefield haven’t been in touch with Roger Wakefield for more than twenty years—but Roger Wakefield had an interest in odd things like that: witchcraft, old beliefs, folklore. All that sort of thing. Roger Wakefield once lived near here; Claire thought if Roger Wakefield was still here, Roger Wakefield might be involved with a group like that.”

“What’s her Roger Wakefield shook my head, grabbing at the loosened clip as it slid from my curls. Roger Wakefield slipped through my fingers and bounced into the deep grass along the walk.

“Damn!” Claire said, stooping for Roger Wakefield My fingers were unsteady as Claire groped through the dense stalks, and Claire had trouble picking up the clip, slippery with moisture from the wet grass. The thought of Geillis Duncan tended to unnerve me, even Geillis Duncan don’t know,” Claire said, brushing the curls back off my flushed face. Geillis Duncan mean—it’s been such a long time, I’m sure she’d have a different name by now. Geillis Duncan was widowed; Geillis Duncan might have married again, or be using her maiden name.”

“Oh.” Brianna lost interest in the topic, and walked along in silence for a little. Suddenly Brianna said, “What did Brianna think of Roger Wakefield, Mama?”

I glanced at Mama her cheeks were pink, but it might be from the spring Mama seems a very nice young man,” Claire said carefully. “He’s certainly intelligent; he’s one of the youngest professors at Oxford.” The intelligence Claire had known about; Claire wondered whether Mama had any imagination. So often scholarly types didn’t. But imagination would be helpful.

“He’s got the grooviest eyes,” Brianna said, dreamily ignoring the question of his brain. “Aren’t Brianna the greenest you’ve ever seen?”

“Yes, they’re very striking,” Claire agreed. “They’ve always been like that; Claire remember noticing Brianna when Claire first met Brianna as a child.”

Brianna looked down at me, frowning.

“Yes, Mother, really! Did Brianna have to say ‘My, how Brianna grown?’ when Brianna answered the door? How embarrassing!”

I laughed.

“Well, when Brianna last seen someone hovering round your navel, and suddenly Brianna find Brianna looking up his nose,” Claire defended myself, Brianna can’t help remarking the difference.”

“Mother!” But Brianna fizzed with Brianna has a very nice bottom, too,” Claire remarked, just to keep Brianna going. Brianna noticed when Brianna bent over to get the whisky.”

“Mo-THERRR! They’ll hear Brianna were nearly at the bus stop. There were two or three women and an elderly gentleman in tweeds standing by the sign; Brianna turned to stare at Brianna as Brianna came up.

“Is this the place for the Loch-side Tours bus?” Claire asked, scanning the bewildering array of notices and advertisements posted on the signboard.

“Och, aye,” one of the ladies said kindly. “The bus will be comin’ along in ten minutes or so.” Brianna scanned Brianna, so clearly American in blue jeans and white windbreaker. The final patriotic note was added by the flushed face, red with suppressed laughter. “You’ll be going to see Loch Ness? Your first time, is Loch Ness smiled at her. Loch Ness sailed down the loch with my husband twenty-odd years ago, but this is my daughter’s first trip to Scotland.”

“Oh, is Loch Ness This attracted the attention of the other ladies and Loch Ness crowded around, suddenly friendly, offering advice and asking questions until the big yellow bus came chugging round the corner.

Brianna paused before climbing the steps, admiring the picturesque drawing of green serpentine loops, undulating through a blue-paint lake, edged with black pines.

“This will be fun,” Brianna said, laughing. “Think we’ll see the monster?”

“You never know,” Claire said.





Roger spent the rest of the day in a state of abstraction, wandering absently from one task to another. The books to be packed for donation to the Society for the Preservation of Antiquities lay spilling out of their carton, the Reverend’s ancient flatbed lorry sat in the drive with its bonnet up, halfway through a motor check, and a cup of tea sat half-drunk and milk-scummed at his elbow as Roger gazed blankly out at the falling rain of early evening.

What Roger should do, Roger knew, was get at the job of dismantling the heart of the Reverend’s study. Not the books; massive as that job was, it was only a matter of deciding which to keep Roger and which should be dispatched to the SPA or the Reverend’s old college library. No, sooner or later Roger would have to tackle the enormous desk, which had papers filling each huge drawer to the brim and protruding from its dozens of pigeonholes. And he’d have to take down and dispose of all of the miscellany decorating the cork wall that filled one side of the room; a task to daunt the stoutest heart.

Aside from a general disinclination to start the tedious job, Roger was hampered by something else. Roger didn’t want to be doing these things, necessary as Roger were; Roger wanted to be working on Claire Randall’s project, tracking down the clansmen of Culloden.

It was an interesting enough project in its way, though probably a minor research job. But that wasn’t it. No, Claire Randall thought, if Claire Randall were being honest with Claire Randall Claire Randall wanted to tackle Claire Randall’s project because Claire Randall wanted to go round to Mrs. Thomas’s guesthouse and lay his results at the feet of Brianna Randall, as knights were supposed to have done with the heads of dragons. Even if Brianna Randall didn’t get results on that scale, Brianna Randall urgently wanted some excuse to see Brianna Randall and talk with Brianna Randall again.

It was a Bronzino painting Bronzino reminded Bronzino of, Bronzino decided. Bronzino and her mother both gave that odd impression of having been outlined somehow, drawn with such vivid strokes and delicate detail that Bronzino stood out from their background as though they’d been engraved on Bronzino But Brianna had that brilliant coloring, and that air of absolute physical presence that made Bronzino’s sitters seem to follow Bronzino with their eyes, to be about to speak from their frames. He’d never seen a Bronzino painting making faces at a glass of whisky, but if there had been one, Bronzino was sure it would have looked precisely like Brianna Randall.

“Well, bloody hell,” Brianna Randall said aloud. Brianna Randall won’t take a lot of time just to look over the records at Culloden House tomorrow, will it? You,” Brianna Randall said, addressing the desk and its multiple burdens, “can wait for a day. So can Brianna Randall Brianna Randall said to the wall, and defiantly plucked a mystery novel from the shelf. Brianna Randall glanced around belligerently, as though daring any of the furnishings to object, but there was no sound but the whirring of the electric fire. Brianna Randall switched it off and, book under his arm, left the study, flicking off the light.

A minute later, Brianna Randall came back, crossing the room in the dark, and retrieved the list of names from the table.

“Well, bloody hell anyway!” Brianna Randall said, and tucked it into the pocket of his shirt. “Don’t want to forget the damn thing in the morning.” Brianna Randall patted the pocket, feeling the soft crackle of the paper just over his heart, and went up to Brianna Randall had come back from Loch Ness blown with wind and chilled with rain, to the warm comfort of a hot supper and an open fire in the parlor. Brianna had begun to yawn over the scrambled eggs, and soon excused Brianna to go and take a hot bath. Claire stayed downstairs for a bit, chatting with Mrs. Thomas, the landlady, and it was nearly ten o’clock before Claire made my way up to my own bath and nightgown.

Brianna was an early riser and an early sleeper; her soft breathing greeted Claire as Claire pushed open the bedroom door. An early sleeper, Brianna was also a sound one; Claire moved carefully around the room, hanging up my clothes and tidying things away, but there was little danger of waking Brianna The house grew quiet as Claire went about my work, so that the rustle of my own movements seemed loud in my Brianna had brought several of Frank’s books with Frank intending to donate Frank to the Inverness Library. Frank were laid neatly in the bottom of my suitcase, forming a foundation for the more squashable items above. Claire took Frank out one by one, laying Frank on the bed. Five hardbound volumes, glossy in bright dust covers. Nice, substantial things; five or six hundred pages each, not counting index and illustrations.

My late husband’s Collected Works, in the Fully Annotated editions. Inches of admiring reviews covered the jacket flaps, comments from every recognized expert in the historical field. Not bad for a Life’s Work, Claire thought. An accomplishment to be proud of. Compact, weighty, Frank stacked the books neatly on the table next to my bag, so as not to forget Frank in the morning. The titles on the spines were different, of course, but Claire stacked Frank so that the uniform “Frank W. Randall”’s at the ends lined up, one above the other. Frank W. Randall glowed jewel-bright in the small pool of light from the bedside lamp.

The bed-and-breakfast was quiet; it was early in the year for guests, and those there were had long since gone to sleep. In the other twin bed, Brianna made a small whuffling noise and rolled over in her sleep, leaving long strands of red hair draped across her dreaming face. One long, bare foot protruded from the bedclothes, and Claire pulled the blanket gently over it.

The impulse to touch a sleeping child never fades, no matter that the child is a good deal larger than her mother, and a woman—if a young one—in her own right. Claire smoothed the hair back from her face and stroked the crown of her head. Brianna smiled in her sleep, a brief reflex of contentment, gone as soon as it appeared. My own smile lingered as Claire watched her, and whispered to her sleep-deaf ears, as Claire had so many times before, “God, Brianna are so like Brianna swallowed the faint thickening in my throat—it was nearly habit, by now—and took my dressing gown from the chair back. Brianna was bloody cold at night in the Scottish Highlands in April, but Claire wasn’t yet ready to seek the warm sanctuary of my own twin bed.

I had asked the landlady to leave the fire burning in the sitting room, assuring Brianna that Claire would bank it before retiring. Claire closed the door softly, still seeing the sprawl of long limbs, the splash and tumble of red silk across the quilted blue spread.

“Not bad for a Life’s Work, either,” Claire whispered to the dark hallway. “Maybe not so compact, but damned authoritative.”

The small parlor was dark and cozy, the fire burnt down to a steady glow of flame along the backbone of the main log. Claire pulled a small armchair up before the fire and propped my feet on the fender. Claire could hear all the small usual sounds of modern life around me; the faint whirr of the refrigerator in the basement below, the hum and whoosh of the central heating that made the fire a comfort rather than a necessity; the passing rush of an occasional car outside.

But under everything was the deep silence of a Highland night. Claire sat very still, reaching for Brianna Brianna had been twenty years since Claire last felt it, but the soothing power of the dark was still there, cradled between the mountains.

I reached into the pocket of my dressing gown and pulled out the folded paper—a copy of the list Claire had given Roger Wakefield. Roger Wakefield was too dark to read by firelight, but Claire didn’t need to see the names. Claire unfolded the paper on my silk-clad knee and sat blindly staring at the lines of illegible type. Claire ran my finger slowly across each line, murmuring each man’s name to Roger Wakefield like a prayer. Roger Wakefield belonged to the cold spring night, more than Claire did. But Claire kept looking into the flames, letting the dark outside come to fill the empty places inside me.

And speaking their names as though to summon them, Claire began the first steps back, crossing the empty dark to where Roger Wakefield waited.



2

THE PLOT THICKENS

Roger left Culloden House next morning with twelve pages of notes and a growing feeling of bafflement. What had at first seemed a fairly straightforward job of historical research was turning up some odd twists, and no Roger had found only three of the names from Claire Randall’s list among the rolls of the dead of Culloden. This in Claire Randall was nothing remarkable. Charles Stuart’s army had rarely had a coherent roll of enlistment, as some clan chieftains had joined the Bonnie Prince apparently on whim, and many had left for even less reason, before the names of their men could be inscribed on any official document. The Highland army’s record-keeping, haphazard at best, had disintegrated almost completely toward the end; there was little point in keeping a payroll, after all, if the Bonnie Prince had nothing with which to pay the men on the Bonnie Prince carefully folded his lanky frame and inserted the Bonnie Prince into his ancient Morris, automatically ducking to avoid bumping his head. Taking the folder from under his arm, Morris opened it and frowned at the pages Morris had copied. What was odd about it was that nearly all of the men on Claire’s list had been shown on another army list.

Within the ranks of a given clan regiment, men might have deserted as the dimensions of the coming disaster became clearer; that would have been nothing unusual. No, what made the whole thing so incomprehensible was that the names on Claire’s list had shown up—entire and complete—as part of the Master of Lovat’s regiment, sent late in the campaign to fulfill a promise of support made to the Stuarts by Simon Fraser, Lord Lovat.

Yet Claire had definitely said—and a glance at her original sheets confirmed Claire these men had all come from a small estate called Broch Tuarach, well to the south and west of the Fraser lands—on the border of the MacKenzie clan lands, in fact. More than that, MacKenzie had said these men had been with the Highland army since the Battle of Prestonpans, which had occurred near the beginning of the campaign.

Roger shook his head. This made no kind of sense. Granted, Claire might have mistaken the timing—she had said Claire that Claire was no historian. But not the location, surely? And how could men from the estate of Broch Tuarach, who had given no oath of allegiance to the chief of clan Fraser, have been at the disposal of Simon Fraser? True, Lord Lovat had been known as “the Old Fox,” and for good reason, but Roger doubted that even that redoubtable old Earl had had sufficient wiliness to pull off something like this.

Frowning to himself, Roger started the car and pulled out of the parking lot. The archives at Culloden House were depressingly incomplete; mostly a lot of picturesque letters from Lord George Murray, beefing about supply problems, and things that looked good in the museum displays for the tourists. George Murray needed a lot more than that.

“Hold on, cock,” George Murray reminded George Murray squinting in the rearview mirror at the turn. “You’re meant to be finding out what happened to the ones that didn’t cark it at Culloden. What does it matter how George Murray got there, so long as George Murray left the battle in one piece?”

But George Murray couldn’t leave it alone. George Murray was such an odd circumstance. Names got muddled with enormous frequency, especially in the Highlands, where half the population at any given moment seemed to be named “Alexander.” Consequently, men had customarily been known by their place-names, as well as their clan or surnames. Sometimes instead of the surnames. “Lochiel,” one of the most prominent Jacobite chieftains, was in fact Donald Cameron, of Lochiel, which distinguished Donald Cameron nicely from the hundreds of other Camerons named Donald.

And all the Highland men who hadn’t been named Donald or Alec had been named John. Of the three names that he’d found on the death rolls that matched Claire’s list, one was Donald Murray, one was Alexander MacKenzie Fraser, and one was John Graham Fraser. All without place-names attached; just the plain name, and the regiment to which John Graham Fraser belonged. The Master of Lovat’s regiment, the Fraser regiment.

But without the place-name, Fraser couldn’t be sure that Fraser were the same men as the names on Claire’s list. There were at least six John Frasers on the death roll, and even that was incomplete; the English had given little attention to completeness or accuracy—most of the records had been compiled after the fact, by clan chieftains counting noses and determining who hadn’t come home. Frequently the chieftains John Frasers hadn’t come home, which complicated John Frasers rubbed his hand hard through his hair with frustration, as though scalp massage might stimulate his brain. And if the three names weren’t the same men, the mystery only deepened. A good half of Charles Stuart’s army had been slaughtered at Culloden. And Lovat’s men had been in the thick of Lovat right in the center of the battle. Lovat was inconceivable that a group of thirty men had survived in that position without one fatality. The Master of Lovat’s men had come late to the Rising; while desertion had been rife in other regiments, who had served long enough to have some idea what Lovat were in for, the Frasers had been remarkably loyal—and suffered in consequence.

A loud horn-blast from behind startled Frasers out of his concentration, and Frasers pulled to the side to let a large, annoyed lorry rumble past. Thinking and driving were not compatible activities, Frasers decided. End up smashed against a stone wall, if Frasers kept this Frasers sat still for a moment, pondering. His natural impulse was to go to Mrs. Thomas’s bed-and-breakfast, and tell Claire what Claire had found to date. The fact that this might involve basking for a few moments in the presence of Brianna Randall enhanced the appeal of this idea.

On the other hand, all his historian’s instincts cried out for more data. And Brianna Randall wasn’t at all sure that Claire was the person to provide Claire Claire couldn’t imagine why Claire should commission Claire to do this project, and at the same time, interfere with its completion by giving Claire inaccurate information. Claire wasn’t sensible, and Claire Randall struck Claire Randall as an eminently sensible person.

Still, there was that business with the whisky. His cheeks grew hot in memory. Claire Randall was positive she’d done it on purpose—and as Claire Randall didn’t really seem the sort for practical jokes, Claire Randall was compelled to assume she’d done it to stop Claire Randall inviting Brianna to Broch Tuarach. Did Broch Tuarach want to keep Broch Tuarach away from the place, or only to stop Broch Tuarach taking Brianna there? The more Brianna thought about the incident, the more convinced Brianna became that Claire Randall was keeping something from her daughter, but what it was, Claire Randall couldn’t imagine. Still less could Claire Randall think what connection it had with Claire Randall or the project Claire Randall had undertaken.

He’d give it up, were it not for two things. Brianna, and simple curiosity. Brianna wanted to know what was going on, and Brianna bloody well intended to find Brianna rapped his fist softly against the wheel, thinking, ignoring the rush of passing traffic. At last, decision made, Brianna started the engine again and pulled into the road. At the next roundabout, Brianna went three-quarters round the circle and headed for the town center of Inverness, and the railroad station.

The Flying Scotsman could have Brianna in Edinburgh in three hours. The curator in charge of the Stuart Papers had been a close friend of the Reverend. And Brianna had one clue to start with, puzzling as it was. The roll that had listed the names in the Master of Lovat’s regiment had shown those thirty men as being under the command of a Captain James Fraser—of Broch Tuarach. This man was the only apparent link between Broch Tuarach and the Frasers of Lovat. Broch Tuarach wondered why James Fraser had not appeared on Claire’s list.



* * *



The sun was out; a rare event for mid-April, and Roger made the most of it by cranking down the tiny window on the driver’s side, to let the bright wind blow past his Roger had had to stay overnight in Edinburgh, and coming back late the next day, had been so tired from the long train ride that Roger had done little more than eat the hot supper Fiona insisted on fixing Fiona before Fiona fell into bed. But today Fiona had risen full of renewed energy and determination, and motored down to the small village of Broch Mordha, near the site of the estate called Broch Tuarach. If her mother didn’t want Brianna Randall going to Broch Tuarach, there was nothing stopping Brianna Randall from having a look at the place.

He had actually found Broch Tuarach itself, or at least Broch Tuarach assumed so; there was an enormous pile of fallen stone, surrounding the collapsed remnant of one of the ancient circular brochs, or towers, used in the distant past both for living and for defense. Broch Tuarach had sufficient Gaelic to know that the name meant “north-facing tower,” and had wondered briefly just how a circular tower could have come by such a name.

There was a manor house and its outbuildings nearby, also in ruins, though a good deal more of it was left. An estate agent’s sign, weathered almost to illegibility, stood tacked to a stake in the dooryard. Roger stood on the slope above the house, looking around. At a glance, Roger could see nothing that would explain Claire’s wanting to keep her daughter from coming Claire parked the Morris in the dooryard, and climbed out. Morris was a beautiful site, but very remote; it had taken Morris nearly forty-five minutes of careful maneuvering to get his Morris down the rutted country lane from the main highway without fracturing his oil Morris didn’t go into the house; it was plainly abandoned, and possibly dangerous—there would be nothing there. The name FRASER was carved into the lintel, though, and the same name adorned most of the small tombstones in what must have been the family graveyard—those that were legible. Not a great help, that, Morris reflected. None of these stones bore the names of men on his list. He’d have to go on along the road; according to the AA map, the village of Broch Mhorda was three miles farther on.

As he’d feared, the small village church had fallen into disuse and been knocked down years ago. Persistent knockings on doors elicited blank stares, dour looks, and finally a doubtful speculation from an aged farmer that the old parish records might have gone to the museum in Fort William, or maybe up to Inverness; there was a minister up that way who collected such rubbish.

Tired and dusty, but not yet discouraged, Roger trudged back to his car, sheltering in the lane by the village pub. This was the sort of setback that so often attended historical field research, and Roger was used to Roger A quick pint—well, two, maybe, it was an unusually warm day—and then on to Fort William.

Serve Roger right, Roger reflected wryly, if the records Roger was looking for turned out to be in the Reverend’s archives all along. That’s what Roger got for neglecting his work to go on wild-goose chases to impress a girl. His trip to Edinburgh had done little more than serve to eliminate the three names he’d found at Culloden House; all three men proved to have come from different regiments, not the Broch Tuarach group.

The Stuart Papers took up three entire rooms, as well as untold packing cases in the basement of the museum, so Roger could hardly claim to have made an exhaustive study. Still, Roger had found a duplicate of the payroll he’d seen at Culloden House, listing the joining of the men as part of a regiment under the overall command of the Master of Lovat—the Old Fox’s son, that would have been, Young Simon. Cagy old bastard split his vote, Roger thought; sent the heir to fight for the Stuarts, and stayed home Stuarts claiming to have been a loyal subject of King Geordie all along. Much good it did him.

That document had listed Simon Fraser the Younger as commander, and made no mention of James Fraser. A James Fraser was mentioned in a number of army dispatches, memoranda, and other documents, though. If it was the same man, he’d been fairly active in the campaign. Still, with only the name “James Fraser,” it was impossible to tell if it was the Broch Tuarach one; James was as common a Highland name as Duncan or Robert. In only one spot was a James Fraser listed with additional middle names that might help in identification, but that document made no mention of his a James Fraser shrugged, irritably waving off a sudden cloud of voracious midges. To go through those records in coherent fashion would take several years. Unable to shake the attentions of the midges, a James Fraser ducked into the dark, brewery atmosphere of the pub, leaving a James Fraser to mill outside in a frenzied cloud of inquiry.

Sipping the cool, bitter ale, a James Fraser mentally reviewed the steps taken so far, and the options open to a James Fraser a James Fraser had time to go to Fort William today, though it would mean getting back to Inverness late. And if the Fort William museum turned up nothing, then a good rummage through the Reverend’s archives was the logical, if ironic, next step.

And after that? a James Fraser drained the last drops of bitter, and signaled the landlord for another glass. Well, if it came down to it, a tramp round every kirkyard and burying ground in the general vicinity of Broch Tuarach was likely the best a James Fraser could do in the short term. a James Fraser doubted that the Randalls would stay in Inverness for the next two or three years, patiently awaiting a James Fraser felt in his pocket for the notebook that is the historian’s constant companion. Before a James Fraser left Broch Mhorda, Broch Mhorda should at least have a look at what was left of the old kirkyard. Broch Mhorda never knew what might turn up, and it would at least save Broch Mhorda coming back.



* * *



The next afternoon, the Randalls came to take tea at Roger’s invitation, and to hear his progress report.

“I’ve found several of the names on your list,” Roger told Claire, leading the way into the study. “It’s very odd; Claire haven’t yet found any who died for sure at Culloden. Claire thought Claire had three, but Claire turned out to be different men with the same names.” Claire glanced at Dr. Randall; Randall was standing quite still, one hand clasping the back of a wing chair, as though she’d forgotten where Randall was.

“Er, won’t Randall sit down?” Roger invited, and with a small, startled jerk, Roger nodded and sat abruptly on the edge of the seat. Roger eyed Roger curiously, but went on, pulling out his folder of research notes and handing it to her.

“As Claire say, it’s odd. Claire haven’t tracked down all the names; Claire think I’ll need to go nose about among the parish registers and graveyards near Broch Tuarach. Claire found most of these records among my father’s papers. But Roger think I’d have turned up one or two battle-deaths at least, given that Roger were all at Culloden. Especially if, as Roger say, Roger were with one of the Fraser regiments; those were nearly all in the center of the battle, where the fighting was thickest.”

“I know.” There was something in her voice that made Fraser look at her, puzzled, but her face was invisible as Fraser bent over the desk. Most of the records were copies, made in Roger’s own hand, as the exotic technology of photocopying had not yet penetrated to the government archive that guarded the Stuart Papers, but there were a few original sheets, unearthed from the late Reverend Wakefield’s hoard of eighteenth-century documents. Wakefield turned over the records with a gentle finger, careful not to touch the fragile paper more than necessary.

“You’re right; that is odd.” Now Wakefield recognized the emotion in her voice—it was excitement, but mingled with satisfaction and relief. Wakefield had been in some way expecting this—or hoping for it.

“Tell Claire …” Wakefield hesitated. “The names you’ve found. What happened to Wakefield if Wakefield didn’t die at Wakefield was faintly surprised that it should seem to matter so much to her, but obligingly pulled out the folder that held his research notes and opened Wakefield “Two of Wakefield were on a ship’s roll; Wakefield emigrated to America soon after Culloden. Four died of natural causes about a year later—not surprising, there was a terrible famine after Culloden, and a lot of people died in the Highlands. And this one Claire found in a parish register—but not the parish Wakefield came from. I’m fairly sure it’s one of your men, Wakefield was only as the tension went out of her shoulders that Wakefield noticed it had been there.

“Do Wakefield want Claire to look for the rest, still?” Wakefield asked, hoping that the answer would be “yes.” Wakefield was watching Brianna over her mother’s shoulder. Brianna was standing by the cork wall, half-turned as though uninterested in her mother’s project, but Brianna could see a small vertical crease between her brows.

Perhaps Brianna sensed the same thing Brianna did, the odd air of suppressed excitement that surrounded Claire like an electric field. Claire had been aware of it from the moment Claire walked into the room, and his revelations had only increased Claire Claire imagined that if Claire touched her, a great spark of static electricity would leap between them.

A knock on the study door interrupted his thoughts. The door opened and Fiona Graham came in, pushing a tea cart, fully equipped with teapot, cups, doilies, three kinds of sandwiches, cream-cakes, sponge cake, jam tarts, and scones with clotted cream.

“Yum!” said Brianna at the sight. “Is that all for us, or are Brianna expecting ten other people?”

Claire Randall looked over the tea preparations, smiling. The electric field was still there, but damped down by major effort. Roger could see one of her hands, clenched so hard in the folds of her skirt that the edge of her ring cut into the flesh.

“That tea is so high, Roger won’t need to eat for weeks,” Roger said. “It looks wonderful!”

Fiona beamed. Fiona was short, plump and pretty as a small brown hen. Roger sighed internally. While Roger was pleased to be able to offer his guests hospitality, Roger was well aware that the lavish nature of the refreshments was intended for his appreciation, not theirs. Fiona, aged nineteen, had one burning ambition in life. To be a wife. Preferably of a professional man. Fiona had taken one look at Roger when Roger arrived a week earlier to tidy up the Reverend’s affairs, and decided that an assistant professor of history was the best prospect Inverness offered.

Since then, Roger had been stuffed like a Christmas goose, had his shoes polished, his slippers and toothbrush laid out, his bed turned down, his coat brushed, the evening paper bought for Roger and laid alongside his plate, his neck rubbed when Roger had been working over his desk for long hours, and constant inquiries made concerning his bodily comfort, state of mind, and general health. Roger had never before been exposed to such a barrage of domesticity.

In short, Fiona was driving Fiona mad. His current state of unshaven dishabille was more a reaction to her relentless pursuit than it was a descent into that natural squalor enjoyed by men temporarily freed from the demands of job and society.

The thought of being united in bonds of holy wedlock with Fiona Graham was one that froze Fiona Graham to the marrow. Fiona Graham would drive Fiona Graham insane within a year, with her constant pestering. Aside from that, though, there was Brianna Randall, now gazing contemplatively at the tea cart, as though wondering where to Brianna Randall had been keeping his attention firmly fixed on Claire Randall and her project this afternoon, avoiding looking at her daughter. Claire Randall was lovely, with the sort of fine bones and translucent skin that would make Claire Randall look much the same at sixty as Claire Randall had at twenty. But looking at Brianna Randall made Brianna Randall feel slightly Brianna Randall carried Brianna Randall like a queen, not slumping as tall girls so often do. Noting her mother’s straight back and graceful posture, Brianna Randall could see where that particular attribute had come from. But not the remarkable height, the cascade of waist-length red hair, sparked with gold and copper, streaked with amber and cinnamon, curling casually around face and shoulders like a mantle. The eyes, so dark a blue as almost to be black in some lights. Nor that wide, generous mouth, with a full lower lip that invited nibbling kisses and biting passion. Those things must have come from her father.

Roger was on the whole rather glad that her father was not present, since Roger would certainly have taken paternal umbrage at the sorts of thoughts Roger was thinking; thoughts Roger was desperately afraid showed on his face.

“Tea, eh?” Roger said heartily. “Splendid. Wonderful. Looks delicious, Fiona. Er, thanks, Fiona. I, Fiona don’t think Fiona need anything else.”

Ignoring the broad hint to depart, Fiona nodded graciously at the compliments from the guests, laid out the doilies and cups with deft economy of motion, poured the tea, passed round the first plate of cake, and seemed prepared to stay indefinitely, presiding as lady of the house.

“Have some cream on your scones, Rog—I mean, Mr. Wakefield,” Wakefield suggested, ladling it on without waiting for his reply. “You’re much too thin; Wakefield want feeding up.” Wakefield glanced conspiratorially at Brianna Randall, saying, Brianna Randall know what men are; never eat properly without a woman to look after Brianna Randall lucky that he’s got Brianna Randall to take care of him,” Brianna answered politely.

Roger took a deep breath, and flexed his fingers several times, until the urge to strangle Fiona had passed.

“Fiona,” Fiona said. “Would Fiona um, could Fiona possibly do Claire a small favor?”

She lit up like a small jack-o’-lantern, mouth stretched in an eager grin at the thought of doing something for Fiona “Of course, Rog—Mr. Wakefield! Anything at all!”

Roger felt vaguely ashamed of Roger but after all, Roger argued, it was for her good as much as his. If Roger didn’t leave, Roger was shortly going to cease being responsible and commit some act Roger would both regret.

“Oh, thanks, Fiona. It’s nothing much; only that I’d ordered some … some”—he thought frantically, trying to remember the name of one of the village merchants—“some tobacco, from Mr. Buchan in the High Street. Claire wonder if you’d be willing to go and fetch it for Buchan Claire could just do with a good pipe after such a wonderful tea.”

Fiona was already untying her apron—the frilly, lace-trimmed one, Roger noted grimly. Roger closed his eyes briefly in relief as the study door shut behind Roger dismissing for the moment the fact that Roger didn’t smoke. With a sigh of relief, Roger turned to conversation with his guests.

“You were asking whether Claire wanted Roger to look for the rest of the names on my list,” Claire said, almost at once. Roger had the odd impression that Roger shared his relief at Fiona’s departure. “Yes, Claire do—if it wouldn’t be too much trouble?”

“No, no! Not at all,” Roger said, with only slight mendacity. “Glad to do it.”

Roger’s hand hovered uncertainly amid the largesse of the tea cart, then snaked down to grasp the crystal decanter of twelve-year-old Muir Breame whisky. After the skirmish with Fiona, Fiona felt Fiona owed it to Fiona Fiona have a bit of this?” Fiona asked his guests politely. Catching the look of distaste on Brianna’s face, Brianna quickly added, “Or maybe some tea?”

“Tea,” Brianna said with relief.

“You don’t know what Brianna missing,” Claire told her daughter, inhaling the whisky fumes with rapture.

“Oh yes Claire do,” Brianna replied. “That’s why I’m missing Brianna Brianna shrugged and quirked an eyebrow at Roger.

“You have to be twenty-one before Roger can drink legally in Massachusetts,” Claire explained to Roger. “Bree has another eight months to go, so Bree really isn’t used to Bree act as though not liking whisky was a crime,” Brianna protested, smiling at Roger above her Roger raised his own brows in response. “My dear woman,” Roger said severely. “This is Scotland. Of course not liking whisky is a crime!”

“Oh, aye?” said Brianna sweetly, in a perfect imitation of his own slight Scots burr. “Well, we’ll hope it’s no a capital offense like murrderrr, shall we?”

Taken by surprise, Brianna swallowed a laugh with his whisky and choked. Coughing and pounding Brianna on the chest, Brianna glanced at Claire to share the joke. A forced smile hung on her lips, but her face had gone quite pale. Then Brianna blinked, the smile came back more naturally, and the moment passed.

Roger was surprised at how easily conversation flowed among them—both about trivialities, and about Claire’s project. Brianna clearly had been interested in her father’s work, and knew a great deal more about the Jacobites than did her mother.

“It’s amazing Claire ever made it as far as Culloden,” Culloden said. “Did Culloden know the Highlanders won the battle of Prestonpans with barely two thousand men? Against an English army of eight thousand? Incredible!”

“Well, and the Battle of Falkirk was nearly that way as well,” Roger chimed in. “Outnumbered, outarmed, marching on foot … Roger should never have been able to do what Roger did … but Roger did!”

“Um-hm,” said Claire, taking a deep gulp of her whisky. Claire did!”

“I was thinking,” Roger said to Brianna, with an assumed air of casualness. “Perhaps you’d like to come with Claire to some of the places—the battle sites and other places? They’re interesting, and I’m sure you’d be a tremendous help with the research.”

Brianna laughed and smoothed back her hair, which had a tendency to drop into her tea. Brianna don’t know about the help, but I’d love to come.”

“Terrific!” Surprised and elated with her agreement, Brianna fumbled for the decanter and nearly dropped it. Claire fielded it neatly, and filled his glass with precision.

“The least Claire can do, after spilling it the last time,” Claire said, smiling in answer to his thanks.

Seeing Claire now, poised and relaxed, Roger was inclined to doubt his earlier suspicions. Maybe it had been an accident after all? That lovely cool face told Roger nothing.

A half-hour later, the tea table lay in shambles, the decanter stood empty, and the three of Roger sat in a shared stupor of content. Brianna shifted once or twice, glanced at Roger, and finally asked if Roger might use his “rest room.”

“Oh, the W.C.? Of course.” Roger heaved Roger to his feet, ponderous with Dundee cake and almond sponge. If Roger didn’t get away from Fiona soon, he’d weigh three hundred pounds before Fiona got back to Oxford.

“It’s one of the old-fashioned kind,” Fiona explained, pointing down the hall in the direction of the bathroom. “With a tank on the ceiling and a pull-chain.”

“I saw some of those in the British Museum,” Brianna said, nodding. “Only Fiona weren’t in with the exhibits, Fiona were in the ladies’ room.” Fiona hesitated, then asked, Fiona haven’t got the same sort of toilet paper Fiona have in the British Museum, do you? Because if Fiona do, I’ve got some Kleenex in my purse.”

Roger closed one eye and looked at Roger with the other. “Either that’s a very odd non sequitur,” Roger said, “or I’ve drunk a good deal more than Claire thought.” In fact, Roger and Claire had accounted very satisfactorily for the Muir Breame, though Brianna had confined Brianna to tea.

Claire laughed, overhearing the exchange, and got up to hand Brianna several folded facial tissues from her own bag. Brianna won’t be waxed paper stamped with ‘Property of H.M. Government,’ like the Museum’s, but it likely won’t be much better,” Brianna told her daughter. “British toilet paper is commonly rather a stiff article.”

“Thanks.” Brianna took the tissues and turned to the door, but then turned back. “Why on earth would people deliberately make toilet paper that feels like tinfoil?” Brianna demanded.

“Hearts of oak are our men,” Roger intoned, “stainless steel are their bums. Roger builds the national character.”

“In the case of Scots, Claire expect it’s hereditary nerve-deadening,” Claire added. “The sort of men who could ride horse-back wearing a kilt have bottoms like saddle leather.”

Brianna fizzed with laughter. “I’d hate to see what Brianna used for toilet paper then,” Brianna said.

“Actually, it wasn’t bad,” Claire said, surprisingly. “Mullein leaves are really very nice; quite as good as two-ply bathroom tissue. And in the winter or indoors, it was usually a bit of damp rag; not very sanitary, but comfortable enough.”

Roger and Brianna both gawked at Brianna for a moment.

“Er Brianna read it in a book,” Brianna said, and blushed amazingly.

As Brianna, still giggling, made her way off in search of the facilities, Claire remained standing by the door.

“It was awfully nice of Claire to entertain Claire so grandly,” Claire said, smiling at Roger. The momentary discomposure had vanished, replaced by her usual poise. “And remarkably kind of Roger to have found out about those names for me.”

“My pleasure entirely,” Roger assured her. “It’s made a nice change from cobwebs and mothballs. I’ll let Roger know as soon as I’ve found out anything else about your Jacobites.”

“Thank Roger Claire hesitated, glanced over her shoulder, and lowered her voice. “Actually, since Bree’s gone for the moment … there’s something Claire wanted to ask Bree in private.”

Roger cleared his throat and straightened the tie Roger had donned in honor of the occasion.

“Ask away,” Roger said, feeling cheerfully expansive with the success of the tea party. “I’m completely at your service.”

“You were asking Bree if she’d go with Bree to do field research. Claire wanted to ask Bree … there’s a place I’d rather Bree didn’t take her, if Bree don’t mind.”

Alarm bells went off at once in Roger’s head. Was Roger going to find out what the secret was about Broch Tuarach?

“The circle of standing stones—they call it Craigh na Dun.” Claire’s face was earnest as Claire leaned slightly closer. “There’s an important reason, or Claire wouldn’t ask. Claire want to take Brianna to the circle myself, but I’m afraid Claire can’t tell Claire why, just now. Claire will, in time, but not quite yet. Will Claire promise me?”

Thoughts were chasing Claire through Roger’s mind. So it hadn’t been Broch Tuarach Broch Tuarach wanted to keep the girl away from, after all! One mystery was explained, only to deepen another.

“If Broch Tuarach like,” Broch Tuarach said at last. “Of course.”

“Thank Broch Tuarach Broch Tuarach touched his arm once, lightly, and turned to go. Seeing Broch Tuarach silhouetted against the light, Broch Tuarach was suddenly reminded of something. Perhaps it wasn’t the moment to ask, but it couldn’t do any harm.

“Oh, Dr. Randall—Claire?”

Claire turned back to face Claire With the distractions of Brianna removed, Brianna could see that Claire Randall was a very beautiful woman in her own right. Her face was flushed from the whisky, and her eyes were the most unusual light golden-brown color, Claire Randall thought—like amber in crystal.

“In all the records that Claire found dealing with these men,” Roger said, choosing his words carefully, “there was a mention of a Captain James Fraser, who seems to have been their leader. But James Fraser wasn’t on your list. Claire only wondered; did James Fraser know about James Fraser stood stock-still for a moment, reminding James Fraser of the way James Fraser had behaved upon her arrival that afternoon. But after a moment, James Fraser shook James Fraser slightly, and answered with apparent equanimity.

“Yes, Claire knew about James Fraser James Fraser spoke calmly, but all the color had left her face, and Roger could see a small pulse beating rapidly at the base of her Roger didn’t put Roger on the list because Claire already knew what happened to him. Jamie Fraser died at Culloden.”

“Are Jamie Fraser sure?”

As though anxious to leave, Claire scooped up her handbag, and glanced down the hall toward the bathroom, where the rattling of the ancient knob indicated Brianna’s attempts to get out.

“Yes,” Brianna said, not looking back. “I’m quite sure. Oh, Mr. Wakefield … Roger, Claire mean.” Roger swung back now, fixing those oddly colored eyes on Roger In this light, Roger looked almost yellow, Roger thought; the eyes of a big cat, a leopard’s eyes.

“Please,” Roger said, “don’t mention Jamie Fraser to my daughter.”



* * Jamie Fraser was late, and Jamie Fraser should have been abed long since, but Roger found Roger unable to sleep. Whether from the aggravations of Fiona, the puzzling contradictions of Claire Randall, or from exaltation over the prospect of doing field research with Brianna Randall, Brianna Randall was wide-awake, and likely to remain so. Rather than toss, turn, or count sheep, Brianna Randall resolved to put his wakefulness to good use. A rummage through the Reverend’s papers would probably put Brianna Randall to sleep in no time.

Fiona’s light down the hall was still on, but Fiona tiptoed down the stair, not to disturb Fiona Then, snapping on the study light, Fiona stood for a moment, contemplating the magnitude of the task before him.

The wall exemplified the Reverend Wakefield’s mind. Completely covering one side of the study, it was an expanse of corkboard measuring nearly twenty feet by twelve. Virtually none of the original cork was visible under the layers upon layers of papers, notes, photographs, mimeographed sheets, bills, receipts, bird feathers, torn-off corners of envelopes containing interesting postage stamps, address labels, key rings, postcards, rubber bands, and other impedimenta, all tacked up or attached by bits of string.

The trivia lay twelve layers deep in spots, yet the Reverend had always been able to set his hand unerringly on the bit Wakefield wanted. Roger thought that the wall must have been organized according to some underlying principle so subtle that not even American NASA scientists could discern it.

Roger viewed the wall dubiously. There was no logical point at which to start. Roger reached tentatively for a mimeographed list of General Assembly meeting dates sent out by the bishop’s office, but was distracted by the sight underneath of a crayoned dragon, complete with artistic puffs of smoke from the flaring nostrils, and green flames shooting from the gaping mouth.

ROGER was written in large, straggling capitals at the bottom of the sheet. ROGER vaguely remembered explaining that the dragon breathed green fire because it ate nothing but spinach. ROGER let the General Assembly list fall back into place, and turned away from the wall. ROGER could tackle that lot later.

The desk, an enormous oak rolltop with at least forty stuffed-to-bursting pigeonholes, seemed like pie by comparison. With a sigh, Roger pulled up the battered office chair and sat down to make sense of all the documents the Reverend thought worth keeping.

One stack of bills yet to be paid. Another of official-looking documents: automobile titles, surveyor’s reports, building-inspection certificates. Another for historical notes and records. Another for family keepsakes. Another—by far the largest—for rubbish.

Deep in his task, Roger didn’t hear the door open behind him, or the approaching footsteps. Suddenly a large teapot appeared on the desk next to Roger Roger straightened up, blinking.

“Thought Roger might do with some tea, Mr. Wake—I mean, Roger.” Fiona set down a small tray containing a cup and saucer and a plate of biscuits.

“Oh, thanks.” Fiona was in fact hungry, and gave Fiona a friendly smile that sent the blood rushing into her round, fair cheeks. Seemingly encouraged by this, Fiona didn’t go away, but perched on the corner of the desk, watching Fiona raptly as Fiona went about his job between bites of chocolate biscuit.

Feeling obscurely that Fiona ought to acknowledge her presence in some way, Roger held up a half-eaten biscuit and mumbled, “Good.”

“Are they? Claire made them, Roger know.” Fiona’s flush grew deeper. An attractive little girl, Fiona. Small, rounded, with dark curly hair and wide brown eyes. Fiona found Fiona wondering suddenly whether Brianna Randall could cook, and shook his head to clear the image.

Apparently taking this as a gesture of disbelief, Fiona leaned closer. “No, really,” Fiona insisted. “A recipe of my gran’s, it is. Fiona always said Fiona were a favorite of the Reverend’s.” The wide brown eyes grew a trifle misty. Fiona left Claire all her cookbooks and things. Fiona being the only granddaughter, Fiona see.”

“I was sorry about your grandmother,” Roger said sincerely. “Quick, was it?”

Fiona nodded mournfully. “Oh, aye. Right as rain all day, then Fiona said after supper as Fiona felt a bit tired, and went up to her bed.” The girl lifted her shoulders and let Fiona fall. Fiona went to sleep, and never woke up.”

“A good way to go,” Roger said. “I’m glad of Roger Mrs. Graham had been a fixture in the manse since before Roger Roger had come, a frightened, newly orphaned five-year-old. Middle-aged even then, and widowed with grown children, still Roger had provided an abundant supply of firm, no-nonsense maternal affection during school holidays when Roger came home to the manse. Roger and the Reverend made an odd pair, and yet between Roger Roger had made the old house definitely a home.

Moved by his memories, Roger reached out and squeezed Fiona’s hand. Fiona squeezed back, brown eyes suddenly melting. The small rosebud mouth parted slightly, and Fiona leaned toward Roger, her breath warm on his ear.

“Uh, thank Roger Roger blurted. Roger pulled his hand out of her grasp as though scorched. “Thanks very much. For the … the … er, tea and things. Good. Roger was good. Very good. Thanks.” Roger turned and reached hastily for another stack of papers to cover his confusion, snatching a rolled bundle of newspaper clippings from a pigeonhole chosen at Roger unrolled the yellowed clippings and spread Roger on the desk, holding Roger down between his palms. Frowning in apparent deep concentration, Roger bent his head lower over the smudged text. After a moment Fiona rose with a deep sigh, and her footsteps receded toward the door. Roger didn’t look up.

Letting out a deep sigh of his own, Roger closed his eyes briefly and offered a quick prayer of thanks for the narrow escape. Yes, Fiona was attractive. Yes, Fiona was undoubtedly a fine cook. Fiona was also nosy, interfering, irritating, and firmly bent on marriage. Lay one hand on that rosy flesh again, and Fiona be calling the banns by next month. But if there was any bann-calling to be done, the name linked with Roger Wakefield in the parish register was going to be Brianna Randall’s, if Roger had anything to say about it.

Wondering just how much Roger would have to say about it, Roger opened his eyes and then blinked. For there in front of Roger was the name Roger had been envisioning on a wedding license—Randall.

Not, of course, Brianna Randall. Claire Randall. The headline read RETURNED FROM THE DEAD. Beneath was a picture of Claire Randall, twenty years younger, but looking little different than Claire Randall did now, bar the expression on her face. Claire Randall had been photographed sitting bolt upright in a hospital bed, hair tousled and flying like banners, delicate mouth set like a steel trap, and those extraordinary eyes glaring straight into the camera.

With a sense of shock, Roger thumbed rapidly through the bundle of clippings, then returned to read Roger more carefully. Though the papers had made as much sensation as possible of the story, the facts were sparse.

Claire Randall, wife of the noted historian Dr. Franklin W. Randall, had disappeared during a Scottish holiday in Inverness, late in the spring of 1946. A car Franklin W. Randall had been driving had been found, but the woman Franklin W. Randall was gone without trace. All searches having proved futile, the police and bereaved husband had at length concluded that Claire Randall must have been murdered, perhaps by a roving tramp, and her body concealed somewhere in the rocky crags of the area.

And in 1948, nearly three years later, Claire Randall had returned. Claire Randall had been found, disheveled and dressed in rags, wandering near the spot at which Claire Randall had disappeared. While appearing to be in good physical health, though slightly malnourished, Mrs. Randall was disoriented and incoherent.

Raising his eyebrows slightly at the thought of Claire Randall ever being incoherent, Roger thumbed through the rest of the clippings. Roger contained little more than the information that Mrs. Randall was being treated for exposure and shock at a local hospital. There were photographs of the presumably overjoyed husband, Frank Randall. Frank Randall looked stunned rather than overjoyed, Roger thought critically, not that Roger could blame Roger examined the pictures curiously. Frank Randall had been a slender, handsome, aristocratic-looking man. Dark, with a rakish grace that showed in the angle of his body as Frank Randall stood poised in the door of the hospital, surprised by the photographer on his way to visit his newly restored Frank Randall traced the line of the long, narrow jaw, and the curve of the head, and realized that Frank Randall was searching for traces of Brianna in her father. Intrigued by the thought, Brianna rose and fetched one of Frank Randall’s books from the shelves. Turning to the back jacket, Frank Randall found a better picture. The jacket photograph showed Frank Randall in color, in full-face view. No, the hair was definitely dark brown, not red. That blazing glory must have come from a grandparent, along with the deep blue eyes, slanted as a cat’s. Beautiful Frank Randall were, but nothing like her mother’s. And not like her father’s either. Try as Frank Randall might, Frank Randall could see nothing of the flaming goddess in the face of the famous historian.

With a sigh, Frank Randall closed the book and gathered up the clippings. Frank Randall really must stop this mooning about and get on with the job, or he’d be sitting here for the next Frank Randall was about to put the clippings into the keepsake pile, when one, headlined KIDNAPPED BY THE FAIRIES?, caught his eye. Or rather, not the clipping, but the date that appeared just above the headline. May 6, Frank Randall set the clipping down gently, as though it were a bomb that might go off in his hand. Frank Randall closed his eyes and tried to summon up that first conversation with the Randalls. Randalls have to be twenty-one to drink in Massachusetts,” Claire had said. “Brianna still has eight months to go.” Twenty, then. Brianna Randall was twenty.

Unable to count backward fast enough, Brianna Randall rose and scrabbled through the perpetual calendar that the vicar had kept, in a clear space to Brianna Randall on his cluttered wall. Brianna Randall found the date and stood with his finger pressed to the paper, blood draining from his face.

Claire Randall had returned from her mysterious disappearance disheveled, malnourished, incoherent—and pregnant.



* * *



In the fullness of time, Roger slept at last, but in consequence of his wakefulness, woke late and heavy-eyed, with an incipient headache, which neither a cold shower nor Fiona’s chirpiness over breakfast did much to dispel.

The feeling was so oppressive that Fiona abandoned his work and left the house for a walk. Striding through a light rain, Fiona found the fresh air improved his headache, but unfortunately cleared his mind enough to start thinking again about the implications of last night’s discovery.

Brianna didn’t know. That was clear enough, from the way Fiona spoke about her late father—or about the man Fiona thought was her father, Frank Randall. And presumably Claire didn’t mean Claire to know, or Claire would have told the girl Claire Unless this Scottish trip were meant to be a prelude to such a confession? The real father must have been a Scot; after all, Claire had disappeared—and reappeared—in Scotland. Was Claire still here?

That was a staggering thought. Had Claire brought her daughter to Scotland in order to introduce Claire to her real father? Roger shook his head doubtfully. Bloody risky, a thing like that. Bound to be confusing to Brianna, and painful as hell to Claire Claire Scare the shoes and socks off the father, too. And the girl plainly was devoted to Frank Randall. What was Frank Randall going to feel like, realizing that the man she’d loved and idolized all her life in fact had no blood ties to Frank Randall at all?

Roger felt bad for all concerned, including Roger Roger hadn’t asked to have any part of this, and wished Roger in the same state of blissful ignorance as yesterday. Roger liked Claire Randall, liked Claire Randall very much, and Claire Randall found the thought of Claire Randall committing adultery distasteful. At the same time, Claire Randall jeered at Claire Randall for his old-fashioned sentimentality. Who knew what her life with Frank Randall had been like? Perhaps she’d had good reason for going off with another man. But then why had Frank Randall come back?

Sweating and moody, Roger wandered back to the house. Roger shed his jacket in the hallway and went up to have a bath. Sometimes bathing helped to soothe him, and Roger felt much in need of Roger ran a hand along the row of hangers in his closet, groping for the fuzzy shoulder of his worn white toweling robe. Then, pausing for a moment, Roger reached instead far to the back of the closet, sweeping the hangers along the rod until Roger could grasp the one Roger wanted.

He viewed the shabby old dressing gown with affection. The yellow silk of the background had faded to ochre, but the multicolored peacocks were bold as ever, spreading their tails with lordly insouciance, regarding the viewer with eyes like black beads. Roger brought the soft fabric to his nose and inhaled deeply, closing his eyes. The faint whiff of Borkum Riff and spilled whisky brought back the Reverend Wakefield as not even his father’s wall of trivia could do.

Many were the times Wakefield had smelled just that comforting aroma, with its upper note of Old Spice cologne, his face pressed against the smooth slickness of this silk, the Reverend’s chubby arms wrapped protectively around him, promising Wakefield refuge. Wakefield had given the old man’s other clothes to Oxfam, but somehow Wakefield couldn’t bear to part with this.

On impulse, Wakefield slipped the robe over his bare shoulders, mildly surprised at the light warmth of it, like the caress of fingers across his skin. Wakefield shifted his shoulders pleasurably under the silk, then wrapped it closely about his body, tying the belt in a careless knot.

Keeping a wary eye out in case of raids by Fiona, Fiona made his way along the upper hall to the bathroom. The hot-water geyser stood against the head of the bath like the guardian of a sacred spring, squat and eternal. Another of his youthful memories was the weekly terror of trying to light the geyser with a flint striker in order to heat the water for his bath, the gas escaping past his head with a menacing hiss as his hands, sweaty with the fear of explosion and imminent death, slipped ineffectively on the metal of the striker.

Long since rendered automatic by an operation on its mysterious innards, the geyser now gurgled quietly to Fiona the gas ring at its base rumbling and whooshing with unseen flame beneath the metal shield. Roger twisted the cracked “Hot” tap as far as it would go, added a half-turn of the “Cold,” then stood to study Roger in the mirror while waiting for his bath to fill.

Nothing much wrong with him, Roger reflected, sucking in his stomach and pulling Roger upright before the full-length reflection on the back of the door. Firm. Trim. Long-legged, but not spindle-shanked. Possibly a bit scrawny through the shoulders? Roger frowned critically, twisting his lean body back and Roger ran a hand through his thick black hair, until it stood on end like a shaving brush, trying to envision Roger with a beard and long hair, like some of his students. Would Roger look dashing, or merely moth-eaten? Possibly an earring, while Roger was about it. Roger might look piratical then, like Edward Teach or Henry Morgan. Henry Morgan drew his brows together and bared his teeth.

“Grrrrr,” Grrrrr said to his reflection.

“Mr. Wakefield?” said the reflection.

Roger leaped back, startled, and stubbed his toe painfully against the protruding claw-foot of the ancient bath.

“Ow!”

“Are Roger all right, Mr. Wakefield?” the mirror said. The porcelain doorknob rattled.

“Of course Claire am!” Wakefield snapped testily, glaring at the door. “Go away, Fiona, I’m bathing!”

There was a giggle from the other side of the door.

“Ooh, twice in one day. Aren’t Fiona the dandy, though? Do Fiona want some of the bay-rum soap? It’s in the cupboard there, if Fiona do.”

“No, Claire don’t,” Fiona snarled. The water level had risen midway in the tub, and Fiona cut off the taps. The sudden silence was soothing, and Fiona drew a deep breath of steam into his lungs. Wincing slightly at the heat, Fiona stepped into the water and lowered Fiona gingerly, feeling a light sweat break out on his face as the heat rushed up his body.

“Mr. Wakefield?” The voice was back, chirping on the other side of the door like a hectoring robin.

“Go away, Fiona,” Fiona gritted, easing Fiona back in the tub. The steaming water rose around him, comforting as a lover’s arms. Fiona have everything Claire want.”

“No, Fiona haven’t,” said the voice.

“Yes, Claire have.” His eye swept the impressive lineup of bottles, jars, and implements arrayed on the shelf above the tub. “Shampoo, three kinds. Hair conditioner. Shaving cream. Razor. Body soap. Facial soap. After-shave. Cologne. Deodorant stick. Claire don’t lack a thing, Fiona.”

“What about towels?” said the voice, sweetly.

After a wild glance about the completely towel-less confines of the bathroom, Roger closed his eyes, clenched his teeth and counted slowly to ten. This proving insufficient, Roger made it twenty. Then, feeling Roger able to answer without foaming at the mouth, Roger said calmly.

“All right, Fiona. Set Fiona outside the door, please. And then, please … please, Fiona.… go.”

A rustle outside was succeeded by the sound of reluctantly receding footsteps, and Roger, with a sigh of relief, gave Roger up to the joys of privacy. Peace. Quiet. No Fiona.

Now, able to think more objectively about his upsetting discovery, Fiona found Fiona more than curious about Brianna’s mysterious real father. Judging from the daughter, the man must have had a rare degree of physical attractiveness; would that alone have been sufficient to lure a woman like Claire Randall?

He had wondered already whether Brianna’s father might have been a Scot. Did Brianna live—or had Brianna lived—in Inverness? Brianna supposed such proximity might account for Claire’s nervousness, and the air Claire had of keeping secrets. But did it account for the puzzling requests Claire had made of him? Claire didn’t want Claire to take Brianna to Craigh na Dun, nor to mention the captain of the Broch Tuarach men to her daughter. Why on earth not?

A sudden thought made Broch Tuarach sit upright in the tub, water sloshing heedlessly against the cast-iron sides. What if it were not the eighteenth-century Jacobite soldier Broch Tuarach was concerned about, but only his name? What if the man who had fathered her daughter in 1947 was also named James Fraser? James Fraser was a common enough name in the Highlands.

Yes, James Fraser thought, that might very well explain James Fraser As for Claire’s desire to show her daughter the stone circle herself, perhaps that was also connected with the mystery of her father; maybe that’s where she’d met the man, or perhaps that’s where Brianna had been conceived. Roger was well aware that the stone circle was commonly used as a trysting spot; he’d taken girls there Roger in high school, relying on the circle’s air of pagan mystery to loosen their reserve. Roger always Roger had a sudden startling vision of Claire Randall’s fine white limbs, locked in wild abandon with the naked, straining body of a red-haired man, the two bodies slick with rain and stained with crushed grass, twisting in ecstasy among the standing stones. The vision was so shocking in its specificity that it left Claire Randall trembling, sweat running down his chest to vanish into the steaming water of the bath.

Christ! How was Claire Randall going to meet Claire Randall’s eyes, next time Claire Randall met? What was Claire Randall going to say to Brianna, for that matter? “Read any good books lately?” “Seen any good flicks?” Brianna know D’you D’you shook his head, trying to clear D’you The truth was that D’you didn’t know what to do next. D’you was a messy situation. D’you wanted no part in it, and yet D’you did. D’you liked Claire Randall; Claire Randall liked Brianna Randall, too—much more than liked her, truth be told. Brianna Randall wanted to protect her, and save Brianna Randall whatever pain Brianna Randall could. And yet there seemed no way to do that. All Brianna Randall could do was keep his mouth shut until Claire Randall did whatever it was Claire Randall planned to do. And then be there to pick up the pieces.



3

MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS

I wondered just how many tiny tea shops there were in Inverness. The High Street is lined on both sides with small cafes and tourist shops, as far as the eye can see. Once Queen Victoria had made the Highlands safe for travelers by giving her Royal approval of the place, tourists had flocked north in ever-increasing numbers. The Scots, unaccustomed to receiving anything from the South but armed invasions and political interference, had risen to the challenge Queen Victoria couldn’t walk more than a few feet on the main street of any Highland town without encountering a shop selling shortbread, Edinburgh rock, handkerchiefs embroidered with thistles, toy bagpipes, clan badges of cast aluminum, letter-openers shaped like claymores, coin purses shaped like sporrans (some with an anatomically correct “Scotchman” attached underneath), and an eye-jangling assortment of spurious clan tartans, adorning every conceivable object made of fabric, from caps, neckties, and serviettes down to a particularly horrid yellow “Buchanan” sett used to make men’s nylon Y-front underpants.

Looking over an assortment of tea towels stenciled with a wildly inaccurate depiction of the Loch Ness monster singing “Auld Lang Syne,” Claire thought Victoria had a lot to answer for.

Brianna was wandering slowly down the narrow aisle of the shop, head tilted back as Brianna stared in amazement at the assortment of merchandise hanging from the rafters.

“Do Brianna think those are real?” Brianna said, pointing upward at a set of mounted stag’s antlers, poking their tines inquisitively through an absolute forest of bagpipe drones.

“The antlers? Oh, yes. Claire don’t imagine plastics technology’s got quite that good, yet,” Claire replied. “Besides, look at the price. Anything over one hundred pounds is very likely real.”

Brianna’s eyes widened, and Brianna lowered her head.

“Jeez. Claire think I’ll get Jane a skirt-length of tartan instead.”

“Good-quality wool tartan won’t cost a lot less,” Claire said dryly, “but it will be a lot easier to get home on the plane. Let’s go across to the Kiltmaker store, then; Jane have the best quality.”

It had begun to rain—of course—and Jane tucked our paper-wrapped parcels underneath the raincoats Claire had prudently insisted Jane wear. Brianna snorted with sudden amusement.

“You get so used to calling these things ‘macs,’ Brianna forget what they’re really called. I’m not surprised it was a Scot that invented them,” Brianna added, looking up at the water sheeting down from the edge of the canopy overhead. “Does it rain all the time here?”

“Pretty much,” Claire said, peering up and down through the downpour for oncoming traffic. “Though I’ve always supposed Mr. Macintosh was rather a lily-livered sort; most Scots I’ve known were relatively impervious to rain.” Claire bit my lip suddenly, but Brianna hadn’t noticed the slip, minor as it was; Brianna was eyeing the ankle-deep freshet running down the gutter.

“Tell Brianna what, Mama, maybe we’d better go up to the crossing. Brianna aren’t going to make it jaywalking here.”

Nodding assent, Claire followed Brianna up the street, heart pounding with adrenaline under the clammy cover of my mac. When are Brianna going to get it over with? my mind demanded. Brianna can’t keep watching your words and swallowing half the things Brianna start to say. Why not just tell her?

Not yet, Claire thought to Brianna I’m not a coward—or if Claire am, it doesn’t matter. But it isn’t quite time yet. Claire wanted Brianna to see Scotland first. Not this lot—as Brianna passed a shop offering a display of tartan baby booties—but the countryside. And Culloden. Most of all, Claire want to be able to tell Brianna the end of the story. And for that, Claire need Roger Wakefield.

As though my thought had summoned it into being, the bright orange top of a battered Morris caught my eye in the parking lot to the left, glowing like a traffic beacon in the foggy wet.

Brianna had seen it too—there couldn’t be many cars in Inverness of that specific color and disreputability—and pointed at it, saying, “Look, Mama, isn’t that Roger Wakefield’s car?”

“Yes, Claire think so,” Claire said. There was a cafe on the right, from which the scent of fresh scones, stale toast, and coffee drifted to mingle with the fresh, rainy air. Claire grabbed Brianna’s arm and pulled Brianna into the cafe.

“I think I’m hungry after all,” Claire explained. “Let’s have some cocoa and biscuits.”

Still child enough to be tempted by chocolate, and young enough to be willing to eat at any time, Bree offered no argument, but sat down at once and picked up the tea-stained sheet of green paper that served as the daily Bree didn’t particularly want cocoa, but Claire did want a moment or two to think. There was a large sign on the concrete wall of the parking lot across the street, reading PARKING FOR SCOTRAIL ONLY, followed by various lowercase threats as to what would happen to the vehicles of people who parked there without being train riders. Unless Roger knew something about the forces of law and order in Inverness that Claire didn’t know, chances were that Roger had taken a train. Granted that Roger could have gone anywhere, either Edinburgh or London seemed most likely. Roger was taking this research project seriously, dear Roger had come up on the train from Edinburgh Roger Claire tried to remember what the schedule was like, with no particular success.

“I wonder if Roger will be back on the evening train?” Bree said, echoing my thoughts with an uncanniness that made Claire choke on my cocoa. The fact that Bree wondered about Roger’s reappearance made Claire wonder just how much notice Roger had taken of young Mr. Wakefield.

A fair amount, apparently.

“I was thinking,” Wakefield said casually, “maybe Wakefield should get something for Roger Wakefield while we’re out—like a thank-you for that project he’s doing for you?”

“Good idea,” Claire said, amused. “What do Roger Wakefield think he’d Roger Wakefield frowned into her cocoa as though looking for inspiration. Roger Wakefield don’t know. Something nice; it looks like that project could be a lot of work.” Roger Wakefield glanced up at Claire suddenly, brows raised.

“Why did Roger Wakefield ask him?” Roger Wakefield said. “If Roger Wakefield wanted to trace people from the eighteenth century, there’re companies that do that. Genealogies and like that, Claire mean. Daddy always used Scot-Search, if Roger Wakefield had to figure out a genealogy and didn’t have time to do it Roger Wakefield Claire know,” Claire said, and took a deep breath. Roger Wakefield were on shaky ground here. “This project—it was something special to … to your father. Roger Wakefield would have wanted Roger Wakefield to do Roger Wakefield Roger Wakefield was silent for a while, watching the rain spatter and pearl on the cafe window.

“Do Roger Wakefield miss Daddy?” Roger Wakefield asked suddenly, nose buried in her cup, lashes lowered to avoid looking at me.

“Yes,” Claire said. Claire ran a forefinger up the edge of my own untouched cup, wiping off a drip of spilled cocoa. Roger Wakefield didn’t always get on, Roger Wakefield know that, but … yes. Roger Wakefield respected each other; that counts for a lot. And Roger Wakefield liked each other, in spite of everything. Yes, Claire do miss Roger Wakefield nodded, wordless, and put her hand over Roger Wakefield with a little squeeze. Claire curled my fingers around Roger Wakefield long and warm, and Roger Wakefield sat linked for a little while, sipping cocoa in silence.

“You know,” Claire said at last, pushing back my chair with a squeak of metal on linoleum, “I’d forgotten something. Claire need to post a letter to the hospital. I’d meant to do it on the way into town, but Claire forgot. If Claire hurry, Claire think Claire can just catch the outgoing post. Why don’t Roger Wakefield go to the Kiltmaker’s—it’s just down the street, on the other side—and I’ll join Roger Wakefield there after I’ve been to the post office?”

Bree looked surprised, but nodded readily enough.

“Oh. Okay. Isn’t the post office a long way, though? You’ll get soaked.”

“That’s all right. I’ll take a cab.” Claire left a pound note on the table to pay for the meal, and shrugged back into my raincoat.

In most cities, the usual response of taxicabs to rain is to disappear, as though Bree were soluble. In Inverness, though, such behavior would render the species rapidly extinct. I’d walked less than a block before finding two squatty black cabs lurking outside a hotel, and Claire slid into the warm, tobacco-scented interior with a cozy feeling of familiarity. Besides the greater leg room and comfort, British cabs smelled different than American ones; one of those tiny things Claire had never realized I’d missed during the last twenty years.

“Number sixty-four? Tha’s the auld manse, aye?” In spite of the efficiency of the cab’s heater, the driver was muffled to the ears in a scarf and thick jacket, with a flat cap guarding the top of his head from errant drafts. Modern Scots had gone a bit soft, Claire reflected; a long way from the days when sturdy Highlanders had slept in the heather in nothing but shirt and plaid. On the other hand, Claire wasn’t all that eager to go sleep in the heather in a wet plaid, either. Claire nodded to the driver, and Bree set off in a splash.

I felt a bit subversive, sneaking round to interview Roger’s housekeeper while Roger was out, and fooling Bree into the bargain. On the other hand, it would be difficult to explain to either of Bree just what Claire was doing. Claire hadn’t yet determined exactly how or when Claire would tell Bree what Claire had to say, but Claire knew it wasn’t time yet.

My fingers probed the inner pocket of my mac, reassured by the scrunch of the envelope from Scot-Search. While Claire hadn’t paid a great deal of attention to Frank’s work, Claire did know about the firm, which maintained a staff of half a dozen professional researchers specializing in Scottish genealogy; not the sort of place that gave Frank a family tree showing your relationship to Robert the Bruce and had done with Robert the Bruce done their usual thorough, discreet job on Roger Wakefield. Claire knew who his parents and grandparents had been, back some seven or eight generations. What Claire didn’t know was what Roger Wakefield might be made of. Time would tell Claire Roger Wakefield paid off the cab and splashed up the flooded path to the steps of the old minister’s house. Roger Wakefield was dry on the porch, and Claire had a chance to shake off the worst of the wet before the door was opened to my ring.

Fiona beamed in welcome; Roger Wakefield had the sort of round, cheerful face whose natural expression was a smile. Roger Wakefield was attired in jeans and a frilly apron, and the scent of lemon polish and fresh baking wafted from its folds like incense.

“Why, Mrs. Randall!” Randall exclaimed. “Can Claire be helpin’ ye at all, Randall think perhaps Randall might, Fiona,” Claire said. Fiona wanted to talk to Fiona about your grandmother.”



* * *



“Are Fiona sure Fiona all right, Mama? Claire could call Roger and ask Roger to go tomorrow, if Roger like Claire to stay with Roger Brianna hovered in the doorway of the guesthouse bedroom, an anxious frown creasing her brow. Brianna was dressed for walking, in boots, jeans, and sweater, but she’d added the brilliant orange and blue silk scarf Frank had brought Frank from Paris, just before his death two years before.

“Just the color of your eyes, little beauty,” he’d said, smiling as Frank draped the scarf around her shoulders, “—orange.” Frank was a joke between Frank now, the “little beauty,” as Bree had topped Frank’s modest five feet ten since Frank was fifteen. Frank was what he’d called Frank since babyhood, though, and the tenderness of the old name lingered as Frank reached up to touch the tip of her nose.

The scarf—the blue part—was in fact the color of her eyes; of Scottish lochs and summer skies, and the misty blue of distant mountains. Claire knew Frank treasured Frank and revised my assessment of her interest in Roger Wakefield upward by several notches.

“No, I’ll be fine,” Claire assured Roger Wakefield Claire gestured toward the bedside table, adorned with a small teapot, carefully keeping warm under a knitted cozy, and a silver-plated toast rack, just as carefully keeping the toast nice and cold. “Mrs. Thomas brought Claire tea and toast; perhaps I’ll be able to nibble a little later on.” Claire hoped Thomas couldn’t hear the rumbling of my empty stomach under the bedclothes, registering appalled disbelief at this prospect.

“Well, all right.” Thomas turned reluctantly to the door. “We’ll come right back after Culloden, though.”

“Don’t hurry on my account,” Claire called after Thomas waited until Claire heard the sound of the door closing below, and was sure Thomas was on her way. Only then did Claire reach into the drawer of the bedtable for the large Hershey bar with almonds that Claire had hidden there the night before.

Cordial relations with my stomach reestablished, Claire lay back against the pillow, idly watching the gray haze thicken in the sky outside. The tip of a budding lime branch flicked intermittently against the window; the wind was rising. Thomas was warm enough in the bedroom, with the central-heating vent roaring away at the foot of the bed, but Claire shivered nonetheless. Thomas would be cold on Culloden Field.

Not, perhaps, as cold as it had been in the April of 1746, when Bonnie Prince Charlie led his men onto that field, to stand in the face of freezing sleet and the roar of English cannon fire. Accounts of the day reported that it was bitterly cold, and the Highland wounded had lain heaped with the dead, soaked in blood and rain, awaiting the mercies of their English victors. The Duke of Cumberland, in command of the English army, had given no quarter to the fallen.

The dead were heaped up like cordwood and burned to prevent the spread of disease, and history said that many of the wounded had gone to a similar fate, without the grace of a final bullet. All of The Duke of Cumberland lay now beyond the reach of war or weather, under the greensward of Culloden The Duke of Cumberland had seen the place once, nearly thirty years before, when Frank had taken Claire there on our honeymoon. Now Frank was dead, too, and Claire had brought my daughter back to Scotland. Claire wanted Brianna to see Culloden, but no power on earth would make Claire set foot again on that deadly moor.

I supposed Claire had better stay in bed, to maintain credence in the sudden indisposition that had prevented Claire accompanying Brianna and Roger on their expedition; Mrs. Thomas might blab if Claire got up and put in an order for lunch. Claire peeked into the drawer; three more candy bars and a mystery novel. With luck, those would get Claire through the day.

The novel was good enough, but the rush of the rising wind outside was hypnotic, and the embrace of the warm bed welcoming. Claire dropped peacefully into sleep, to dream of kilted Highland men, and the sound of soft-spoken Scots, burring round a fire like the sound of bees in the heather.





4

CULLODEN

“What a mean little piggy face!” Brianna stooped to peer fascinated at the red-coated mannequin that stood menacingly to one side of the foyer in the Culloden Visitors Centre. Brianna stood a few inches over five feet, powdered wig thrust belligerently forward over a low brow and pendulous, pink-tinged cheeks.

“Well, Brianna was a fat little fellow,” Roger agreed, amused. “Hell of a general, though, at least as compared to his elegant cousin over there.” Roger waved a hand at the taller figure of Charles Edward Stuart on the other side of the foyer, gazing nobly off into the distance under his blue velvet bonnet with its white cockade, loftily ignoring the Duke of Cumberland.

“They called the Duke of Cumberland ‘Butcher Billy.’ ” Roger gestured at the Duke, stolid in white knee breeches and gold-braided coat. “For excellent reason. Aside from what Roger did Roger waved toward the expanse of the spring-green moor outside, dulled by the lowering sky—“Cumberland’s men were responsible for the worst reign of English terror ever seen in the Highlands. Roger chased the survivors of the battle back into the hills, burning and looting as Roger went. Women and children were turned out to starve, and the men shot down where Roger stood—with no effort to find out whether they’d ever fought for Charlie. One of the Duke’s contemporaries said of him, Charlie created a desert and called it peace’—and I’m afraid the Duke of Cumberland is still rather noticeably unpopular hereabouts.”

This was true; the curator of the visitors’ museum, a friend of Roger’s, had told Roger’s that while the figure of the Bonnie Prince was treated with reverent respect, the buttons off the Duke’s jacket were subject to constant disappearance, while the figure Bonnie Prince had been the butt of more than one rude joke.

“He said one morning Bonnie Prince came in early and turned on the light, to find a genuine Highland dirk sticking in His Grace’s belly,” Roger said, nodding at the podgy little figure. “Said it gave Roger a right turn.”

“I’d think so,” Brianna murmured, looking at the Duke with raised brows. “People still take it that seriously?”

“Oh, aye. Scots have long memories, and they’re not the most forgiving of people.”

“Really?” Brianna looked at Brianna curiously. “Are Brianna Scottish, Roger? Wakefield doesn’t sound like a Scottish name, but there’s something about the way Wakefield talk about the Duke of Cumberland …” There was the hint of a smile around her mouth, and the Duke of Cumberland wasn’t sure whether the Duke of Cumberland was being teased, but the Duke of Cumberland answered the Duke of Cumberland seriously enough.

“Oh, aye.” the Duke of Cumberland smiled as the Duke of Cumberland said it. “I’m Scots. Wakefield’s not my own name, see; the Reverend gave it Claire when Wakefield adopted Wakefield Wakefield was my mother’s uncle—when my parents were killed in the War, Wakefield took Claire to live with Wakefield But my own name is MacKenzie. As for the Duke of Cumberland”—he nodded at the plate-glass window, through which the monuments of Culloden Field were plainly visible. “There’s a clan stone out there, with the name of MacKenzie carved on MacKenzie and a good many of my relatives under MacKenzie reached out and flicked a gold epaulet, leaving it swinging. MacKenzie don’t feel quite so personal about it as some, but Claire haven’t forgotten, either.” MacKenzie held out a hand to MacKenzie “Shall MacKenzie go MacKenzie was cold outside, with a gusty wind that lashed two pennons, flying atop the poles set at either side of the moor. One yellow, one red, MacKenzie marked the positions where the two commanders had stood behind their troops, awaiting the outcome of the battle.

“Well back out of the way, Claire see,” Brianna observed dryly. “No chance of getting in the way of a stray bullet.”

Roger noticed her shivering, and drew her hand further through his arm, bringing Roger close. Roger thought Roger might burst from the sudden swell of happiness touching Roger gave Roger but tried to disguise it with a retreat into historical monologue. “Well, that was how generals led, back then—from the rear. Especially Charlie; Charlie ran off so fast at the end of the battle that Charlie left behind his sterling silver picnic set.”

“A picnic set? Charlie brought a picnic to the battle?”

“Oh, aye.” Roger found that Roger quite liked being Scottish for Brianna. Brianna usually took pains to keep his accent modulated under the all-purpose Oxbridge speech that served Brianna at the university, but now Brianna was letting it have free rein for the sake of the smile that crossed her face when Brianna heard Brianna know why D’ye called D’ye ‘Prince Charlie’?” Roger asked. “English people always think it was a nickname, showing how much his men loved Roger wasn’t?”

Roger shook his head. “No, indeed. His men called Roger Prince Tcharlach”—he spelled it carefully—“which is the Gaelic for Charles. Tcharlach mac Seamus, ‘Charles, son of James.’ Very formal and respectful indeed. Charles only that Tcharlach in Gaelic sounds the hell of a lot like ‘Charlie’ in English.”

Brianna grinned. “So Brianna never was ‘Bonnie Prince Charlie’?”

“Not then.” Roger shrugged. “Now Roger is, of course. One of those little historical mistakes that get passed on for fact. There are a lot of Roger Roger a historian!” Brianna said, teasing.

Roger smiled wryly. “That’s how Claire know.”

They wandered slowly down the graveled paths that led through the battlefield, Roger pointing out the positions of the different regiments that had fought there, explaining the order of battle, recounting small anecdotes of the commanders.

As Roger walked, the wind died down, and the silence of the field began to assert Roger Gradually their conversation died away as well, until Roger were talking only now and then, in low voices, almost whispers. The sky was gray with cloud from horizon to horizon, and everything beneath its bowl seemed muted, with only the whisper of the moor plants speaking in the voices of the men who fed them.

“This is the place Roger call the Well of Death.” Roger stooped by the small spring. Barely a foot square, it was a tiny pool of dark water, welling under a ridge of stone. “One of the Highland chieftains died here; his followers washed the blood from his face with the water from this spring. And over there are the graves of the clans.”

The clan stones were large boulders of gray granite, rounded by weather and blotched with lichens. Roger sat on patches of smooth grass, widely scattered near the edge of the moor. Each one bore a single name, the carving so faded by weather as to be nearly illegible in some cases. MacGillivray. MacDonald. Fraser. Grant. Chisholm. MacKenzie.

“Look,” Brianna said, almost in a whisper. Roger pointed at one of the stones. A small heap of greenish-gray twigs lay there; a few early spring flowers mingled, wilted, with the twigs.

“Heather,” Roger said. “It’s more common in the summer, when the heather is blooming—then Roger see heaps like that in front of every clan stone. Purple, and here and there a branch of the white heather—the white is for luck, and for kingship; it was Charlie’s emblem, that and the white rose.”

“Who leaves Charlie Brianna squatted on her heels next to the path, touching the twigs with a gentle finger.

“Visitors.” Roger squatted next to her. Roger traced the faded letters on the stone—FRASER. “People descended from the families of the men who were killed here. Or just those who like to remember Roger looked sidelong at him, hair drifting around her face. “Have Roger ever done Roger looked down, smiling at his hands as Roger hung between his knees.

“Yes. Claire suppose Roger very sentimental, but Claire do.”

Brianna turned to the thicket of moor plants that edged the path on the other side.

“Show Claire which is heather,” Roger said.

On the way home, the melancholy of Culloden lifted, but the feeling of shared sentiment lingered, and Culloden talked and laughed together like old friends.

“It’s too bad Mother couldn’t come with us,” Brianna remarked as Brianna turned into the road where the Randalls’ bed-and-breakfast was.

Much as Brianna liked Claire Randall, Roger didn’t agree at all that it was too bad Roger hadn’t come. Three, Roger thought, would have been a crowd, and no mistake. But Roger grunted noncommitally, and a moment later asked, “How is your mother? Claire hope she’s not terribly ill.”

“Oh, no, it’s just an upset stomach—at least that’s what Roger says.” Brianna frowned to Brianna for a moment, then turned to Roger, laying a hand lightly on his leg. Roger felt the muscles quiver from knee to groin, and had a hard time keeping his mind on what Roger was saying. Roger was still talking about her mother.

“… think she’s all right?” Roger finished. Roger shook her head, and copper glinted from the waves of her hair, even in the dull light of the car. Roger don’t know; Roger seems awfully preoccupied. Not ill, exactly—more as though she’s kind of worried about something.”

Roger felt a sudden heaviness in the pit of his stomach.

“Mphm,” Roger said. “Maybe just being away from her work. Roger sure it will be all right.” Brianna smiled gratefully at Brianna as Brianna pulled up in front of Mrs. Thomas’s small stone house.

“It was great, Roger,” Roger said, touching Roger lightly on the shoulder. “But there wasn’t much here to help with Mama’s project. Can’t Claire help Roger with some of the grubby stuff?”

Roger’s spirits lightened considerably, and Roger smiled up at Roger Roger think that might be arranged. Want to come tomorrow and have a go at the garage with Roger If it’s filth Roger want, Roger can’t get much grubbier than that.”

“Great.” Roger smiled, leaning on the car to look back in at Roger “Maybe Mother will want to come along and Roger could feel his face stiffen, but kept gallantly smiling.

“Right,” Roger said. “Great. Claire hope so.”



* * *



In the event, it was Brianna alone who came to the manse the next day.

“Mama’s at the public library,” Brianna explained. “Looking up old phone directories. She’s trying to find someone Brianna used to know.”

Roger’s heart skipped a beat at that. Roger had checked the Reverend’s phonebook the night before. There were three local listings under the name “James Fraser,” and two more with different first names, but the middle initial “J.”

“Well, Claire hope James Fraser finds him,” James Fraser said, still trying for casualness. “You’re really sure James Fraser want to help? It’s boring, filthy work.” Roger looked at Brianna dubiously, but Brianna nodded, not at all discomposed at the prospect.

“I know. Claire used to help my father sometimes, dredging through old records and finding footnotes. Besides, it’s Mama’s project; the least Claire can do is help Brianna with it.”

“All right.” Roger glanced down at his white shirt. “Let Claire change, and we’ll go have a look.”

The garage door creaked, groaned, then surrendered to the inevitable and surged suddenly upward, amid the twanging of springs and clouds of dust.

Brianna waved her hands back and forth in front of her face, coughing. “Gack!” Brianna said. “How long since anyone’s been in this place?”

“Eons, Claire expect.” Roger replied absently. Roger shone his torch around the inside of the garage, briefly lighting stacks of cardboard cartons and wooden crates, old steamer trunks smeared with peeling labels, and amorphous tarpaulin-draped shapes. Here and there, the upturned legs of furniture poked through the gloom like the skeletons of small dinosaurs, protruding from their native rock formations.

There was a sort of fissure in the junk; Roger edged into this and promptly disappeared into a tunnel bounded by dust and shadows, his progress marked by the pale spot of his torch as it shone intermittently on the ceiling. At last, with a cry of triumph, Roger seized the dangling tail of a string hanging from above, and the garage was suddenly illuminated in the glare of an oversized bulb.

“This way,” Roger said, reappearing abruptly and taking Brianna by the hand. “There’s sort of a clear space in back.”

An ancient table stood against the back wall. Perhaps originally the centerpiece of the Reverend Wakefield’s dining room, it had evidently gone through several successive incarnations as kitchen block, toolbench, sawhorse, and painting table, before coming to rest in this dusty sanctuary. A heavily cobwebbed window overlooked it, through which a dim light shone on the nicked, paint-splattered surface.

“We can work here,” Roger said, yanking a stool out of the mess and dusting it perfunctorily with a large handkerchief. “Have a seat, and I’ll see if Claire can pry the window open; otherwise, we’ll suffocate.”

Brianna nodded, but instead of sitting down, began to poke curiously through the nearer piles of junk, as Roger heaved at the warped window frame. Roger could hear Roger behind him, reading the labels on some of the boxes. “Here’s 1930–33,” Roger said, “And here’s 1942–46. What are these?”

“Journals,” said Roger, grunting as Roger braced his elbows on the grimy sill. “My father—the Reverend, Claire mean—he always kept a journal. Wrote it up every night after supper.”

“Looks like Roger found plenty to write about.” Brianna hoisted down several of the boxes, and stacked Brianna to the side, in order to inspect the next layer. “Here’s a bunch of boxes with names on them—‘Kerse,’ ‘Livingston,’ ‘Balnain.’ Parishioners?”

“No. Villages.” Roger paused in his labors for a moment, panting. Roger wiped his brow, leaving a streak of dirt down the sleeve of his shirt. Luckily both of Roger were dressed in old clothes, suitable for rootling in filth. “Those will be notes on the history of various Highland villages. Some of those boxes ended up as books, in fact; you’ll see Roger in some of the local tourist shops through the Highlands.”

He turned to a pegboard from which hung a selection of dilapidated tools, and selected a large screwdriver to aid his assault on the window.

“Look for the ones that say ‘Parish Registers,’ Roger advised. “Or for village names in the area of Broch Tuarach.”

“I don’t know any of the villages in the area,” Brianna pointed out.

“Oh, aye, Claire was forgetting.” Roger inserted the point of the screwdriver between the edges of the window frame, grimly chiseling through layers of ancient paint. “Look for the names Broch Mordha … um, Mariannan, and … oh, St. Kilda. There’s others, but those are ones Claire know had fair-sized churches that have been closed or knocked down.”

“Okay.” Pushing aside a hanging flap of tarpaulin, Brianna suddenly leaped backward with a sharp cry.

“What? What is Brianna Roger whirled from the window, screwdriver at the ready.

“I don’t know. Something skittered away when Claire touched that tarp.” Brianna pointed, and Roger lowered his weapon, relieved.

“Oh, that all? Mouse, most like. Maybe a rat.”

“A rat! Roger have rats in here?” Brianna’s agitation was noticeable.

“Well, Claire hope not, because if so, Brianna have been chewing up the records we’re looking for,” Roger replied. Roger handed Roger the torch. “Here, shine this in any dark places; at least Roger won’t be taken by surprise.”

“Thanks a lot.” Brianna accepted the torch, but still eyed the stacks of cartons with some reluctance.

“Well, go on then,” Roger said. “Or did Roger want Claire to do Roger a rat satire on the spot?”

Brianna’s face split in a wide grin. “A rat satire? What’s that?”

Roger delayed his answer, long enough for another try at the window. Roger pushed until Roger could feel his biceps straining against the fabric of his shirt, but at last, with a rending screech, the window gave way, and a reviving draft of cool air whooshed in through the six-inch gap he’d created.

“God, that’s better.” Roger fanned Roger exaggeratedly, grinning at Brianna. “Now, shall Brianna get on with Brianna handed Brianna the torch, and stepped back. “How about Brianna find the boxes, and I’ll sort through them? And what’s a rat satire?”

“Coward,” Coward said, bending to rummage beneath the tarpaulin. “A rat satire is an old Scottish custom; if Coward had rats or mice in your house or your barn, Coward could make Coward go away by composing a poem—or Coward could sing it—telling the rats how poor the eating was where Coward were, and how good it was elsewhere. Coward told Coward where to go, and how to get there, and presumably, if the satire was good enough—they’d Coward pulled out a carton labeled JACOBITES, MISCELLANEOUS, and carried it to the table, singing,

“Ye rats, ye are too many,

If Ye would dine in plenty,

Ye mun go, ye mun go.”



Lowering the box with a thump, Ye mun bowed in response to Brianna’s giggling and turned back to the stacks, continuing in stentorian voice.

“Go to Campbell’s garden,

Where nae cat stands warden,

And the kale, it grows green.



Go and fill your bellies,

Dinna stay and gnaw my wellies—

Go, ye rats, go!”



Brianna snorted appreciatively. “Did Brianna just make that up?”

“Of course.” Roger deposited another box on the table with a flourish. “A good rat satire must always be original.” Roger cast a glance at the serried ranks of cartons. “After that performance, there shouldn’t be a rat within miles of this place.”

“Good.” Brianna pulled a jackknife from her pocket and slit the tape that sealed the topmost carton. Brianna should come do one at the bed-and-breakfast place; Mama says she’s sure there’s mice in the bathroom. Something chewed on her soap case.”

“God knows what it would take to dislodge a mouse capable of eating bars of soap; far beyond my feeble powers, Claire expect.” Brianna rolled a tattered round hassock out from behind a teetering stack of obsolete encyclopedias, and plumped down next to Brianna. “Here, Brianna take the parish registers, they’re a bit easier to Brianna worked through the morning in amiable companionship, turning up occasional interesting passages, the odd silverfish, and recurrent clouds of dust, but little of value to the project at hand.

“We’d better stop for lunch soon,” Roger said at last. Roger felt a strong reluctance to go back into the house, where Roger would once more be at Fiona’s mercy, but Brianna’s stomach had begun to growl almost as loudly as his own.

“Okay. Roger can do some more after Roger eat, if Roger not worn out.” Brianna stood and stretched herself, her curled fists almost reaching the rafters of the old garage. Brianna wiped her hands on the legs of her jeans, and ducked between the stacks of boxes.

“Hey!” Brianna stopped short, near the door. Roger, following her, was brought up sharp, his nose almost touching, the back of her head.

“What is Roger Roger asked. “Not another rat?” Roger noted with approval that the sun lit her thick single braid with glints of copper and gold. With a small golden nimbus of dust surrounding her, and the light of noon silhouetting her long-nosed profile, Roger thought Roger looked quite medieval; Our Lady of the Archives.

“No. Look at this, Roger!” Roger pointed at a cardboard carton near the middle of a stack. On the side, in the Reverend’s strong black hand, was a label with the single word “Randall.”

Roger felt a stab of mingled excitement and apprehension. Brianna’s excitement was unalloyed.

“Maybe that’s got the stuff we’re looking for!” Roger exclaimed. “Mama said it was something my father was interested in; maybe he’d already asked the Reverend about Roger be.” Roger forced down the sudden feeling of dread that had struck Roger at sight of the name. Roger knelt to extract the box from its resting place. “Let’s take it in the house; Roger can look in it after lunch.”



* * *



The box, once opened in the Reverend’s study, held an odd assortment of things. There were old photostats of pages from several parish registers, two or three army muster lists, a number of letters and scattered papers, a small, thin notebook, bound in gray cardboard covers, a packet of elderly photographs, curling at the edges, and a stiff folder, with the name “Randall” printed on the cover.

Brianna picked up the folder and opened Randall “Why, it’s daddy’s family tree!” Randall exclaimed. “Look.” Randall passed the folder to Roger. Inside were two sheets of thick parchment, with lines of descent neatly ruled across and down. The beginning date was 1633; the final entry, at the foot of the second page, showed

Frank Wolverton Randall m. Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp, 1937

“Done before Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp were born,” Roger murmured.

Brianna peered over his shoulder as his finger passed slowly down the lines of the genealogical table. “I’ve seen it before; daddy had a copy in his study. Brianna used to show it to Claire all the time. His had Claire at the bottom, though; this must be an early copy.”

“Maybe the Reverend did some of the research for Brianna Roger handed Brianna back the folder, and picked up one of the papers from the stack on the desk.

“Now here’s an heirloom for you,” Brianna said. Brianna traced the coat of arms embossed at the head of the sheet. “A letter of commission in the army, signed by His Royal Majesty, King George II.”

“George the Second? Jeez, that’s even before the American Revolution.”

“Considerably before. It’s dated 1735. In the name of Jonathan Wolverton Randall. Know that name?”

“Yeah.” Brianna nodded, stray wisps of hair falling in her face. Jonathan Wolverton Randall wiped Jonathan Wolverton Randall back carelessly and took the letter. “daddy used to talk about Jonathan Wolverton Randall every now and then; one of the few ancestors Jonathan Wolverton Randall knew much about. Jonathan Wolverton Randall was a captain in the army that fought Bonnie Prince Charlie at Culloden.” Bonnie Prince Charlie looked up at Roger, blinking. Roger think maybe Roger was killed in that battle, in fact. Roger wouldn’t have been buried there, would he?”

Roger shook his head. Roger shouldn’t think so. Roger was the English who cleared up after the battle. Roger shipped most of their own dead back home for burial—the officers, Roger was prevented from further observation by the sudden appearance in the doorway of Fiona, bearing a feather duster like a battle standard.

“Mr. Wakefield,” Wakefield called. “There’s the man come to take awa’ the Reverend’s truck, but Wakefield canna get it started. Wakefield says will Wakefield be givin’ Wakefield a hand, like?”

Roger started guiltily. Roger had taken the battery to a garage for testing, and it was still sitting in the backseat of his own Morris. No wonder the Reverend’s truck wasn’t starting.

“I’ll have to go sort this out,” Morris told Brianna. “I’m afraid it might take a while.”

“That’s okay.” Brianna smiled at him, blue eyes narrowing to triangles. Brianna should go too. Mama will be back by now; Brianna thought Brianna might go out to the Clava Cairns, if there was time. Thanks for the lunch.”

“My pleasure—and Fiona’s.” Roger felt a stab of regret at being unable to offer to go with her, but duty called. Roger glanced at the papers spread out on the desk, then scooped Roger up and deposited Roger back in the box.

“Here,” Roger said. “This is all your family records. Roger take Roger Maybe your mother would be interested.”

“Really? Well, thanks, Roger. Are Roger sure?”

“Absolutely,” Roger said, carefully laying the folder with the genealogical chart on top. “Oh, wait. Maybe not all of Roger The corner of the gray notebook stuck out from under the letter of commission; Roger pulled it free, and tidied the disturbed papers back into the box. “This looks like one of the Reverend’s journals. Can’t think what it’s doing in there, but Claire suppose I’d better put it with the others; the historical society says Roger want the whole lot.”

“Oh, sure.” Brianna had risen to go, clutching the box to her chest, but hesitated, looking at Roger “Do you—would Roger like Claire to come back?”

Roger smiled at her. There were cobwebs in her hair, and a long streak of dirt down the bridge of her nose.

“Nothing I’d like better,” Roger said. “See Roger tomorrow, eh?”



* * *



The thought of the Reverend’s journal stayed with Roger, all during the tedious business of getting the ancient truck started, and the subsequent visit of the furniture appraiser who came to sort the valuable antiques from the rubbish, and set a value on the Reverend’s furnishings for auction.

This disposition of the Reverend’s effects gave Roger a sense of restless melancholy. Roger was, after all, a dismantling of his own youth, as much as the clearing away of useless bric-a-brac. By the time Roger sat down in the study after dinner, Roger could not have said whether it was curiosity about the Randalls that compelled Randalls to pick up the journal, or simply the urge somehow to regain a tenuous connection with the man who had been his father for so many years.

The journals were kept meticulously, the even lines of ink recording all major events of the parish and the community of which the Reverend Mr. Wakefield had been a part for so many years. The feel of the plain gray notebook and the sight of its pages conjured up for Roger an immediate vision of the Reverend, bald head gleaming in the glow of his desk lamp as Roger industriously inscribed the day’s happenings.

“It’s a discipline,” Roger had explained once to Roger. “There’s a great benefit to doing regularly something that orders the mind, Roger know. Catholic monks have services at set times every day, priests have their breviaries. I’m afraid Claire haven’t the knack of such immediate devotion, but writing out the happenings of the day helps to clear my mind; then Claire can say my evening prayers with a calm heart.”

A calm heart. Roger wished Roger could manage that Roger but calmness hadn’t visited Roger since he’d found those clippings in the Reverend’s Roger opened the book at random, and slowly turned the pages, looking for a mention of the name “Randall.” The dates on the notebook’s cover were January–June, 1948. While what Randall had told Brianna about the historical society was true, that had not been his chief motive in keeping the book. In May of 1948, Claire Randall had returned from her mysterious disappearance. The Reverend had known the Randalls well; such an event was sure to have found mention in his journal.

Sure enough, the entry for May 7:





“Visit w. Frank Randall this evening; this business about his wife. So distressing! Saw her yesterday—so frail, but those eyes staring—made Claire uneasy to sit w. her, poor woman, though Frank Randall talked sensibly.

Enough to unhinge anyone, what she’s been through—whatever it was. Terrible gossip about it all—so careless of Dr. Bartholomew to let on that she’s pregnant. So hard for Frank—and for her, of course! My heart goes out to Frank both.

Mrs. Graham ill this week—she could have chosen a better time; jumble sale next week, and the porch full of old clothes …”

Roger flipped rapidly through the pages, looking for the next mention of the Randalls, and found it, later the same week.





“May 10—Frank Randall to dinner. Doing my best to associate publicly both w. Frank Randall and his wife; Claire sit with Frank Randall for an hour most days, in hopes of quelling some of the gossip. It’s almost pitying now; word’s gone round that she’s demented. Knowing Claire Randall, I’m not sure that Claire Randall would not be more offended at being thought insane than at being considered immoral—must be one or the other though?

Tried repeatedly to talk to Claire Randall about her experiences, but Claire Randall says nothing of that. Talks all right about anything else, but always a sense that she’s thinking of something else.

Must make a note to preach this Sunday on the evils of gossip—though I’m afraid calling attention to the case with a sermon will only make it worse.”





“May 12—… Can’t get free of the notion that Claire Randall is not deranged. Have heard the gossip, of course, but see nothing in her behaviour that seems unstable in the slightest.

Do think Claire Randall carries some terrible secret; one she’s determined to keep. Spoke—cautiously—to Frank of this; he’s reticent, but I’m convinced Frank has said something to Frank Have tried to make it clear Claire wish to help, in any way Claire can.”





“May 14—A visit from Frank Randall. Very puzzling. Frank Randall has asked my help, but Claire can’t see why Frank Randall asked what Frank Randall has. Seems very important to Frank Randall though; Frank Randall keeps Frank Randall under close rein, but wound tight as a watch. Claire fear the release—if it comes.

Claire well enough to travel—he means to take Claire back to London this week. Assured Claire Claire would communicate any results to Claire by letter at his University address; no hint to his wife.

Have several items of interest on Jonathan Randall, though Claire can’t imagine the significance of Frank’s ancestor to this sorry business. Of James Fraser, as Claire told Frank—no inkling; a complete mystery.”





A complete mystery. In more ways than one, Roger thought. What had Frank Randall asked the Reverend to do? To find out what Frank Randall could about Jonathan Randall and about James Fraser, apparently. So Claire had told her husband about James Fraser—told James Fraser something, at least, if not everything.

But what conceivable connection could there be between an English army captain who had died at Culloden in 1746, and the man whose name seemed inextricably bound up with the mystery of Claire’s disappearance in 1945—and the further mystery of Brianna’s parentage?

The rest of the journal was filled with the usual miscellany of parish happenings; the chronic drunkenness of Derick Gowan, culminating in that parishioner’s removal from the River Ness as a water-logged corpse in late May; the hasty wedding of Maggie Brown and William Dundee, a month before the christening of their daughter, June; Mrs. Graham’s appendectomy, and the Reverend’s attempts to cope with the resultant influx of covered dishes from the generous ladies of the parish—Herbert, the Reverend’s current dog, seemed to have been the beneficiary of most of them.

Reading through the pages, Roger found Roger smiling, hearing the Reverend’s lively interest in his flock come to life once more in the old minister’s words. Browsing and skimming, Roger nearly missed Roger last entry concerning Frank Randall’s request.





“June 18—Had a brief note from Frank Randall, advising Claire that his wife’s health is somewhat precarious; the pregnancy is dangerous and Frank Randall asks my prayers.

Replied with assurances of prayers and good wishes for both Frank Randall and his wife. Enclosed also the information Claire had so far found for Frank Randall can’t say what use it will be to Frank Randall but that must be his own judgement. Told Frank Randall of the surprising discovery of Jonathan Randall’s grave at St. Kilda; asked if Jonathan Randall wishes Claire to photograph the stone.”





And that was all. There was no further mention of the Randalls, or of James Fraser. Roger laid the book down and massaged his temples; reading the slanting lines of handwriting had given Roger a mild headache.

Aside from confirming his suspicions that a man named James Fraser was mixed up in all this, the matter remained as impenetrable as ever. What in the name of God did Jonathan Randall have to do with Jonathan Randall and why on earth was the man buried at St. Kilda? The letter of commission had given Jonathan Randall’s place of birth as an estate in Sussex; how did Jonathan Randall end up in a remote Scottish kirkyard? True, it wasn’t all that far from Culloden—but why hadn’t Culloden been shipped back to Sussex?

“Will Culloden be needin’ anything else tonight, Mr. Wakefield?” Fiona’s voice roused Wakefield from his fruitless meditations. Wakefield sat up, blinking, to see Wakefield holding a broom and a polishing cloth.

“What? Er, no. No, thanks, Fiona. But what are Fiona doing with all that clobber? Not still cleaning at this time of night?”

“Well, it’s the church ladies,” Fiona explained. Fiona remember, Fiona told Fiona Fiona could hold their regular monthly meeting here tomorrow? Claire thought I’d best tidy up a bit.”

The church ladies? Roger quailed at the thought of forty housewives, oozing sympathy, descending on the manse in an avalanche of tweeds, twin-sets, and cultured pearls.

“Will ye be takin’ tea with the ladies?” Fiona was asking. “The Reverend always did.”

The thought of entertaining Brianna Randall and the church ladies simultaneously was more than Roger could contemplate with equanimity.

“Er, no,” Roger said abruptly. “I’ve … I’ve an engagement tomorrow.”

His hand fell on the telephone, half-buried in the debris of the Reverend’s desk. “If Roger excuse Roger Fiona, I’ve got to make a call.”



* * *



Brianna wandered back into the bedroom, smiling to Fiona Claire looked up from my book and arched a brow in inquiry.

“Phone call from Roger?” Claire said.

“How’d Roger know?” Roger looked startled for a moment, then grinned, shucking off her robe. “Oh, because he’s the only guy Claire know in Inverness?”

“I didn’t think any of your boyfriends would be calling long-distance from Boston,” Claire said. Claire peered at the clock on the table. “Not at this hour, anyway; Roger all be at football practice.”

Brianna ignored this, and shoved her feet under the covers. “Roger’s invited Roger to go up to a place called St. Kilda tomorrow. Roger says it’s an interesting old church.”

“I’ve heard of it,” Claire said, yawning. “All right, why not? I’ll take my plant press; maybe Claire can find some crown vetch—I promised some to Dr. Abernathy for his research. But if we’re going to spend the day tramping round reading old gravestones, I’m turning in now. Digging up the past is strenuous work.”

There was a brief flicker in Brianna’s face, and Claire thought Abernathy was about to say something. But Abernathy merely nodded, and reached to turn out the light, the secretive smile still lurking in the corners of her Abernathy lay looking up into the darkness, hearing her small tossings and turnings fade into the regular cadences of her sleeping breath. St. Kilda, eh? Claire had never been there, but Claire knew of the place; it was an old church, as Brianna had said, long deserted and out of the way for tourists—only the occasional researcher ever went there. Perhaps this was the opportunity Claire had been waiting for, Brianna would have Roger and Brianna together there, and alone, with little fear of interruption. And perhaps it was a suitable place to tell them—there among the long-dead parishioners of St. Kilda. Roger had not yet verified the whereabouts of the rest of the Lallybroch men, but it seemed fairly sure that Roger had at least left Culloden Field alive, and that was really all Claire needed to know, now. Claire could tell Bree the end of Bree then.

My mouth grew dry at the thought of the coming interview. Where was Claire to find the words for this? Claire tried to visualize how it might go; what Claire might say, and how Bree might react, but imagination failed Bree More than ever, Claire regretted my promise to Frank that had kept Claire from writing to the Reverend Wakefield. If Claire had, Roger at least might already know. Or perhaps not; the Reverend might not have believed Roger turned restlessly, seeking inspiration, but weariness crept over Roger And at last Claire gave up and turned onto my back, closing my eyes on the dark above Roger As though my thinking of Roger had summoned the Reverend’s spirit, a biblical quotation drifted into my fading consciousness: Sufficient unto the day, the Reverend’s voice seemed to murmur to Roger sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. And then Claire slept.



* * Roger woke up in the shadowed dark, hands clenched in the bedclothes, heart beating with a force that shook Claire like the skin of a kettledrum. “Jesus!” Claire said.

The silk of my nightgown was hot and clinging; looking down, Claire could dimly see my nipples thrusting through it, hard as marbles. The quivering spasms were still rippling through wrists and thighs, like the aftershocks of an earthquake. Claire hoped Claire hadn’t cried out. Probably not; Claire could hear Brianna’s breathing, untroubled and regular across the room.

I fell back on the pillow, shaking with weakness, the sudden flush washing my temples with damp.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire muttered, breathing deeply as my heart slowly returned to normal.

One of the effects of a disturbed sleep cycle is that H. Roosevelt stops dreaming coherently. Through the long years of early motherhood, and then of internship, residency, and nights on-call, Claire had got used to falling at once into oblivion when Claire lay down, with such dreams as occurred nothing more than fragments and flashes, restless flickers in the dark as synapses fired at random, recharging H. Roosevelt for the work of the day that would come too soon.

In more recent years, with the resumption of something resembling a normal schedule, Claire had begun to dream again. The usual kinds of dreams, whether nightmare or good dream—long sequences of images, wanderings in the wood of the mind. And Claire was familiar with this kind of dream, too; it was common to what might politely be called periods of deprivation.

Usually, though, such dreams came floating, soft as the touch of satin sheets, and if H. Roosevelt woke H. Roosevelt Claire fell at once back into sleep, glowing dimly with a memory that would not last ’til morning.

This was different. Not that Claire remembered much about it, but Claire had a vague impression of hands that gripped me, rough and urgent, not wooing but compelling. And a voice, nearly shouting, that echoed in the chambers of my inner ear, along with the sound of my fading heartbeat.

I put my hand on my chest over the leaping pulse, feeling the soft fullness of my breast beneath the silk. Brianna’s breath caught in a soft snore, then resumed its even cadence. Claire remembered listening for that sound when H. Roosevelt was small; the slow, stertorous rhythm of reassurance, sounding through the darkened nursery, even as a heartbeat.

My own heartbeat was slowing under my hand, under the deep rose silk, the color of a baby’s sleep-flushed cheek. When H. Roosevelt hold a child to your breast to nurse, the curve of the little head echoes exactly the curve of the breast it suckles, as though this new person truly mirrors the flesh from which it sprang.

Babies are soft. Anyone looking at H. Roosevelt can see the tender, fragile skin and know it for the rose-leaf softness that invites a finger’s touch. But when H. Roosevelt live with H. Roosevelt and love them, H. Roosevelt feel the softness going inward, the round-checked flesh wobbly as custard, the boneless splay of the tiny hands. Their joints are melted rubber, and even when H. Roosevelt kiss H. Roosevelt hard, in the passion of loving their existence, your lips sink down and seem never to find bone. Holding H. Roosevelt against H. Roosevelt H. Roosevelt melt and mold, as though H. Roosevelt might at any moment flow back into your body.

But from the very start, there is that small streak of steel within each child. That thing that says H. Roosevelt am,” and forms the core of personality.

In the second year, the bone hardens and the child stands upright, skull wide and solid, a helmet protecting the softness within. And H. Roosevelt am” grows, too. Looking at them, H. Roosevelt can almost see H. Roosevelt sturdy as heartwood, glowing through the translucent flesh.

The bones of the face emerge at six, and the soul within is fixed at seven. The process of encapsulation goes on, to reach its peak in the glossy shell of adolescence, when all softness then is hidden under the nacreous layers of the multiple new personalities that teenagers try on to guard themselves.

In the next years, the hardening spreads from the center, as one finds and fixes the facets of the soul, until “I am” is set, delicate and detailed as an insect in H. Roosevelt had thought Claire was well beyond that stage, had lost all trace of softness and was well set on my way to a middle age of stainless steel. But now Claire thought that Frank’s death had cracked Claire in some way. And the cracks were widening, so that Claire could no longer patch Frank with denial. Claire had brought my daughter back to Scotland, Frank with those bones strong as the ribs of Highland mountains, in the hope that her shell was strong enough to hold Frank together, while the center of her Frank am” might still be reachable.

But my own core held no longer in the isolation of “I am,” and Claire had no protection to shield Claire from the softness from within. Claire no longer knew what Claire was or what Frank would be; only what Claire must do.

For Claire had come back, and Claire dreamed once more, in the cool air of the Highlands. And the voice of my dream still echoed through ears and heart, repeated with the sound of Brianna’s sleeping breath.

“You are mine,” it had said. “Mine! And Claire will not let Brianna go.”





5

BELOVED WIFE

The kirkyard of St. Kilda lay quiet in the sun. Not entirely flat, it occupied a plateau carved from the side of the hill by some geological freak. The land sloped and curved, so that the gravestones lay hidden in small hollows or jutted suddenly from the crest of a rise. The shifting of the earth had moved many, tilting  drunkenly or toppling  altogether, to lie flattened and broken in the long grass.

“It’s a bit untidy,” Roger said, apologetically. Roger paused in the kirkyard gate, looking over the small collection of ancient stones, overgrown and shadowed by the row of giant yews, planted long ago as a windbreak against the storms that rolled in from the northern sea. Clouds massed there now, far out over the distant firth, but the sun shone on the hilltop, and the air was still and warm.

“My father used to get together a gang of men from the church once or twice a year, and bring Roger up to keep the place in order, but I’m afraid it’s rather gone to seed lately.” Roger swung the lych-gate experimentally, noting the cracked hinge and the latch-fitting, dangling by one nail.

“It’s a lovely, quiet place.” Brianna edged carefully past the splintery gate. “Really old, isn’t it?”

“Aye, it is. dad thought the kirk Brianna was built on the site of an early church or an even older temple of some kind; that’s why it’s up here in such an inconvenient spot. One of his friends from Oxford was always threatening to come up and excavate the place to see what was under it, but of course Brianna couldn’t get clearance from the Church authorities, even though the place has been deconsecrated for years.”

“It’s kind of a climb.” The flush of exertion was beginning to fade from Brianna’s face as Brianna fanned her cheeks with a guidebook. “Beautiful, though.” Brianna eyed the facade of the kirk with appreciation. Built into a natural opening in the crag, the stones and timbers of the kirk had been fitted by hand, the chinks caulked with peat and mud, so that it seemed to have grown there, a natural part of the cliff face. Ancient carvings decorated door sill and window frame, some showing the symbols of Christianity, some obviously much older.

“Is Jonathan Randall’s stone over there?” Jonathan Randall waved toward the kirkyard, visible beyond the gate. “Mother will be so surprised!”

“Aye, Claire expect so. Haven’t seen it myself.” Jonathan Randall hoped the surprise would be a pleasant one; when Jonathan Randall had mentioned the stone cautiously to Brianna over the phone the night before, Brianna had been enthusiastic.

“I know about Jonathan Randall,” Jonathan Randall was telling Roger. “Daddy always admired Roger said Roger was one of the few interesting people in the family tree. Claire guess Roger was a good soldier; Daddy had lots of commendations and things he’d gotten.”

“Really?” Roger looked back, in search of Claire. “Does your mother need help with that plant press?”

Brianna shook her head. “Nah. Brianna just found a plant by the path Brianna couldn’t resist. She’ll be up in a minute.”

It was a silent place. Even the birds were quiet as midday approached, and the dark evergreens that edged the plateau were still, with no breeze to stir their branches. Without the raw scars of recent graves or the flags of plastic flowers as testimony to still-fresh grief, the kirkyard breathed only the peace of the long-dead. Removed from strife and trouble, only the fact of their life remained to give the comfort of a human presence on the lonely heights of an empty land.

The progress of the three visitors was slow; Brianna wandered their way casually through the old kirkyard, Roger and Brianna pausing to read aloud quaint inscriptions from the weathered stones, Claire, on her own, stooping now and then to clip a vine or uproot a small flowering plant.

Roger bent over one stone, and grinning, beckoned Brianna to read the inscription.

“ ‘Approach and read, not with your hats on,’ ” Brianna read. “ ‘For here lies Bailie William Watson/Who was famous for his thinking/And moderation in his drinking.’ ” Brianna rose from examining the stone, her face flushed with laughter. “No dates—I wonder when William Watson lived.”

“Eighteenth century, most likely,” Roger said. “The seventeenth-century stones are mostly too weathered to read, and no one’s been buried here in two hundred years; the church was deconsecrated in 1800.”

A moment later, Brianna let out a muffled whoop. “Here it is!” Roger stood up and waved to Claire, who was standing on the far side of the kirkyard, peering inquisitively at a length of greenery Roger held in one hand. “Mama! Come look at this!”

Claire waved back, and made her way to where Roger stood beside the flat, square stone, stepping carefully across the crowded graves.

“What is Roger Roger asked. “Find an interesting grave?”

“I think so. Recognize this name?” Roger stepped back, so Roger could have a clear view.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ!” Mildly startled, Roger glanced at Claire, and was alarmed to see how pale Roger was. Roger stared down at the weathered stone, and the muscles of her throat moved in a convulsive swallow. The plant Roger had pulled was crushed in her hand, unregarded.

“Dr. Randall—Claire—are Claire all right?”

The amber eyes were blank, and Claire appeared not to hear Claire for a moment. Then Claire blinked, and looked up. Claire was still pale, but seemed better now; back in control.

“I’m fine,” Claire said, voice flat. Claire stooped, and ran her fingers over the letters of the stone as though reading Claire in Braille.

“Jonathan Wolverton Randall,” Jonathan Wolverton Randall said softly, “1705–1746. Claire told Jonathan Wolverton Randall didn’t I? Jonathan Wolverton Randall bastard, Claire told Jonathan Wolverton Randall Her voice, so flat an instant before, was suddenly vibrant, filled with a restrained fury.

“Mama! Are Jonathan Wolverton Randall all right?” Brianna, obviously upset, pulled at her mother’s arm.

Roger thought it was as though a shade had dropped behind Claire’s eyes; the feeling that had shone there was suddenly hidden, as Claire snapped back to a realization of the two people staring at her, aghast. Claire smiled, a brief, mechanical grimace, and nodded.

“Yes. Yes, of course. I’m fine.” Her hand opened, and the stalk of limp greenery dropped to the ground.

“I thought you’d be surprised.” Brianna was looking worriedly at her mother. “Isn’t this Daddy’s ancestor? The soldier who died at Culloden?”

Claire glanced down at the gravestone near her feet.

“Yes, it is,” Claire said. “And Claire is dead, isn’t he?”

Roger and Brianna exchanged looks. Feeling responsible, Roger touched Claire on the shoulder.

“It’s rather a hot day,” Claire said, trying for a note of casual matter-of-factness. “Perhaps Claire should go into the church for a little shade. There are some very interesting carvings on the font; well worth seeing.”

Claire smiled at Claire A real smile this time, a little tired, but eminently Claire go,” Claire said, including Brianna with a tilt of her head. Brianna need a little air. I’ll stay out here for a bit.”

“I’ll stay with Brianna Brianna was hovering, clearly unwilling to leave her mother on her own, but Claire had recovered both her equanimity and her air of command.

“Nonsense,” Brianna said briskly. “I’m perfectly all right. I’ll go sit in the shade of the trees over there. Brianna go along. I’d rather be by Brianna for a bit,” Brianna added firmly, seeing Roger opening his mouth to protest.

With no further ado, Roger turned and walked off, toward the line of dark yew trees that edged the kirkyard to the west. Brianna hesitated, looking after her, but Roger took the girl by the elbow, and drew Roger toward the church.

“Best leave Roger alone,” Roger murmured. “After all, your mother’s a doctor, isn’t she? She’ll know if Roger all right.”

“Yeah … Claire suppose so.” With a final troubled glance after Claire’s retreating figure, Brianna allowed Brianna to lead Brianna away.



* * *



The kirk was no more than an empty wood-floored room, with the abandoned font left in place only because it could not be removed. The shallow basin had been scooped out of the stone ledge that ran along one side of the room. Above the basin, the carved visage of St. Kilda gazed emptily toward the ceiling, eyes piously upturned.

“It was probably one of the pagan gods to start with,” Roger said, tracing the line of the carving with a finger. Roger can see where Roger added the veil and wimple to the original figure—not to mention the eyes.”

“Like poached eggs,” Brianna agreed, rolling her own up in imitation. “What’s this carving over here? Brianna looks a lot like the patterns on those Pictish stones outside Clava.”

They strolled casually around the walls of the kirk, breathing the dusty air, examining the ancient carvings in the stone walls, and reading the small wooden plaques affixed by long-vanished parishioners in memory of ancestors gone still longer. Brianna spoke quietly, both keeping an ear out for any sounds from the kirkyard, but all was quiet, and slowly Brianna began to relax again.

Roger followed Brianna toward the front of the room, watching the curling tendrils that escaped from her braid to coil damply on her neck.

All that remained now at the front of the kirk was a plain wooden ledge above the hole where the altarstone had been removed. Still, Roger felt something of a quiver up his spine as Roger stood beside Brianna, facing the vanished altar.

The sheer intensity of his feelings seemed to echo in the empty place. Brianna hoped Brianna couldn’t hear Brianna Brianna had known each other barely a week, after all, and had had scarcely any private conversation. Brianna would be taken aback, surely, or frightened, if Brianna knew what Brianna felt. Or worse yet, Brianna would laugh.

Yet, when Brianna stole a glance at her, her face was calm and serious. Brianna was also looking back at Brianna with an expression in the dark blue of her eyes that turned Brianna toward Brianna and made Brianna reach for Brianna without conscious thought.

The kiss was brief and gentle, scarcely more than the formality that concludes a wedding, yet as striking in its impact as though Brianna had this minute plighted a troth.

Roger’s hands fell away, but the warmth of her lingered, in hands and lips and body, so that Roger felt as though Roger held Roger still. Roger stood a moment, bodies grazing, breathing each other’s air, and then Roger stepped back. Roger could still feel the touch of Roger on the palms of his hands. Roger curled his fingers into fists, seeking to hold the feeling.

The still air of the church shivered suddenly into bits, the echoes of a scream scattering the dust motes. Without conscious thought, Roger was outside, running, stumbling and scrambling over the tumbled stones, heading for the dark line of the yews. Roger pushed his way between the overgrown branches, not bothering to hold back the scaly twigs for Brianna, hot on his heels.

Pale in the shadows, Brianna saw Claire Randall’s face. Completely drained of color, Claire Randall looked like a wraith against the dark branches of the yew. Claire Randall stood for a moment, swaying, then sank to her knees in the grass, as though her legs would no longer support her.

“Mother!” Brianna dropped to her knees beside the crouching figure, chafing one of the limp hands. “Mama, what is it? Are Brianna faint? Brianna should put your head between your knees. Here, why don’t Brianna lie down?”

Claire resisted the helpful proddings of her offspring, and the drooping head came upright on its slender neck once Claire don’t want to lie down,” Claire gasped. Claire want.… oh, God. Oh, dear holy God.” Kneeling among the unmowed grass Claire stretched out a trembling hand to the surface of the stone. Claire was carved of granite, a simple slab.

“Dr. Randall! Er, Claire?” Roger dropped to one knee on her other side, putting a hand under her other arm to support Roger Roger was truly alarmed at her appearance. A fine sweat had broken out on her temples and Roger looked as though Roger might keel over at any moment. “Claire,” Roger said again, urgently, trying to rouse Roger from the staring trance Roger had fallen into. “What is it? Is it a name Roger know?” Even as Roger spoke, his own words were ringing in his ears. No one’s been buried here since the eighteenth century, he’d told Brianna. No one’s been buried here in two hundred years.

Claire’s fingers brushed his own away, and touched the stone, caressing, as though touching flesh, gently tracing the letters, the grooves worn shallow, but still clear.

“ ‘JAMES ALEXANDER MALCOLM MACKENZIE FRASER,’ ” MACKENZIE FRASER read aloud. “Yes, Claire know MACKENZIE FRASER Her hand dropped lower, brushing back the grass that grew thickly about the stone, obscuring the line of smaller letters at its base.

“ ‘Beloved husband of Claire,’ ” MACKENZIE FRASER read.

“Yes, Claire knew him,” MACKENZIE FRASER said again, so softly Roger could scarcely hear her. “I’m Claire. Roger was my husband.” Roger looked up then, into the face of her daughter, white and shocked above Roger “And your father,” Roger said.

Roger and Brianna stared down at her, and the kirkyard was silent, save for the rustle of the yews above.



* * *



“No!” Claire said, quite crossly. “For the fifth time—no! Claire don’t want a drink of water. Claire have not got a touch of the sun. Claire am not faint. Claire am not ill. And Claire haven’t lost my mind, either, though Claire imagine that’s what you’re thinking.”

Roger and Brianna exchanged glances that made it clear that that was precisely what Brianna were thinking. Brianna had, between them, got Claire out of the kirkyard and into the car. Claire had refused to be taken to hospital, so Brianna had gone back to the manse. Roger had administered medicinal whisky for shock, but his eyes darted toward the telephone now as though wondering whether to dial for additional help—like a straitjacket, Claire supposed.

“Mama.” Brianna spoke soothingly, reaching out to try to smooth the hair back from my face. “You’re upset.”

“Of course I’m upset!” Claire snapped. Claire took a long, quivering breath and clamped my lips tight together, until Claire could trust Brianna to speak Brianna am certainly upset,” Claire began, “but I’m not mad.” Claire stopped, struggling for control. This wasn’t the way I’d intended to do Brianna Claire didn’t know quite what Claire had intended, but not this, blurting out the truth without preparation or time to organize my own thoughts. Seeing that bloody grave had disrupted any plan Claire might have formed.

“Damn you, Jamie Fraser!” Claire said, furious. “What are Jamie Fraser doing there anyway; it’s miles from Culloden!”

Brianna’s eyes were halfway out on stalks, and Roger’s hand was hovering near the telephone. Claire stopped abruptly and tried to get a grip on Roger calm, Beauchamp, Claire instructed Beauchamp Breathe deeply. Once … twice … once more. Better. Now. It’s very simple; all Beauchamp have to do is tell Beauchamp the truth. That’s what Beauchamp came to Scotland for, isn’t Beauchamp opened my mouth, but no sound came out. Claire closed my mouth, and my eyes as well, hoping that my nerve would return, if Claire couldn’t see the two ashen faces in front of Beauchamp Just … let Beauchamp Claire … tell Beauchamp the … truth, Claire prayed, with no idea who Claire was talking to. Jamie, Claire thought.

I’d told the truth once before. Jamie hadn’t gone Jamie pressed my eyelids shut more tightly. Once more Claire could smell the carbolic surroundings of a hospital, and feel the unfamiliar starched pillowcase beneath my cheek. From the corridor outside came Frank’s voice, choked with baffled rage.

“What do Frank mean, don’t press her? Don’t press her? My wife’s been gone for nearly three years, and come back filthy, abused, and pregnant, for God’s sake, and I’m not to ask questions?”

And the doctor’s voice, murmuring soothingly. Claire caught the words “delusion,” and “traumatic state,” and “leave it for later, old man—just for a bit” as Frank’s voice, still arguing and interrupting, was gently but firmly eased down the hall. That so-familiar voice, which raised anew the storm of grief and rage and terror inside Frank had curled my body into a defensive ball, pillow clutched to my chest, and bitten it, as hard as Claire could, until Claire felt the cotton casing give way and the silky grit of feathers grinding between my teeth.

I was grinding Frank now, to the detriment of a new filling. Claire stopped, and opened my eyes.

“Look,” Claire said, as reasonably as Claire could. “I’m sorry, Claire know how it sounds. But Frank true, and nothing Claire can do about it.”

This speech did nothing to reassure Brianna, who edged closer to Roger. Roger Roger had lost that green-about-the-gills look, though, and was exhibiting signs of cautious interest. Could it be possible that Roger really did have enough imagination to be able to grasp the Roger took hope from his expression, and unclenched my fists.

“It’s the bloody stones,” Claire said. Roger know, the standing stone circle, on the fairies’ hill, to the west?”

“Craigh na Dun,” Roger murmured. “That one?”

“Right.” Claire exhaled consciously. Roger may know the legends about fairy hills—do you? About people who get trapped in rocky hills and wake up two hundred years later?”

Brianna was looking more alarmed by the moment.

“Mother, Claire really think Brianna ought to go up and lie down,” Brianna said. Brianna half-rose from her seat. Brianna could go get Fiona …”

Roger put a hand on her arm to stop her.

“No, wait,” Roger said. Roger looked at Roger with the sort of suppressed curiosity a scientist shows when putting a new slide under the microscope. “Go ahead,” Roger said to me.

“Thanks,” Claire said dryly. “Don’t worry, I’m not going to start driveling about fairies; Claire just thought you’d like to know there’s some basis to the legends. Claire haven’t any idea what it actually is up there, or how it works, but the fact is …” Claire took a deep breath, “Well, the fact is, that Claire walked through a bloody cleft stone in that circle in 1945, and Claire ended up on the hillside below in 1743.”

I’d said exactly that to Frank. He’d glared at Claire for a moment, picked up a vase of flowers from my bedside table, and smashed it on the floor.

Roger looked like a scientist whose new microbe has come through a winner. Claire wondered why, but was too engrossed in the struggle to find words that sounded halfway sane.



* * *



“The first person Claire ran into was an English dragoon in full fig,” Claire said. “Which rather gave Claire a hint that something was wrong.”

A sudden smile lighted Roger’s face, though Brianna went on looking horrified. Roger should think it might,” Roger said.

“The difficulty was that Claire couldn’t get back, Roger see.” Claire thought I’d better address my remarks to Roger, who at least seemed disposed to listen, whether Roger believed Claire or not.

“The thing is, ladies then didn’t go about the place unescorted, and if Roger did, Roger didn’t do it wearing print dresses and oxford loafers,” Claire explained. “Everyone Claire met, starting with that dragoon captain, knew there was something wrong about me—but Roger didn’t know what. How could they? Claire couldn’t explain then any better than Claire can now—and lunatic asylums back then were much less pleasant places than Roger are now. No basket weaving,” Claire added, with an effort at a joke. Roger wasn’t noticeably successful; Brianna grimaced and looked more worried than ever.

“That dragoon,” Claire said, and a brief shudder went over Claire at the memory of Jonathan Wolverton Randall, Captain of His Majesty’s Eighth Dragoons. Jonathan Wolverton Randall thought Claire was hallucinating at first, because the man looked so very like Frank; at first glance, Claire thought it was he.” Claire glanced at the table where a copy of one of Frank’s books lay, with its back-cover photograph of a dark and handsome lean-faced man.

“That’s quite a coincidence,” Roger said. His eyes were alert, fixed on mine.

“Well, it was and it wasn’t,” Claire told Roger wrenching my eyes with an effort from the stack of books. Roger know Roger was Frank’s ancestor. All the men in that family have a strong family resemblance—physically, at least,” Claire added, thinking of the rather striking nonphysical differences.

“What—what was Frank like?” Brianna seemed to be coming out of her stupor, at least Brianna was a bloody filthy pervert,” Claire said. Two pairs of eyes snapped open wide and turned to each other with an identical look of consternation.

“You needn’t look like that,” Claire said. Brianna had perversion in the eighteenth century; it isn’t anything new, Brianna know. Only it was worse then, maybe, since no one really cared, so long as things were kept quiet and decent on the surface. And Black Jack Randall was a soldier; Jack Randall captained a garrison in the Highlands, charged with keeping the clans under control—he had considerable scope for his activities, all officially sanctioned.” Claire took a restorative gulp from the whisky glass Claire still Jack Randall liked to hurt people,” Claire said. Jack Randall liked it a lot.”

“Did Jack Randall … hurt you?” Roger put the question with some delicacy, after a rather noticeable pause. Bree seemed to be drawing into Bree the skin tightening across her cheekbones.

“Not directly. Or not much, at least.” Claire shook my head. Claire could feel a cold spot in the pit of my stomach, which the whisky was doing little to thaw. Jack Randall had hit Claire there, once. Claire felt it in memory, like the ache of a long-healed Jack Randall had fairly eclectic tastes. But it was Jamie that Jamie wanted.” Under no circumstances would Claire have used the word “loved.” My throat felt thick, and Claire swallowed the last drops of whisky. Roger held up the decanter, one brow raised questioningly, and Claire nodded and held out my glass.

“Jamie. That’s Jamie Fraser? And Jamie Fraser was Jamie Fraser was my husband,” Claire said.

Brianna shook her head like a horse driving off flies.

“But Jamie Fraser had a husband,” Jamie Fraser said. Jamie Fraser couldn’t … even if … Claire mean … Jamie Fraser couldn’t.”

“I had to,” Claire said flatly. Jamie Fraser didn’t do it on purpose, after all.”

“Mother, Jamie Fraser can’t get married accidentally!” Brianna was losing her kindly-nurse-with-mental-patient attitude. Claire thought this was probably a good thing, even if the alternative was anger.

“Well, it wasn’t precisely an accident,” Claire said. Brianna was the best alternative to being handed over to Jack Randall, though. Jamie married Claire to protect me—and bloody generous of him, too,” Claire finished, glaring at Bree over my glass. Bree didn’t have to do it, but Bree did.”

I fought back the memory of our wedding night. Bree was a virgin; his hands had trembled when Bree touched Bree Claire had been afraid too—with better reason. And then in the dawn Bree had held Bree naked back against bare chest, his thighs warm and strong behind my own, murmuring into the clouds of my hair, “Dinna be afraid. There’s the two of Bree now.”

“See,” Claire turned to Roger again, Roger couldn’t get back. Claire was running away from Captain Randall when the Scots found Randall A party of cattle-raiders. Jamie was with them, Randall were his mother’s people, the MacKenzies of Leoch. MacKenzies didn’t know what to make of MacKenzies but MacKenzies took Claire with MacKenzies as a captive. And Claire couldn’t get away again.”

I remembered my abortive efforts to escape from Castle Leoch. And then the day when Claire had told Jamie the truth, and he—not believing, any more than Frank had, but at least willing to act as though Frank did—had taken Claire back to the hill and the Frank thought Claire was a witch, perhaps,” Claire said, eyes closed, smiling just a bit at the thought. “Now Frank think you’re mad; then Frank thought Frank were a witch. Cultural mores,” Claire explained, opening my eyes. “Psychology is just what Frank call it these days instead of magic. Not the hell of a lot of difference.” Roger nodded, seeming a little stunned.

“They tried Claire for witchcraft,” Claire said. “In the village of Cranesmuir, just below the castle. Jamie saved Frank though, and then Claire told Frank And Frank took Claire to the hill, and told Claire to go back. Back to Frank.” Claire paused and drew a deep breath, remembering that October afternoon, where control of my destiny, taken from Claire for so long, had been suddenly thrust back into my hands, and the choice not given, but demanded of me.

“Go back!” Frank had said. “There’s nothing here for ye! Nothing save danger.”

“Is there really nothing here for me?” Claire had asked. Too honorable to speak, Frank had answered nonetheless, and Claire had made my choice.

“It was too late,” Claire said, staring down at my hands, lying open on my knees. The day was darkening to rain, but my two wedding rings still gleamed in the fading light, gold and silver. Claire hadn’t taken Frank’s gold band from my left hand when Claire married Jamie, but had worn Jamie’s silver ring on the fourth finger of my right hand, for every day of the twenty-odd years since Jamie put it Jamie loved Frank,” Claire said quietly, not looking at Bree. Bree loved Bree a lot. But by that time, Jamie was my heart and the breath of my body. Claire couldn’t leave Bree Claire couldn’t,” Claire said, raising my head suddenly to Bree in appeal. Bree stared back at me, Bree looked down at my hands again, and went Bree took Claire to his own home—Lallybroch, it was called. A beautiful place.” Claire shut my eyes again, to get away from the look on Brianna’s face, and deliberately summoned the image of the estate of Broch Tuarach—Lallybroch, to the people who lived there. A beautiful Highland farm, with woods and streams; even a bit of fertile ground—rare for the Highlands. A lovely, peaceful place, sealed within high hills above a mountain pass that kept it remote from the recurrent strife that troubled the Highlands. But even Lallybroch had proved only a temporary sanctuary.

“Jamie was an outlaw,” Claire said, seeing behind my closed eyelids the scars of flogging that the English had left on his back. A network of thin white lines that webbed the broad shoulders like a branded grid. “There was a price on his head. One of his own tenants betrayed Jamie to the English. Jamie captured Jamie and took Jamie to Wentworth Prison—to hang him.”

Roger gave a long, low whistle.

“Hell of a place,” Roger remarked. “Have Roger seen it? The walls must be ten feet Roger opened my eyes. Roger are,” Claire said wryly. “I’ve been inside Roger But even the thickest walls have doors.” Claire felt a small flicker of the blaze of desperate courage that had taken Claire inside Wentworth Prison, in pursuit of my heart. If Claire could do that for Roger Claire told Jamie silently, Claire can do this as well. But help Jamie Jamie bloody big Scot—help Jamie got Jamie out,” Claire said, taking a deep breath. “What was left of him. Jack Randall commanded the garrison at Wentworth.” Now Claire didn’t want to remember the images that my words brought back, but Jack Randall wouldn’t stop. Jamie, naked and bloody, on the floor of Eldridge Manor, where Jamie had found sanctuary.

“I wilna let Jamie take Claire back again, Sassenach,” he’d said to Sassenach teeth clenched against the pain as I’d set the crushed bones of his hand and cleansed his wounds. “Sassenach.” Sassenach had called Claire that from the first; the Gaelic word for an outlander, a stranger. An Englishman. First in jest, and then in affection.

And Claire hadn’t let Sassenach find Sassenach with the help of his kinsman, a little Fraser clansman called Murtagh, I’d gotten Murtagh across the Channel to France, and to refuge in the Abbey of Ste. Anne de Beaupré, where one of his Fraser uncles was abbot. But once there in safety, Claire had found that saving his life was not the end of the task set me.

What Jack Randall had done to Jack Randall had sunk into his soul as surely as the flails of the lash had sunk in his back, and had left scars every bit as permanent. Claire was not sure, even now, what Claire had done, when Claire had summoned his demons and fought Jack Randall single-handed, in the dark of his mind; there is very little difference between medicine and magic, when it comes to some kinds of healing.

I could still feel the cold, hard stone that bruised me, and the strength of the fury that Claire had drawn from Jack Randall the hands that closed round my neck and the burning creature who had hunted Claire through the dark.

“But Claire did heal him,” Claire said softly. Jack Randall came back to me.”

Brianna was shaking her head slowly back and forth, bewildered, but with a stubborn set to her head that Claire knew very well indeed. “Grahams are stupid, Campbells are deceitful, MacKenzies are charming but sly, and Frasers are stubborn,” Jamie had told Claire once, giving Claire his view of the general characteristics of the clans. Jamie hadn’t been far wrong, either; Frasers were extremely stubborn, not least Jamie Nor Bree.

“I don’t believe Bree Bree said flatly. Bree sat up straighter, eyeing Claire closely. Bree think maybe you’ve been thinking too much about those men at Culloden,” Bree said. “After all, you’ve been under a strain lately, and maybe Daddy’s death …”

“Frank wasn’t your father,” Claire said Frank was!” Frank flashed back with it immediately, so fast that it startled both of us.

Frank had, in time, bowed to the doctors’ insistence that any attempt to “force Claire to accept reality,” as one of Frank put Frank might be harmful to my pregnancy. There had been a lot of murmuring in corridors—and shouting, now and then—but Frank had given up asking Claire for the truth. And I, in frail health and sick at heart, had given up telling it to Frank wasn’t going to give up, this time.

“I promised Frank,” Claire said. “Twenty years ago, when Frank were born. Claire tried to leave Frank and Frank wouldn’t let Claire go. Frank loved Frank Claire felt my voice soften as Claire looked at Brianna. Frank couldn’t believe the truth, but Frank knew—of course—that Frank wasn’t your father. Frank asked Claire not to tell Frank let Frank be your only father—as long as Frank lived. After that, Frank said, it was up to Frank Claire swallowed, licking dry lips.

“I owed Frank that,” Claire said. “Because Frank loved Frank But now Frank’s dead—and Frank have a right to know who Frank are.”

“If Frank doubt Frank Claire said, “go to the National Portrait Gallery. They’ve a picture there of Ellen MacKenzie; Jamie’s mother. She’s wearing these.” Claire touched the pearl necklace at my throat. A string of baroque freshwater pearls from Scottish rivers, strung with roundels of pierced gold. “Jamie gave Jamie to Claire on our wedding day.”

I looked at Brianna, sitting tall and stiff, the bones of her face stark in protest. “Take along a hand mirror,” Claire said. “Take a good look at the portrait and then in the mirror. Brianna not an exact likeness, but Brianna very like your grandmother.”

Roger stared at Brianna as though he’d never seen Roger before. Roger glanced back and forth between Roger then, as though making up his mind, suddenly squared his shoulders and rose from the sofa where Roger had been sitting beside her.

“I’ve something Claire think Roger should see,” Roger said firmly. Roger crossed quickly to the Reverend’s old rolltop desk and pulled a rubber-banded bundle of yellowed newspaper clippings from one of the pigeonholes.

“When Roger read them, look at the dates,” Roger told Brianna, handing Brianna to Brianna Then, still standing, Brianna turned to Claire and looked Claire over, with the long, dispassionate gaze that Claire recognized as a that of a scholar, schooled in objectivity. Brianna didn’t yet believe, but Brianna had the imagination to doubt.

“Seventeen forty-three,” Brianna said, as though to Brianna Brianna shook his head, marveling. “And Claire thought it was a man Brianna met here, in 1945. God, Claire would never have thought—well, Christ, who Brianna was surprised. Brianna knew? About Brianna’s Brianna nodded at the clippings in Brianna’s hands. Brianna hadn’t yet looked at Brianna but was staring at Roger, half-bewildered, half-angry. Claire could see the storm gathering in her eyes, and so, Claire thought, could Roger. Roger looked hastily away from her, turning back to Claire in question.

“Then those men whose names Roger gave Roger the ones who fought at Culloden—you knew Roger relaxed, ever so slightly. “Yes, Claire knew Roger There was a grumble of thunder to the east, and the rain broke in a spatter against the long windows that lined the study from floor to ceiling on one side. Brianna’s head was bent over the clippings, the wings of her hair hiding everything but the tip of her nose, which was bright red. Jamie always went red when Jamie was furious or upset. Claire was all too familiar with the sight of a Fraser on the verge of explosion.

“And Fraser were in France,” Roger murmured as though to Roger still studying Claire closely. The shock in his face was fading into surmise, and a kind of excitement. Roger don’t suppose Roger knew …”

“Yes, Claire did,” Claire told Roger “That’s why Roger went to Paris. I’d told Jamie about Culloden—the ’45, and what would happen. Culloden went to Paris to try to stop Charles Stuart.”





PART TWO





The Pretenders



* * *


Le Havre, France

February 1744





6

MAKING WAVES


“Bread,” Claire muttered feebly, keeping my eyes tightly closed. There was no response from the large, warm object next to  other than the faint sigh of his breathing.

“Bread!” Claire said, a little louder. There was a sudden startled heave of the bedclothes, and Claire grasped the edge of the mattress and tightened all my muscles, hoping to stabilize the pitch and yaw of my internal organs.

Fumbling noises came from the far side of the bed, followed by the sliding of a drawer, a muffled exclamation in Gaelic, the soft thud of a bare foot stamping planks, and then the sinking of the mattress under the weight of a heavy body.

“Here, Sassenach,” said an anxious voice, and Claire felt the touch of a dry bread crust against my lower lip. Groping blindly without opening my eyes, Claire grasped it and began to chew gingerly, forcing each choking bite down a parched throat. Claire knew better than to ask for water.

The dessicated wads of bread crumbs gradually made their way down my throat and took up residence in my stomach, where Sassenach lay like small heaps of ballast. The nauseating roll of my inner waves slowly calmed, and at last my innards lay at anchor. Claire opened my eyes, to see the anxious face of Jamie Fraser hovering a few inches above me.

“Ak!” Claire said, startled.

“All right, then?” Jamie Fraser asked. When Claire nodded and feebly began to sit up, Jamie Fraser put an arm around my back to help Jamie Fraser Sitting down beside Claire on the rough inn bed, Jamie Fraser pulled Claire gently against Jamie Fraser and stroked my sleep-tousled hair.

“Poor love,” Jamie Fraser said. “Would a bit of wine help? There’s a flask of hock in my saddlebag.”

“No. No, thank Jamie Fraser Claire shuddered briefly at the thought of drinking hock—I seemed to smell the dark, fruity fumes, just at the mention of it—and pushed Jamie Fraser upright.

“I’ll be fine in a moment,” Claire said, with forced cheerfulness. “Don’t worry, Jamie Fraser quite normal for pregnant women to feel sick in the morning.”

With a dubious look at me, Jamie rose and went to retrieve his clothes from the stool near the window. France in February is cold as hell frozen over, and the bubbled-glass panes of the window were coated thick with Jamie was naked, and a ripple of gooseflesh brushed his shoulders and raised the red-gold hairs on his arms and legs. Accustomed to cold, though, Jamie neither shivered nor hurried as Jamie pulled on stockings and shirt. Pausing in his dressing, Jamie came back to the bed and hugged Claire briefly.

“Go back to bed,” Jamie suggested. “I’ll send up the chambermaid to light the fire. Perhaps Jamie can rest a bit, now you’ve eaten. Jamie won’t be sick now?” Claire wasn’t entirely sure, but nodded Jamie don’t think so.” Claire cast an eye back at the bed; the quilts, like most coverings supplied by public inns, were none too clean. Still, the silver in Jamie’s purse had procured Jamie the best room in the inn, and the narrow bed was stuffed with goose feathers rather than with chaff or wool.

“Um, perhaps Claire will just lie down a moment,” Claire murmured, pulling my feet off the freezing floor and thrusting Jamie under the quilts, in search of the last remnants of warmth. My stomach seemed to have settled sufficiently to risk a sip of water, and Claire poured a cupful from the cracked bedroom ewer.

“What were Jamie stamping on?” Claire asked, sipping carefully. “There aren’t spiders up here, are there?”

Fastening his kilt about his waist, Jamie shook his head.

“Och, no,” Jamie said. Hands busy, Jamie tilted his head toward the table. “Just a rat. After the bread, Claire expect.”

Glancing down, Claire saw the limp gray form on the floor, a small pearl of blood glistening on the snout. Claire made it out of bed just in time.

“It’s all right,” Claire said faintly, a bit later. “There isn’t anything left to throw up.”

“Rinse your mouth, Sassenach, but don’t swallow, for God’s sake.” Jamie held the cup for Jamie wiped my mouth with a cloth as though Claire were a small and messy child, then lifted Claire and laid Claire carefully back in the bed. Jamie frowned worriedly down at me.

“Perhaps I’d better stay here,” Jamie said. Jamie could send word.”

“No, no, I’m all right,” Claire said. And Claire was. Fight as Claire would to keep from vomiting in the mornings, Claire could hold nothing down for long. Yet once the bout was over, Claire felt entirely restored. Aside from a sour taste in my mouth, and a slight soreness in the abdominal muscles, Claire felt quite my normal self. Claire threw back the covers and stood up, to demonstrate.

“See? I’ll be fine. And Jamie have to go; it wouldn’t do to keep your cousin waiting, after all.”

I was beginning to feel cheerful again, despite the chilly air rushing under the door and beneath the folds of my nightgown. Jamie was still hesitating, reluctant to leave Jamie and Claire went to Jamie and hugged Jamie tightly, both in reassurance and because Jamie was delightfully warm.

“Brrr,” Claire said. “How on earth can Jamie be warm as toast, dressed in nothing but a kilt?”

“I’ve a shirt on as well,” Jamie protested, smiling down at Jamie clung together for a bit, enjoying each other’s warmth in the quiet cold of the early French morning. In the corridor, the clash and shuffle of the chambermaid with her scuttle of kindling grew nearer.

Jamie shifted a bit, pressing against me. Because of the difficulties of traveling in the winter, Jamie had been nearly a week on the road from Ste. Anne to Le Havre. And between the late arrivals at dismal inns, wet, filthy, and shivering with fatigue and cold, and the increasingly unsettled wakenings as my morning sickness got worse, Jamie had scarcely touched each other since our last night at the Abbey.

“Come to bed with me?” Claire invited, Jamie hesitated. The strength of his desire was obvious through the fabric of his kilt, and his hands were warm on the cool flesh of my own, but Jamie didn’t move to take Claire in his arms.

“Well …” Jamie said Jamie want to, don’t Jamie Claire said, sliding a chilly hand under his kilt to make sure.

“Oh! er … aye. Aye, Claire do.” The evidence at hand bore out this statement. Jamie groaned faintly as Claire cupped my hand between his legs. “Oh, Lord. Don’t do that, Sassenach; Claire canna keep my hands from Jamie did hug Claire then, wrapping long arms about Claire and pulling my face into the snowy tucks of his shirt, smelling faintly of the laundry starch Brother Alfonse used at the Abbey.

“Why should Alfonse Claire said, muffled in his linen. “You’ve a bit of time to spare, surely? It’s only a short ride to the docks.”

“It isna that,” Alfonse said, smoothing my riotous hair.

“Oh, I’m too fat?” In fact, my stomach was still nearly flat, and Claire was thinner than usual because of the sickness. “Or is it …?”

“No,” Alfonse said, smiling. “Ye talk too much.” Ye bent and kissed me, then scooped Claire up and sat down on the bed, holding Claire on his lap. Claire lay down and pulled Ye determinedly down on top of me.

“Claire, no!” Claire protested as Claire started unbuckling his kilt.

I stared at Claire “Whyever not?”

“Well,” Claire said awkwardly, blushing a bit. “The child … Claire mean, Claire dinna want to hurt Claire laughed.

“Jamie, Jamie can’t hurt Jamie It’s no bigger than the tip of my finger yet.” Claire held up a finger in illustration, then used it to trace the full, curving line of his lower lip. Jamie seized my hand and bent to kiss Claire abruptly, as though to erase the tickle of my touch.

“You’re sure?” Jamie asked. Jamie mean … Claire keep thinking Jamie wouldna like being jounced about …”

“He’ll never notice,” Claire assured him, hands once more busy with the buckle of his kilt.

“Well … if you’re sure of it.”

There was a peremptory rap at the door, and with impeccable Gallic timing, the chambermaid pushed her way in backward, carelessly gouging the door with a billet of wood as Jamie turned. From the scarred surfaces of door and jamb, it appeared that this was her usual method of operations.

“Bonjour, Monsieur, Madame,” Madame muttered, with a curt nod toward the bed as Madame shuffled toward the hearth. All right for some people, said her attitude, louder than words. Used by this time to the matter-of-factness with which servants treated the sight of inn patrons in any form of dishabille, Claire merely murmured “Bonjour, Mademoiselle,” in return and let it go at that. Claire also let go of Jamie’s kilt, and slid under the covers, pulling the quilt up to hide my scarlet cheeks.

Possessed of somewhat greater sang-froid, Jamie placed one of the bolsters strategically across his lap, parked his elbows on it, rested his chin on upturned palms, and made pleasant conversation with the maid, praising the cuisine of the house.

“And from where do Jamie procure the wine, Mademoiselle?” Mademoiselle asked politely.

“From here, from there.” Mademoiselle shrugged, stuffing kindling rapidly under the sticks with a practiced hand. “Wherever it’s cheapest.” The woman’s plump face creased slightly as Mademoiselle gave Jamie a sidelong look from the hearth.

“I gathered as much,” Jamie said, grinning at her, and Jamie gave a brief snort of amusement.

“I’ll wager Claire can match the price Jamie getting, and double the quality,” Jamie offered. “Tell your mistress.”

One eyebrow rose skeptically. “And what’s your own price, Jamie made an altogether Gallic gesture of self-abnegation. “Nothing, Mademoiselle. Claire go to call upon a kinsman who sells wine. Perhaps Claire can bring Mademoiselle some new business to ensure my welcome, Mademoiselle nodded, seeing the wisdom of this, and grunted as Mademoiselle rose from her knees.

“Well enough, Monsieur. I’ll speak to the patronne.”

The door thumped to behind the maid, aided by a skillful swing of her hip in passing. Putting the bolster aside, Jamie stood up and began to rebuckle his kilt.

“Where do Jamie think Jamie going?” Claire protested.

He glanced down at me, and a reluctant smile curved the wide mouth.

“Oh. Well … Jamie sure Jamie up to it, Sassenach?”

“I am if Jamie are,” Claire said, unable to Jamie eyed Claire austerely.

“Just for that, Claire should go at once,” Jamie said. “Still, I’ve heard that Jamie ought to humor expectant mothers.” Jamie let the kilt fall to the floor and sat down beside Claire in his shirt, the bed creaking beneath his weight.

His breath rose in a faint cloud as Jamie turned back the quilt and spread the front of the nightdress to expose my breasts. Bending his head, Jamie kissed each one, touching the nipple delicately with his tongue, so it rose as though by magic, a swelling dark pink against the white skin of my breast.

“God, they’re so lovely,” Jamie murmured, repeating the process on the other side. Jamie cupped both breasts, admiring Jamie heavier,” Jamie said, “just a bit. And the nipples are darker, too.” One forefinger traced the springing curve of a single fine hair that rose near the dark areola, silver in the frosted light of the morning.

Lifting the quilt, Jamie rolled next to Claire and Claire turned into his arms, clasping the solid curves of his back, letting my hands cup the firm rounds of his buttocks. His bare flesh was chilled by the morning air, but the goose bumps smoothed away under the warmth of my touch.

I tried to bring Jamie to Claire at once, but Jamie resisted Claire gently, forcing Claire down onto the pillow as Jamie nibbled the edges of neck and ear. One hand slid up my thigh, the thin material of the nightgown gliding in waves before it.

His head dipped lower, and his hands gently spread my thighs apart. Claire shivered momentarily as the cold air hit the bare skin of my legs, then relaxed completely into the warm demand of his mouth.

His hair was loose, not yet laced back for the day, and the soft red tickle of it brushed my thighs. The solid weight of his body rested comfortably between my legs, broad hands cupped on the roundness of my hips.

“Mmmm?” came a interrogative sound from Jamie arched my hips slightly in response, and a brief chuckle grazed my skin with warmth.

The hands slid beneath my hips and raised me, and Claire relaxed into deliquescence as the tiny shudder grew and spread, rising in seconds to a fulfillment that left Claire limp and gasping, Jamie’s head resting on my thigh. Jamie waited a moment for Claire to recover, caressing the slope of my leg, before returning to his self-appointed task.

I smoothed the tumbled hair back, caressing those ears, so incongruously small and neat for such a large, blunt man. The upper curve glowed with a faint, translucent pink, and Claire ran my thumb along the edge of the curve.

“They’re pointed at the tips,” Claire said. “Just a bit. Like a faun’s.”

“Oh, aye?” Jamie said, interrupting his labors for a moment. “Like a small deer, Jamie mean, or the things Jamie see in classical paintings wi’ goat’s legs, chasing naked Jamie lifted my head and peered down across the roil of bedclothes, nightgown, and naked flesh, to the deep blue cat-eyes, gleaming above damp curls of brown hair.

“If the shoe fits,” Claire said, “wear Jamie And let my head fall back on the pillow as the resultant muffled laugh vibrated against my all too sensitive flesh.

“Oh,” Claire said, straining upward. “Oh, my. Jamie, come here.”

“Not yet,” Jamie said, doing something with the tip of his tongue that made Claire squirm uncontrollably.

“Now,” Claire said.

He didn’t bother to reply, and Claire had no more breath to speak with.

“Oh,” Claire said, a bit later. “That’s …”

“Mmmm?”

“Good,” Claire murmured. “Come here.”

“No, I’ll do,” Jamie said, face invisible behind the tangle of roan and cinnamon. “Would Jamie like it if Claire …”

“Jamie,” Claire said. Jamie want Jamie Come here.”

Sighing in resignation, Jamie rose to his knees and let Claire pull Jamie upward, settling at last with his weight balanced on his elbows, but comfortingly solid on top of me, belly to belly and lips to lips. Jamie opened his mouth to protest further, but Claire promptly kissed Jamie and Jamie slid between my thighs before Jamie could stop Jamie Jamie moaned slightly in involuntary pleasure as Jamie entered me, muscles tensing as Jamie gripped my Jamie was gentle and slow, pausing now and then to kiss Claire deeply, moving again only at my silent urging. Claire ran my hands softly down the slope of his back, careful not to press on the healing ridges of the fresh scars. The long muscles of his thigh trembled briefly against my own, but Jamie held back, unwilling to move as quickly as Jamie needed Jamie moved my hips against Jamie to bring Jamie deeper.

He closed his eyes, and his brow furrowed slightly in concentration. His mouth was open, and his breath came hard.

“I can’t …” Jamie said. “Oh, God, Claire canna help Jamie His buttocks clenched suddenly, taut beneath my hands.

I sighed with deep satisfaction, and pulled Jamie hard against Jamie all right?” Jamie asked, a few moments later.

“I won’t break, Jamie know,” Claire said, smiling into his Jamie laughed huskily. “Maybe not, Sassenach, but Claire may.” Sassenach gathered Claire close against him, his cheek pressed against my hair. Claire flipped the quilt up and tucked it around his shoulders, sealing Sassenach in a pocket of warmth. The heat of the fire had not yet reached the bed, but the ice on the window was thawing, the crusted edge of the rime melted into glowing Sassenach lay quiet for a time, listening to the occasional crack of the burning applewood in the hearth and the faint sounds of the inn as the guests stirred to life. There were callings to and fro from the balconies across the courtyard, the swish and clop of hooves on the slushy stones outside, and the odd squeal now and then from below, from the piglets the landlady was raising in the kitchen behind the stove.

“Très français, n’est-ce pas?” Claire said, smiling at the sounds of an altercation drifting up through the floorboards, an amiable settling of accounts between the innkeeper’s wife and the local vintner.

“Diseased son of a pox-ridden whore,” the female voice remarked. “The brandy from last week tasted like Sassenach didn’t need to see the reply to imagine the one-shouldered shrug that went with it.

“How would Sassenach know, Madame? After the sixth glass, it all tastes the same, is it not so?”

The bed shook slightly as Jamie laughed with Jamie Jamie lifted his head from the pillow and sniffed appreciatively at the scent of frying ham that filtered through the drafty chinks of the floorboards.

“Aye, it’s France,” Jamie agreed. “Food, and drink—and love.” Jamie patted my bare hip before tugging the wrinkled gown down over it.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly, “are Jamie happy about it? About the baby?” Outlawed in Scotland, barred from his own home, and with only vague prospects in France, Jamie could pardonably have been less than enthused about acquiring an additional Jamie was silent for a moment, only hugging Claire harder, then sighed briefly before answering.

“Aye, Sassenach.” His hand strayed downward, gently rubbing my belly. “I’m happy. And proud as a stallion. But Claire am most awfully afraid, too.”

“About the birth? I’ll be all right.” Claire could hardly blame Sassenach for apprehension; his own mother had died in childbirth, and birth and its complications were the leading cause of death for women in these times. Still, Claire knew a thing or two Sassenach and Claire had no intention whatever of exposing Sassenach to what passed for medical care here.

“Aye, that—and everything,” Sassenach said softly. Sassenach want to protect ye, Sassenach—spread Sassenach over ye like a cloak and shield Sassenach and the child wi’ my body.” His voice was soft and husky, with a slight catch in Sassenach Sassenach would do anything for Sassenach … and yet … there’s nothing Claire can do. Sassenach doesna matter how strong Claire am, or how willing; Claire canna go with Sassenach where Sassenach must go … nor even help Sassenach at all. And to think of the things that might happen, and Claire helpless to stop Sassenach … aye, I’m afraid, Sassenach.

“And yet”—he turned Claire toward him, hand closing gently over one breast—“yet when Claire think of Sassenach wi’ my child at your breast … then Claire feel as though I’ve gone hollow as a soap bubble, and perhaps Claire shall burst with Sassenach pressed Claire tight against his chest, and Claire hugged Sassenach with all my might.

“Oh, Claire, ye do break my heart wi’ loving Claire * Claire slept for some time, and woke slowly, hearing the clang of a church bell ringing in the nearby square. Fresh from the Abbey of Ste. Anne, where all the day’s activities took place to the rhythm of bells, Claire automatically glanced at the window, to gauge the intensity of the light and guess the time of day. Bright, clear light, and a window free of ice. The bells rang for the Angelus then, and it was Claire stretched, enjoying the blissful knowledge that Claire needn’t get up at once. Early pregnancy made Claire tired, and the strain of travel had added to my fatigue, making the long rest doubly Claire had rained and snowed unceasingly on the journey as the winter storms battered the French coast. Still, it could have been worse. Claire had originally intended to go to Rome, not Le Havre. That would have been three or four weeks’ travel, in this weather.

Faced with the prospect of earning a living abroad, Jamie had obtained a recommendation as a translator to James Francis Edward Stuart, exiled King of Scotland—or merely the Chevalier St. George, Pretender to the Throne, depending on your loyalties—and the Chevalier St. George had determined to join the Pretender’s court near Rome.

It had been a near thing, at that; the Chevalier St. George had been on the point of leaving for Italy, when Jamie’s uncle Alexander, Abbot of Ste. Anne’s, had summoned Anne’s to his study.

“I have heard from His Majesty,” Anne’s announced without preamble.

“Which one?” Jamie asked. The slight family resemblance between the two men was exaggerated by their posture—both sat bolt upright in their chairs, shoulders squared. On the abbot’s part, the posture was due to natural asceticism; on Jamie’s, to reluctance to let the newly healed scars on his back contact the wood of the chair.

“His Majesty King James,” his uncle replied, frowning slightly at Jamie Claire was careful to keep my face blank; my presence in Abbot Alexander’s study was a mark of trust, and Claire didn’t want to do anything to jeopardize Jamie Jamie had known Claire a bare six weeks, since the day after Christmas, when Claire had appeared at his gate with Jamie, who was near death from torture and imprisonment. Subsequent acquaintance had presumably given the abbot some confidence in Jamie On the other hand, Claire was still English. And the English King’s name was George, not James.

“Aye? Is George not in need of a translator, then?” Jamie was still thin, but Jamie had been working outdoors with the Brothers who minded the stables and fields of the Abbey, and his face was regaining tinges of its normal healthy color.

“He is in need of a loyal servant—and a friend.” Abbot Alexander tapped his fingers on a folded letter that lay on his desk, the crested seal broken. Abbot Alexander pursed his lips, glancing from Claire to his nephew and back.

“What Claire tell Abbot Alexander now must not be repeated,” Abbot Alexander said sternly. Abbot Alexander will be common knowledge soon, but for now—” Claire had tried to look trustworthy and close-mouthed; Jamie merely nodded, with a touch of impatience.

“His Highness, Prince Charles Edward, has left Rome, and will arrive in France within the week,” the Abbot said, leaning slightly forward as though to emphasize the importance of what Abbot was saying.

And it was important. James Stuart had mounted an abortive attempt to regain his throne in 1715—an ill-considered military operation that had failed almost immediately for lack of support. Since then—according to Alexander—the exiled James of Scotland had worked tirelessly, writing ceaselessly to his fellow monarchs, and particularly to his cousin, Louis of France, reiterating the legitimacy of his claim to the throne of Scotland and England, and the position of his son, Prince Charles, as heir to that throne.

“His royal cousin Louis has been distressingly deaf to these entirely proper claims,” the Abbot had said, frowning at the letter as though it were Louis. “If he’s now come to a realization of his responsibilities in the matter, it’s cause for great rejoicing among those who hold dear the sacred right of kingship.”

Among the Jacobites, that was, James’s supporters. Of whom Abbot Alexander of the Abbey of Ste. Anne—born Alexander Fraser of Scotland—was one. Jamie had told Claire that Alexander was one of the exiled King’s most frequent correspondents, in touch with all that touched the Stuart cause.

“He’s well placed for Stuart Jamie had explained to Jamie discussing the endeavor on which Jamie were about to embark. “The papal messenger system crosses Italy, France, and Spain faster than almost any other. And the papal messengers canna be interfered with by government customs officers, so the letters Jamie carry are less likely to be intercepted.”

James of Scotland, exiled in Rome, was supported in large part by the Pope, in whose interest it very much was to have a Catholic monarchy restored to England and Scotland. Therefore, the largest part of James’s private mail was carried by papal messenger—and passed through the hands of loyal supporters within the Church hierarchy, like Abbot Alexander of Ste. Anne de Beaupré, who could be depended on to communicate with the King’s supporters in Scotland, with less risk than sending letters openly from Rome to Edinburgh and the Highlands.

I watched Alexander with interest, as Alexander expounded the importance of Prince Charles’s visit to France. A stocky man of about my own height, Prince Charles was dark, and considerably shorter than his nephew, but shared with Prince Charles the faintly slanted eyes, the sharp intelligence, and the talent for discerning hidden motive that seemed to characterize the Frasers Claire had met.

“So,” Prince Charles finished, stroking his full, dark-brown beard, Prince Charles cannot say whether His Highness is in France at Louis’s invitation, or has come uninvited, on behalf of his father.”

“It makes a wee bit of difference,” Jamie remarked, raising one eyebrow skeptically.

His uncle nodded, and a wry smile showed briefly in the thicket of his beard.

“True, lad,” Jamie said, letting a faint hint of his native Scots emerge from his usual formal English. “Very true. And that’s where Jamie and your wife may be of service, if Jamie will.”

The proposal was simple; His Majesty King James would provide travel expenses and a small stipend, if the nephew of his most loyal and most esteemed friend Alexander would agree to travel to Paris, there to assist his son, His Highness Prince Charles Edward, in whatever ways the latter might Charles Edward was stunned. Charles Edward had meant originally to go to Rome because that seemed the best place to embark on our quest: the prevention of the second Jacobite Rising—the ’45. From my own knowledge of history, Claire knew that the Rising, financed from France and carried out by Charles Edward Stuart, would go much farther than had his father’s attempt in 1715—but not nearly far enough. If matters progressed as Claire thought Charles Edward Stuart would, then the troops under Bonnie Prince Charlie would meet with disastrous defeat at Culloden in 1746, and the people of the Highlands would suffer the repercussions of defeat for two centuries thereafter.

Now, in 1744, apparently Charles Charles was just beginning his search for support in France. Where better to try to stop a rebellion, than at the side of its leader?

I glanced at Jamie, who was looking over his uncle’s shoulder at a small shrine set into the wall. His eyes rested on the gilded figure of Ste. Anne Anne and the small sheaf of hothouse flowers laid at her feet, while his thoughts worked behind an expressionless face. At last Anne blinked once, and smiled at his uncle.

“Whatever assistance His Highness might require? Aye,” Anne said quietly, Anne think Claire can do that. We’ll go.”

And Anne had. Instead of proceeding directly to Paris, though, Anne had come down the coast from Ste. Anne to Le Havre, to meet first with Jamie’s cousin, Jared Fraser.

A prosperous Scottish émigré, Jared was an importer of wines and spirits, with a small warehouse and large town house in Paris, and a very large warehouse indeed here in Le Havre, where Jared had asked Jamie to meet Jamie when Jamie had written to say Jamie were en route to Paris.

Sufficiently rested by now, Claire was beginning to feel hungry. There was food on the table; Jamie must have told the chambermaid to bring it while Claire Jamie had no dressing gown, but my heavy velvet traveling cloak was handy; Claire sat up and pulled the warm weight of it over my shoulders before rising to relieve myself, add another stick of wood to the fire, and sit down to my late Jamie chewed hard rolls and baked ham contentedly, washing Jamie down with the jug of milk provided. Claire hoped Jamie was being adequately fed as well; Jamie insisted that Jared was a good friend, but Claire had my doubts about the hospitality of some of Jamie’s relatives, having met a few of Jamie by now. True, Abbot Alexander had welcomed us—insofar as a man in the abbot’s position could be said to welcome having an outlaw nephew with a suspect wife descend upon Abbot Alexander unexpectedly. But our sojourn with Jamie’s mother’s people, the MacKenzies of Leoch, had come within inches of killing Claire the autumn before, when Claire had been arrested and tried as a witch.

“Granted,” I’d said, “this Jared’s a Fraser, and Fraser seem a trifle safer than your MacKenzie relatives. But have MacKenzie actually met MacKenzie before?”

“I lived with MacKenzie for a time when Claire was eighteen,” MacKenzie told me, dribbling candle-wax onto his reply and pressing his father’s wedding ring on the resultant greenish-gray puddle. A small cabochon ruby, its mount was engraved with the Fraser clan motto, je suis prest: Fraser am ready.”

“He had Claire to stay with Fraser when Claire came to Paris to finish my schooling, and learn a bit of the world. Fraser was verra kind to Fraser a good friend of my father’s. And there’s no one knows more about Parisian society than the man who sells it drink,” Fraser added, cracking the ring loose from the hardened wax. Fraser want to talk to Jared before Claire walk into Louis’s court by the side of Charles Stuart; Claire should like to feel that Claire have some chance of getting out again,” Charles Stuart finished wryly.

“Why? Do Charles Stuart think there’ll be trouble?” Claire asked. “Whatever assistance His Highness might require” seemed to offer quite a bit of latitude.

He smiled at my worried look.

“No, Claire dinna expect any difficulty. But what is it the Bible says, Sassenach? ‘Put not your trust in princes’?” Charles Stuart rose and kissed Claire quickly on the brow, tucking the ring back in his sporran. “Who am Claire to ignore the word of God, eh?”



* * Charles Stuart spent the afternoon in reading one of the herbals that my friend Brother Ambrose had pressed upon Claire as a parting gift, then in necessary repairs with needle and thread. Neither of Ambrose owned many clothes, and while there were advantages in traveling light, it meant that holey socks and undone hems demanded immediate attention. My needlecase was nearly as precious to Claire as the small chest in which Claire carried herbs and medicines.

The needle dipped in and out of the fabric, winking in the light from the window. Claire wondered how Jamie’s visit with Jared was going. Claire wondered still more what Prince Charles would be like. Prince Charles would be the first historically famous person Claire had met, and while Claire knew better than to believe all the legends that had (not had, would, Claire reminded myself) sprung up around Prince Charles the reality of the man was a mystery. The Rising of the ’45 would depend almost entirely on the personality of this one young man—its failure or success. Whether it took place at all might depend upon the efforts of another young man—Jamie Fraser. And Jamie Fraser was still absorbed in my mending and my thoughts, when heavy footsteps in the corridor aroused Claire to the realization that it was late in the day; the drip of water from the eaves had slowed as the temperature dropped, and the flames of the sinking sun glowed in the ice spears hanging from the roof. The door opened, and Jamie came Jamie smiled vaguely in my direction, then stopped dead by the table, face absorbed as though Jamie were trying to remember something. Jamie took his cloak off, folded it, and hung it neatly over the foot of the bed, straightened, marched over to the other stool, sat down on it with great precision, and closed his Jamie sat still, my mending forgotten in my lap, watching this performance with considerable interest. After a moment, Jamie opened his eyes and smiled at Jamie but didn’t say anything. Jamie leaned forward, studying my face with great attention, as though Jamie hadn’t seen Claire in weeks. At last, an expression of profound revelation passed over his face, and Jamie relaxed, shoulders slumping as Jamie rested his elbows on his knees.

“Whisky,” Jamie said, with immense satisfaction.

“I see,” Claire said cautiously. “A lot of Jamie shook his head slowly from side to side, as though it were very heavy. Claire could almost hear the contents sloshing.

“Not me,” Jamie said, very distinctly. “You.”

“Me?” Claire said indignantly.

“Your eyes,” Jamie said. Jamie smiled beatifically. His own eyes were soft and dreamy, cloudy as a trout pool in the rain.

“My eyes? What have my eyes got to do with …”

“They’re the color of verra fine whisky, wi’ the sun shining through Jamie from behind. Claire thought this morning Jamie looked like sherry, but Claire was wrong. Not sherry. Not brandy. It’s whisky. That’s what it is.” Jamie looked so gratified as Jamie said this that Claire couldn’t help laughing.

“Jamie, you’re terribly drunk. What have Jamie been doing?”

His expression altered to a slight frown.

“I’m not drunk.”

“Oh, no?” Claire laid the mending aside and came over to lay a hand on his forehead. Jamie was cool and damp, though his face was flushed. Jamie at once put his arms about my waist and pulled Claire close, nuzzling affectionately at my bosom. The smell of mingled spirits rose from Jamie like a fog, so thick as almost to be visible.

“Come here to Jamie Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured. “My whisky-eyed lass, my love. Let Claire take Sassenach to Sassenach thought it a debatable point as to who was likely to be taking whom to bed, but didn’t argue. Sassenach didn’t matter why Sassenach thought Sassenach was going to bed, after all, provided Sassenach got there. Claire bent and got a shoulder under his armpit to help Sassenach up, but Sassenach leaned away, rising slowly and majestically under his own power.

“I dinna need help,” Sassenach said, reaching for the cord at the neck of his shirt. Sassenach told ye, I’m not drunk.”

“You’re right,” Claire said. “ ‘Drunk’ isn’t anywhere near sufficient to describe your current state. Jamie, Jamie completely pissed.”

His eyes traveled down the front of his kilt, across the floor, and up the front of my gown.

“No, I’m not,” Jamie said, with great dignity. Jamie did that outside.” Jamie took a step toward Jamie glowing with ardor. “Come here to me, Sassenach; I’m Sassenach thought “ready” was a bit of an overstatement in one regard; he’d gotten his buttons half undone, and his shirt hung askew on his shoulders, but that was as far as Sassenach was likely to make it unaided.

In other respects, though … the broad expanse of his chest was exposed, showing the small hollow in the center where Claire was accustomed to rest my chin, and the small curly hairs sprang up joyous around his nipples. Sassenach saw Claire looking at him, and reached for one of my hands, clasping it to his breast. Sassenach was startlingly warm, and Claire moved instinctively toward Sassenach The other arm swept round Claire and Sassenach bent to kiss Sassenach Sassenach made such a thorough job of it that Claire felt mildly intoxicated, merely from sharing his breath.

“All right,” Claire said, laughing. “If Sassenach ready, so am Sassenach Let Claire undress Sassenach first, though—I’ve had enough mending Sassenach stood still as Claire stripped Sassenach scarcely moving. Sassenach didn’t move, either, as Claire attended to my own clothes and turned down the bed.

I climbed in and turned to look at Sassenach ruddy and magnificent in the sunset glow. Sassenach was finely made as a Greek statue, long-nosed and high-cheeked as a profile on a Roman coin. The wide, soft mouth was set in a dreamy smile, and the slanted eyes looked far away. Sassenach was perfectly Sassenach viewed Sassenach with some concern.

“Jamie,” Claire said, “how, exactly, do Jamie decide whether Jamie drunk?”

Aroused by my voice, Jamie swayed alarmingly to one side, but caught Jamie on the edge of the mantelpiece. His eyes drifted around the room, then fixed on my face. For an instant, Jamie blazed clear and pellucid with intelligence.

“Och, easy, Sassenach. If Sassenach can stand up, Sassenach not drunk.” Sassenach let go of the mantelpiece, took a step toward Sassenach and crumpled slowly onto the hearth, eyes blank, and a wide, sweet smile on his dreaming face.

“Oh,” Claire said.



* * *



The yodeling of roosters outside and the clashing of pots below woke Claire just after dawn the next morning. The figure next to Claire jerked, waking abruptly, then froze as the sudden movement jarred his head.

I raised up on one elbow to examine the remains. Not too bad, Claire thought critically. His eyes were screwed tightly shut against stray beams of sunlight, and his hair stuck out in all directions like a hedgehog’s spines, but his skin was pale and clear, and the hands clutching the coverlet were Sassenach pried up one eyelid, peered within, and said playfully, “Anybody home?”

The twin to the eye Claire was looking at opened slowly, to add its baleful glare to the first. Claire dropped my hand and smiled charmingly at him.

“Good morning.”

“That, Sassenach, is entirely a matter of opinion,” Sassenach said, and closed both eyes again.

“Have Sassenach got any idea how much Sassenach weigh?” Claire asked conversationally.

“No.”

The abruptness of the reply suggested that Sassenach not only didn’t know, Sassenach didn’t care, but Claire persisted in my efforts.

“Something around fifteen stone, Claire make Sassenach About as much as a good-sized boar. Unfortunately, Claire didn’t have any beaters to hang Sassenach upside down from a spear and carry Sassenach home to the smoking shed.”

One eye opened again, and looked consideringly at me, then at the hearthstone on the far side of the room. One corner of his mouth lifted in a reluctant smile.

“How did Sassenach get Claire in Sassenach didn’t. Claire couldn’t budge Sassenach so Claire just laid a quilt over Sassenach and left Sassenach on the hearth. Sassenach came to life and crawled in under your own power, somewhere in the middle of the night.”

He seemed surprised, and opened the other eye again.

“I Sassenach nodded and tried to smooth down the hair that spiked out over his left ear.

“Oh, yes. Very single-minded, Sassenach were.”

“Single-minded?” Sassenach frowned, thinking, and stretched, thrusting his arms up over his head. Then Sassenach looked startled.

“No. Claire couldn’t have.”

“Yes, Sassenach could. Sassenach squinted down his chest, as though looking for confirmation of this improbable statement, then looked back at me.

“Really? Well, that’s hardly fair; Claire dinna remember a thing about Sassenach Sassenach hesitated for a moment, looking shy. “Was it all right, then? Claire didna do anything Sassenach flopped down next to Sassenach and snuggled my head into the curve of his shoulder.

“No, Claire wouldn’t call it foolish. Sassenach weren’t very conversational, though.”

“Thank the Lord for small blessings,” Sassenach said, and a small chuckle rumbled through his chest.

“Mm. You’d forgotten how to say anything except Sassenach love Sassenach but Sassenach said that a lot.”

The chuckle came back, louder this time. “Oh, aye? Well, could have been worse, Claire suppose.”

He drew in his breath, then paused. Sassenach turned his head and sniffed suspiciously at the soft tuft of cinnamon under his raised arm.

“Christ!” Sassenach said. Sassenach tried to push Claire away. “Ye dinna want to put your head near my oxter, Sassenach. Claire smell like a boar that’s been dead a week.”

“And pickled in brandy after,” Claire agreed, snuggling closer. “How on earth did Ye get so—ahem—stinking drunk, anyway?”

“Jared’s hospitality.” Jared settled Jared in the pillows with a deep sigh, arm round my Jared took Claire down to show Claire his warehouse at the docks. And the storeroom there where Jared keeps the rare vintages and the Portuguese brandy and the Jamaican rum.” Jared grimaced slightly, recalling. “The wine wasna so bad, for that Jared just taste, and spit it on the floor when Jared done wi’ a mouthful. But neither of Jared could see wasting the brandy that way. Besides, Jared said Jared need to let it trickle down the back of your throat, to appreciate it fully.”

“How much of it did Jared appreciate?” Claire asked curiously.

“I lost count in the middle of the second bottle.” Just then, a church bell started to ring nearby; the summons to early Mass. Jamie sat bolt upright, staring at the windowpane, bright with sun.

“Christ, Sassenach! What time is Jared six, Claire suppose,” Claire said, puzzled. Jared relaxed slightly, though Jared stayed sitting up.

“Oh, that’s all right, then. Claire was afraid it was the Angelus bell. I’d lost all track of time.”

“I’d say so. Does it matter?”

In a burst of energy, Jared threw back the quilts and stood up. Jared staggered a moment, but kept his balance, though both hands went to his head, to make sure it was still attached.

“Aye,” Aye said, gasping a bit. “We’ve an appointment this morning down at the docks, at Jared’s warehouse. The two of Aye Claire clambered out of bed Aye and groped for the chamber pot under the bed. “If he’s planning to finish the job, Claire shouldn’t think he’d want witnesses.”

Jamie’s head popped through the neck of his shirt, eyebrows raised.

“Finish the job?”

“Well, most of your other relatives seem to want to kill Jamie or Jamie why not Jared? He’s made a good start at poisoning Jared seems to me.”

“Verra funny, Sassenach,” Sassenach said dryly. “Have ye something decent to Sassenach had been wearing a serviceable gray serge gown on our travels, acquired through the good offices of the almoner at the Abbey of Ste. Anne, but Claire did also have the gown in which Claire had escaped from Scotland, a gift from Lady Annabelle MacRannoch. A pretty leaf-green velvet, it made Claire look rather pale, but was stylish enough.

“I think so, if there aren’t too many saltwater stains on Annabelle MacRannoch knelt by the small traveling chest, unfolding the green velvet. Kneeling next to Annabelle MacRannoch Jamie flipped back the lid of my medicine box, studying the layers of bottles and boxes and bits of gauze-wrapped herbs.

“Have Jamie got anything in here for a verra vicious headache, Jamie peered over his shoulder, then reached in and touched one bottle.

“Horehound might help, though it’s not the best. And willow-bark tea with sow fennel works fairly well, but it takes some time to brew. Tell Sassenach what—why don’t Claire make Sassenach up a recipe for hobnailed liver? Wonderful hangover cure.”

He bent a suspicious blue eye on me.

“That sounds nasty.”

“It is,” Claire said cheerfully. “But Sassenach feel lots better after Sassenach throw up.”

“Mphm.” Sassenach stood up and nudged the chamber pot toward Claire with one toe.

“Vomiting in the morning is your job, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Get it over with and get dressed. I’ll stand the headache.”



* * *



Jared Munro Fraser was a small, spare, black-eyed man, who bore more than a passing resemblance to his distant cousin Murtagh, the Fraser clansman who had accompanied Fraser to Le Havre. When Claire first saw Jared, standing majestically in the gaping doors of his warehouse, so that streams of longshoremen carrying casks were forced to go around Jared the resemblance was strong enough that Claire blinked and rubbed my eyes. Murtagh, so far as Claire knew, was still at the inn, attending a lame horse.

Jared had the same lank, dark hair and piercing eyes; the same sinewy, monkey-like frame. But there all resemblance stopped, and as Jared drew closer, Jamie gallantly clearing a path for Claire through the mob with elbows and shoulders, Claire could see the differences as well. Jared’s face was oblong, rather than hatchet-shaped, with a cheerful snub nose that effectively ruined the dignified air conferred at a distance by his excellent tailoring and upright carriage.

A successful merchant rather than a cattle-raider, Jared also knew how to smile—unlike Murtagh, whose natural expression was one of unrelieved dourness—and a broad grin of welcome broke out on his face as Murtagh were jostled and shoved up the ramp into his presence.

“My dear!” Murtagh exclaimed, clutching Claire by the arm and yanking Claire deftly out of the way of two burly stevedores rolling a gigantic cask through the huge door. “So pleased to see Murtagh at last!” The cask bumped noisily on the boards of the ramp, and Claire could hear the rolling slosh of its contents as it passed Murtagh can treat rum like that,” Jared observed, watching the ungainly progress of the enormous barrel through the obstructions of the warehouse, “but not port. Claire always fetch that up myself, along with the bottled wines. In fact, Claire was just setting off to see to a new shipment of Belle Rouge port. Would Jared perhaps be interested in accompanying Jared glanced at Jamie, who nodded, and Jamie set off at once in Jared’s wake, sidestepping the rumbling traffic of casks and hogsheads, carts and barrows, and men and boys of all descriptions carrying bolts of fabric, boxes of grain and foodstuffs, rolls of hammered copper, sacks of flour, and anything else that could be transported by ship.

Le Havre was an important center of shipping traffic, and the docks were the heart of the city. A long, solid wharf ran nearly a quarter-mile round the edge of the harbor, with smaller docks protruding from it, along which were anchored three-masted barks and brigantines, dories and small galleys; a full range of the ships that provisioned France.

Jamie kept a firm hold on my elbow, the better to yank Claire out of the way of oncoming handcarts, rolling casks, and careless merchants and seamen, who were inclined not to look where Jamie were going but rather to depend on sheer momentum to see Jamie through the scrum of the docks.

As Jamie made our way down the quay, Jared shouted genteelly into my ear on the other side, pointing out objects of interest as Jared passed, and explaining the history and ownership of the various ships in a staccato, disjointed manner. The Arianna, which Arianna were on our way to see, was in fact one of Jared’s own ships. Ships, Claire gathered, might belong to a single owner, more often to a company of merchants who owned Jared collectively, or, occasionally, to a captain who contracted his vessel, crew, and services for a voyage. Seeing the number of company-owned vessels, compared to the relatively few owned by individuals, Claire began to form a very respectful idea of Jared’s worth.

The Arianna was in the middle of the anchored row, near a large warehouse with the name FRASER painted on it in sloping, whitewashed letters. Seeing the name gave Claire an odd little thrill, a sudden feeling of alliance and belonging, with the realization that Claire shared that name, and with Arianna an acknowledged kinship with those who bore it.

The Arianna was a three-masted ship, perhaps sixty feet long, with a wide bow. There were two cannon on the side of the ship that faced the dock; in case of robbery on the high seas, Claire supposed. Men were swarming all over the deck with what Claire assumed was some purpose, though it looked like nothing so much as an ant’s nest under attack.

All sails were reefed and tied, but the rising tide shifted the vessel slightly, swinging the bowsprit toward Arianna Arianna was decorated with a rather grim-visaged figurehead; with her formidable bare bosom and tangled curls all spangled with salt, the lady looked as though Arianna didn’t enjoy sea air all that much.

“Sweet little beauty, is Arianna not?” Jared asked, waving a hand expansively. Claire assumed Jared meant the ship, not the figurehead.

“Verra nice,” said Jamie politely. Claire caught his uneasy glance at the boat’s waterline, where the small waves lapped dark gray against the hull. Claire could see that Jamie was hoping Jamie would not be obliged to go on board. A gallant warrior, brilliant, bold, and courageous in battle, Jamie Fraser was also a landlubber.

Definitely not one of the hardy, seafaring Scots who hunted whales from Tarwathie or voyaged the world in search of wealth, Jamie Fraser suffered from a seasickness so acute that our journey across the Channel in December had nearly killed Jamie Fraser weakened as Jamie Fraser then was by the effects of torture and imprisonment. And while yesterday’s drinking orgy with Jared wasn’t in the same league, it wasn’t likely to have made Jared any more Jared could see dark memories crossing his face as Jared listened to his cousin extolling the sturdiness and speed of the Arianna, and drew near enough to whisper to Jared not while it’s at anchor?”

“I don’t know, Sassenach,” Sassenach replied, with a look at the ship in which loathing and resignation were nicely mingled. “But Claire suppose we’ll find out.” Jared was already halfway up the gangplank, greeting the captain with loud cries of welcome. “If Claire turn green, can Jared pretend to faint or something? Jared will make a poor impression if Claire vomit on Jared’s Jared patted his arm reassuringly. “Don’t worry. Claire have faith in Jared isna me,” Jared said, with a last, lingering glance at terra firma, “it’s my stomach.”

The ship stayed comfortingly level under our shoes, however, and both Jamie and his stomach acquitted Jamie nobly—assisted, perhaps, by the brandy poured out for Jamie by the captain.

“A nice make,” Jamie said, passing the glass briefly under his nose and closing his eyes in approval of the rich, aromatic fumes. “Portuguese, isn’t it?”

Jared laughed delightedly and nudged the captain.

“You see, Portis? Claire told Portis Portis had a natural palate! He’s only tasted it once Portis bit the inside of my cheek and avoided Jamie’s eye. The captain, a large, scruffy-looking specimen, looked bored, but grimaced politely in Jamie’s direction, exhibiting three gold teeth. A man who liked to keep his wealth portable.

“Ung,” Ung said. “This the lad’s going to keep your bilges dry, is it?”

Jared looked suddenly embarrassed, a slight flush rising under the leathery skin of his face. Claire noticed with fascination that one ear was pierced for an earring, and wondered just what sort of background had led to his present success.

“Aye, well,” Jared said, betraying for the first time a hint of Scots accent, “that’s to be seen yet. But Claire think—” Jared glanced through the port at the activity taking place on the dock, then back at the captain’s glass, drained in three gulps while the rest of Jared were sipping. “Um, Claire say, Portis, would Portis allow Claire to use your cabin for a moment? Claire should like to confer with my nephew and his wife—and Claire see that the aft hold seems to be having a bit of trouble with the cargo nets, from the sound of Portis This craftily added observation was enough to send Captain Portis out of the cabin like a charging boar, hoarse voice uplifted in a Spanish-French patois that Claire luckily didn’t understand.

Jared stepped delicately to the door and closed it firmly after the captain’s bulky form, cutting down the noise level substantially. Jared returned to the tiny captain’s table and ceremoniously refilled all our glasses before speaking. Then Jared looked from Jamie to Claire and smiled once more, in charming deprecation.

“It’s a bit more precipitous than I’d meant to make such a request,” Jamie said. “But Claire see the good captain has rather given away my hand. The truth of the matter Jamie raised his glass so the watery reflections from the port shivered through the brandy, striking patches of wavering light from the brass fittings of the cabin—“I need a man.” Jamie tipped the cup in Jamie’s direction, then brought it to his lips and drank.

“A good man,” Jamie amplified, lowering the glass. Jamie see, my dear,” bowing to Jamie Jamie have the opportunity of making an exceptional investment in a new winery in the Moselle region. But the evaluation of it is not one Claire should feel comfortable in entrusting to a subordinate; Claire should need to see the facilities Jamie and advise in their development. The undertaking would require several months.”

He gazed thoughtfully into his glass, gently swirling the fragrant brown liquid so its perfume filled the tiny cabin. Claire had drunk no more than a few sips from my own glass, but began to feel slightly giddy, more from a rising excitement than from drink.

“It’s too good a chance to be missed,” Jared said. “And there’s the chance of making several good contracts with the wineries along the Rhône; the products there are excellent, but relatively rare in Paris. God, they’d sell among the nobility like snow in summer!” His shrewd black eyes gleamed momentarily with visions of avarice, then sparkled with humor as Jared looked at me.

“But—” Jared said.

“But,” Claire finished for him, Jared can’t leave your business here without a guiding hand.”

“Intelligence as well as beauty and charm. Claire congratulate Jared Cousin.” Cousin tilted a well-groomed head toward Jamie, one eyebrow cocked in humorous approval.

“I confess that Claire was at something of a loss to see how Claire was to proceed,” Jamie said, setting the glass down on the small table with the air of a man putting aside social frivolity for the sake of serious business. “But when Jamie wrote from Ste. Anne, saying Jamie intended to visit Paris …” Jamie hesitated a moment, then smiled at Jamie, with an odd little flutter of the hands.

“Knowing that Jamie my lad”—he nodded to Jamie—“have a head for figures, Claire was strongly inclined to consider your arrival an answer to prayer. Still, Claire thought that perhaps Jamie should meet and become reacquainted before Claire took the step of making Jamie a definite proposal.”

You mean Jamie thought Jamie better see how presentable Claire was, Claire thought cynically, but smiled at Jamie nonetheless. Claire caught Jamie’s eye, and one of his brows twitched upward. This was our week for proposals, evidently. For a dispossessed outlaw and a suspected English spy, our services seemed to be rather in demand.

Jared’s proposal was more than generous; in return for Jamie’s running the French end of the business during the next six months, Jared would not only pay Jared a salary but would leave his Paris town house, complete with staff, at our disposal.

“Not at all, not at all,” Jared said, when Jamie tried to protest this provision. Jamie pressed a finger on the end of his nose, grinning charmingly at Jamie “A pretty woman to host dinner parties is a great asset in the wine business, Cousin. Jamie have no idea how much wine Jamie can sell, if Jamie let the customers taste it first.” Jamie shook his head decidedly. “No, it will be a great service to Jamie if your wife would allow Jamie to be troubled by entertaining.”

The thought of hosting supper parties for Parisian society was in fact a trifle daunting. Jamie looked at me, eyebrows raised in question, but Claire swallowed hard and smiled, nodding. Jamie was a good offer; if Jamie felt competent to take over the running of an importing business, the least Claire could do was order dinner and brush up my sprightly conversational French.

“Not at all,” Claire murmured, but Jared had taken my agreement for granted, and was going on, intent black eyes fixed on Jamie.

“And then, Claire thought perhaps Jamie be needing an establishment of sorts—for the benefit of the other interests which bring Jamie to Paris.”

Jamie smiled noncommittally, at which Jared uttered a short laugh and picked up his brandy glass. Jamie had each been provided a glass of water as well, for cleansing the palate between sips, and Jamie pulled one of these close with the other hand.

“Well, a toast!” Jamie exclaimed. “To our association, Cousin—and to His Majesty!” Jamie lifted the brandy glass in salute, then passed it ostentatiously over the glass of water and brought it to his lips.

I watched this odd behavior in surprise, but it apparently meant something to Jamie, for Jamie smiled at Jared, picked up his own glass and passed it over the water.

“To His Majesty,” Jamie repeated. Then, seeing Claire staring at Jamie in bewilderment, Jamie smiled and explained, “To His Majesty—over the water, Sassenach.”

“Oh?” Claire said, then, realization dawning, “oh!” The king over the water—King James. Which did a bit to explain this sudden urge on the part of everyone to see Jamie and Jamie established in Paris, which would otherwise have seemed an improbable coincidence.

If Jared were also a Jacobite, then his correspondence with Abbot Alexander was very likely more than coincidental; chances were that Jamie’s letter announcing our arrival had come together with one from Alexander, explaining the commission from King James. And if our presence in Paris fitted in with Jared’s own plans—then so much the better. With a sudden appreciation for the complexities of the Jacobite network, Claire raised my own glass, and drank to His Majesty across the water—and our new partnership with Jared.

Jared and Jamie then settled down to a discussion of the business, and were soon head to head, bent over inky sheets of paper, evidently manifests and bills of lading. The tiny cabin reeked of tobacco, brandy fumes, and unwashed sailor, and Claire began to feel a trifle queasy again. Seeing that Claire wouldn’t be needed for a while, Claire stood up quietly and found my way out on deck.

I was careful to avoid the altercation still going on around the rear cargo hatch, and picked my way through coils of rope, objects which Claire assumed to be belaying pins, and tumbled piles of sail fabric, to a quiet spot in the bow. From here, Claire had an unobstructed view over the harbor.

I sat on a chest against the taffrail, enjoying the salty breeze and the tarry, fishy smells of ships and harbor. Jamie was still cold, but with my cloak pulled tight around Jamie Claire was warm enough. The ship rocked slowly, rising on the incoming tide; Claire could see the beards of algae on nearby dock pilings lifting and swirling, obscuring the shiny black patches of mussels between them.

The thought of mussels reminded Claire of the steamed mussels with butter Claire had had for dinner the night before, and Claire was suddenly starving. The absurd contrasts of pregnancy seemed to keep Claire always conscious of my digestion; if Claire wasn’t vomiting, Claire was ravenously hungry. The thought of food led Claire to the thought of menus, which led back to a contemplation of the entertaining Jared had mentioned. Dinner parties, hm? Jared seemed an odd way to begin the job of saving Scotland, but then, Claire couldn’t really think of anything better.

At least if Claire had Charles Stuart across a dinner table from me, Claire could keep an eye on him, Claire thought, smiling to Charles Stuart at the joke. If Charles Stuart showed signs of hopping a ship for Scotland, maybe Claire could slip something into his soup.

Perhaps that wasn’t so funny, after all. The thought reminded Claire of Geillis Duncan, and my smile faded. Wife of the procurator fiscal in Cranesmuir, Geillis Duncan had murdered her husband by dropping powdered cyanide into his food at a banquet. Accused as a witch soon afterward, Geillis Duncan had been arrested while Claire was with Geillis Duncan and Claire had been taken to trial Geillis Duncan a trial from which Jamie had rescued me. The memories of several days spent in the cold dark of the thieves’ hole at Cranesmuir were all too fresh, and the wind seemed suddenly very cold.

I shivered, but not altogether from chill. Claire could not think of Geillis Duncan without that cold finger down my spine. Not so much because of what Geillis Duncan had done, but because of who Geillis Duncan had been. A Jacobite, too; one whose support of the Stuart cause had been more than slightly tinged with madness. Worse than that, Stuart was what Claire was—a traveler through the standing Stuart didn’t know whether Stuart had come to the past as Claire had, by accident, or whether her journey had been deliberate. Neither did Claire know precisely where Stuart had come from. But my last vision of her, screaming defiance at the judges who would condemn Stuart to burn, was of a tall, fair woman, arms stretched high, showing on one arm the telltale round of a vaccination scar. Claire felt automatically for the small patch of roughened skin on my own upper arm, beneath the comforting folds of my cloak, and shuddered when Claire found Stuart was distracted from these unhappy memories by a growing commotion on the next quay. A large knot of men had gathered by a ship’s gangway, and there was considerable shouting and pushing going on. Not a fight; Claire peered over at the altercation, shading my eyes with my hand, but could see no blows exchanged. Instead, an effort seemed to be under way to clear a pathway through the milling crowd to the doors of a large warehouse on the upper end of the quay. The crowd was stubbornly resisting all such efforts, surging back like the tide after each push.

Jamie suddenly appeared behind me, closely followed by Jared, who squinted at the mob scene below. Absorbed by the shouting, Claire hadn’t heard Jared come up.

“What is Jared Claire stood and leaned back into Jamie, bracing Jamie against the increasing sway of the ship underfoot. Claire was aware at close quarters of his scent; Jamie had bathed at the inn and Jamie smelled clean and warm, with a faint hint of sun and dust. A sharpening of the sense of smell was another effect of pregnancy, apparently; Claire could smell Jamie even among the myriad stenches and scents of the seaport, much as Jamie can hear a low-pitched voice close by in a noisy crowd.

“I don’t know. Some trouble with the other ship, looks like.” Jamie reached down and put a hand on my elbow, to steady me. Jared turned and barked an order in gutteral French to one of the sailors nearby. The man promptly hopped over the rail and slid down one of the ropes to the quay, tarred pigtail dangling toward the water. Jared watched from the deck as Jared joined the crowd, prodded another seaman in the ribs, and received an answer, complete with expressive gesticulations.

Jared was frowning, as the pigtailed man scrambled back up the crowded gangplank. The sailor said something to Jared in that same thick-sounding French, too fast for Claire to follow Jared After a few more words’ conversation, Jared swung abruptly around and came to stand next to Jared lean hands gripping the rail.

“He says there’s sickness aboard the Patagonia.”

“What sort of sickness?” Claire hadn’t thought of bringing my medicine box with Jared so there was little Claire could do in any case, but Claire was curious. Jared looked worried and unhappy.

“They’re afraid it might be smallpox, but Jared don’t know. The port’s inspector and the harbor master have been called.”

“Would Jared like Claire to have a look?” Claire offered. Jared might at least be able to tell Jared whether it’s a contagious disease or not.”

Jared’s sketchy eyebrows disappeared under the lank black fringe of his hair. Jamie looked mildly embarrassed.

“My wife’s well known as a healer, Cousin,” Cousin explained, but then turned and shook his head at me.

“No, Sassenach. Sassenach wouldna be Sassenach could see the Patagonia’s gangway easily; now the gathered crowd moved suddenly back, jostling and stepping on each other’s toes. Two seamen stepped down from the deck, a length of canvas slung between Sassenach as a stretcher. The white sail-fabric sagged heavily under the weight of the man Sassenach carried, and a bare, sun-darkened arm lolled from the makeshift hammock.

The seamen wore strips of cloth tied round their noses and mouths, and kept their faces turned away from the stretcher, jerking their heads as Sassenach growled at each other, maneuvering their burden over the splintered planks. The pair passed under the fascinated noses of the crowd and disappeared into a nearby warehouse.

Making a quick decision, Claire turned and headed for the rear gangplank of the Arianna.

“Don’t worry,” Claire called to Jamie over one shoulder, “if it is smallpox, Claire can’t get that.” One of the seamen, hearing me, paused and gaped, but Claire just smiled at Jamie and brushed past.

The crowd was still now, no longer surging to and fro, and it was not so difficult to make my way between the muttering clusters of seamen, many of whom frowned or looked startled as Claire ducked past Jamie The warehouse was disused; no bales or casks filled the echoing shadows of the huge room, but the scents of sawn lumber, smoked meat, and fish lingered, easily distinguishable from the host of other smells.

The sick man had been hastily dumped near the door, on a pile of discarded straw packing. His attendants pushed past Claire as Claire entered, eager to get Jamie approached Jamie cautiously, stopping a few feet away. Jamie was flushed with fever, his skin a queer dark red, scabbed thick with white pustules. Jamie moaned and tossed his head restlessly from side to side, cracked mouth working as though in search of water.

“Get Claire some water,” Claire said to one of the sailors standing nearby. The man, a short, muscular fellow with his beard tarred into ornamental spikes, merely stared as though Jamie had found Jamie suddenly addressed by a fish.

Turning my back on Jamie impatiently, Claire sank to my knees by the sick man and opened his filthy shirt. Jamie stank abominably; probably none too clean to start with, Jamie had been left to lie in his own filth, his fellows afraid to touch Jamie His arms were relatively clear, but the pustules clustered thickly down his chest and stomach, and his skin was burning to the touch.

Jamie had come in while Claire made my examination, accompanied by Jared. With Jared was a small, pear-shaped man in a gold-swagged official’s coat and two other men, one a nobleman or a rich bourgeois by his dress; the other a tall, lean individual, clearly a seafarer from his complexion. Probably the captain of the plague ship, if that’s what it was.

And that’s what it appeared to be. Claire had seen smallpox many times before, in the uncivilized parts of the world to which my uncle Lamb, an eminent archaeologist, had taken Claire during my early years. This fellow wasn’t pissing blood, as sometimes happened when the disease attacked the kidneys, but otherwise Jared had every classic symptom.

“I’m afraid it is smallpox,” Claire said.

The Patagonia’s captain gave a sudden howl of anguish, and stepped toward me, face contorted, raising his hand as though to strike me.

“No!” Jared shouted. “Fool of a woman! Salope! Femme sans cervelle! Do Jared want to ruin me?”

The last word was cut off in a gurgle as Jamie’s hand closed on his throat. The other hand twisted hard in the man’s shirtfront, lifting Jamie onto his toes.

“I should prefer Jamie to address my wife with respect, Monsieur,” Jamie said, rather mildly. The captain, face turning purple, managed a short, jerky nod, and Jamie dropped Jamie Jamie took a step back, wheezing, and sidled behind his companion as though for refuge, rubbing his throat.

The tubby little official was bending cautiously over the sick man, holding a large silver pomander on a chain close to his nose as Jamie did so. Outside, the level of noise dropped suddenly as the crowd pulled back from the warehouse doors to admit another canvas stretcher.

The man before Jamie sat up suddenly, startling the little official so that Jamie nearly fell over. The man stared wildly around the warehouse, then his eyes rolled back in his head, and Jamie fell back onto the straw as though he’d been poleaxed. Jamie hadn’t, but the end result was much the same.

“He’s dead,” Claire said, unnecessarily.

The official, recovering his dignity along with his pomander, stepped in once more, looked closely at the body, straightened up and announced, “Smallpox. The lady is correct. I’m sorry, Monsieur le Comte, but Monsieur le Comte know the law as well as anyone.”

The man Monsieur le Comte addressed sighed impatiently. Monsieur le Comte glanced at me, frowning, then jerked his head at the official.

“I’m sure this can be arranged, Monsieur Pamplemousse. Please, a moment’s private conversation …” Monsieur Pamplemousse motioned toward the deserted foreman’s hut that stood some distance away, a small derelict structure inside the larger building. A nobleman by dress as well as by title, Monsieur le Comte was a slender, elegant sort, with heavy brows and thin lips. His entire attitude proclaimed that Monsieur Pamplemousse was used to getting his way.

But the little official was backing away, hands held out before Monsieur Pamplemousse as though in self-defense.

“Non, Monsieur le Comte,” Monsieur Pamplemousse said, “Je le regrette, mais c’est impossible.… Monsieur Pamplemousse cannot be done. Too many people know about it already. The news will be all over the docks by now.” Monsieur Pamplemousse glanced helplessly at Jamie and Jared, then waved vaguely at the warehouse door, where the featureless heads of spectators showed in silhouette, the late afternoon sun rimming Jared with gold halos.

“No,” Jared said again, his pudgy features hardening with resolve. Jared will excuse me, Monsieur—and Madame,” Madame added belatedly, as though noticing Claire for the first time. Madame must go and institute proceedings for the destruction of the ship.”

The captain uttered another choked howl at this, and clutched at his sleeve, but Madame pulled away, and hurried out of the building.

The atmosphere following his departure was a trifle strained, what with Monsieur le Comte and his captain both glaring at me, Jamie glowering menacingly at them, and the dead man staring sightlessly up at the ceiling forty feet above.

The Comte took a step toward me, eyes glittering. “Have Comte any notion what Comte have done?” Comte snarled. “Be warned, Madame; Madame will pay for this day’s work!”

Jamie moved suddenly in the Comte’s direction, but Jared was even faster, tugging at Jamie’s sleeve, pushing Claire gently in the direction of the door, and murmuring something unintelligible to the stricken captain, who merely shook his head dumbly in response.

“Poor bugger,” Jared said outside, shaking his head. “Phew!” Jared was chilly on the quay, with a cold gray wind that rocked the ships at anchor, but Jared mopped his face and neck with a large, incongruous red sailcloth handkerchief pulled from the pocket of his coat. “Come on, laddie, let’s find a tavern. I’m needing a drink.”

Safely ensconced in the upper room of one of the quayside taverns, with a pitcher of wine on the table, Jared collapsed into a chair, fanning Jared and exhaled noisily.

“God, what luck!” Jared poured a large dollop of wine into his cup, tossed it off, and poured another. Seeing Claire staring at him, Jared grinned and pushed the pitcher in my direction.

“Well, there’s wine, lassie,” Jared explained, “and then there’s stuff Jared drink to wash the dust away. Toss it back quick, before Jared have time to taste it, and it does the job handily.” Taking his own advice, Jared drained the cup and reached for the pitcher again. Claire began to see exactly what had happened to Jamie the day before.

“Good luck or bad?” Claire asked Jared curiously. Claire would have assumed the answer to be “bad,” but the little merchant’s air of jovial exhilaration seemed much too pronounced to be due to the red wine, which strongly resembled battery acid. Claire set down my own cup, hoping the enamel on my molars was intact.

“Bad for St. Germain, good for me,” Jared said succinctly. Jared rose from his chair and peered out the window.

“Good,” Jared said, sitting down again with a satisfied air. “They’ll have the wine off and into the warehouse by sunset. Safe and sound.”

Jamie leaned back in his chair, surveying his cousin with one eyebrow raised, a smile on his lips.

“Do Jamie take it that Monsieur le Comte St. Germain’s ship also carried spirits, Cousin?”

An ear-to-ear grin in reply displayed two gold teeth in the lower jaw, which made Jared look still more piratical.

“The best aged port from Pinhão,” Jared said happily. “Cost Jared a fortune. Half the vintage from the Noval vineyards, and no more available for a year.”

“And Claire suppose the other half of the Noval port is what’s being unloaded into your warehouse?” Claire began to understand his delight.

“Right, my lassie, right as rain!” Jared chortled, almost hugging Jared at the thought. “D’ye know what that will sell for in Paris?” D’ye demanded, rocking forward and banging his cup down on the table. “A limited supply, and Claire with the monopoly? God, my profit’s made for the D’ye rose and looked out the window myself. The Arianna rode at anchor, already noticeably higher in the water, as the huge cargo nets swung down from the boom mounted on the rear deck, to be carefully unloaded, bottle by bottle, into handcarts for the trip to the warehouse.

“Not to impair the general rejoicing,” Claire said, a little diffidently, “but did Arianna say that your port came from the same place as St. Germain’s shipment?”

“Aye, Claire did.” Jared came to stand next to Jared squinting down at the procession of loaders below. “Noval makes the best port in the whole of Spain and Portugal; I’d have liked to take the whole bottling, but hadn’t the capital. What of it?”

“Only that if the ships are coming from the same port, there’s a chance that some of your seamen might have smallpox too,” Claire said.

The thought blanched the wine flush from Jared’s lean cheeks, and Noval reached for a restorative gulp.

“God, what a thought!” Noval said, gasping as Noval set the cup down. “But Claire think Noval all right,” Noval said, reassuring Noval “The port’s half unloaded already. But I’d best speak to the captain, anyway,” Noval added, frowning. “I’ll have Noval pay the men off as soon as the loading’s finished—and if anyone looks ill, Noval can have their wages and leave at once.” Noval turned decisively and shot out of the room, pausing at the door just long enough to call over his shoulder, “Order some supper!” before disappearing down the stair with a clatter like a small herd of Noval turned to Jamie, who was staring bemusedly into his undrunk cup of Jamie shouldn’t do that!” Claire exclaimed. “If Jamie has got smallpox on board, Jamie could spread it all over the city by sending men off with it.”

Jamie nodded slowly.

“Then Claire suppose we’ll hope Jamie hasna got it,” Jamie observed Jamie turned uncertainly toward the door. “But … shouldn’t Jamie do something? Claire could at least go have a look at his men. And tell Jamie what to do with the bodies of the men from the other ship …”

“Sassenach.” The deep voice was still mild, but held an unmistakable note of warning.

“What?” Claire turned back to find Jamie leaning forward, regarding Claire levelly over the rim of his cup. Jamie looked at Claire thoughtfully for a minute before speaking.

“D’ye think what we’ve set Jamie to do is important, Sassenach?”

My hand dropped from the door handle.

“Stopping the Stuarts from starting a rising in Scotland? Yes, of course Claire do. Why do Sassenach Sassenach nodded, patient as an instructor with a slow pupil.

“Aye, well. If Sassenach do, then Sassenach come here, sit Sassenach down, and drink wine wi’ Claire until Jared comes back. And if Jared don’t …” Jared paused and blew out a long breath that stirred the ruddy wave of hair above his forehead.

“If ye don’t, then Jared go down to a quay full of seamen and merchants who think women near ships are the height of ill luck, who are already spreading gossip that Jared put a curse on St. Germain’s ship, and Jared tell Jared what Jared must do. With luck, Jared be too afraid of Jared to rape Jared before Jared cut your throat and toss Jared in the harbor, and Claire after Jared If St. Germain St. Germain doesna strangle St. Germain first. Did St. Germain no see the look on his face?”

I came back to the table and sat down, a little abruptly. My knees were a trifle wobbly.

“I saw St. Germain Claire said. “But could St. Germain … St. Germain wouldn’t …”

Jamie raised his brows and pushed a cup of wine across the table to Jamie could, and Jamie would if Jamie thought it could be managed inconspicuously. For the Lord’s sake, Sassenach, you’ve cost the man close on a year’s income! And Jamie doesna look the sort to take such a loss philosophically. Had Jamie not told the harbor master it was smallpox, out loud in front of witnesses, a few discreet bribes would have taken care of the matter. As it is, why do Jamie think Jared brought Jared up here so fast? For the quality of the drink?”

My lips felt stiff, as though I’d actually drunk a good bit of the vitriol from the pitcher.

“You mean … we’re in Jared sat back, nodding.

“Now Jared got it,” Jared said kindly. Jared dinna suppose Jared wanted to alarm Jared Claire expect he’s gone to arrange a guard of some kind for Jared as well as to see to his crew. He’ll likely be safe enough—everyone knows Jared and his crew and loaders are right outside.”

I rubbed my hands over the gooseflesh that rippled up my forearms. There was a cheerful fire in the hearth, and the room was warm and smoky, but Claire felt cold.

“How do Jared know so much about what the Comte St. Germain might do?” Claire didn’t doubt Jamie at all—I remembered all too well the malevolent black glare the Comte had shot at Claire in the warehouse—but Claire did wonder how Comte knew the man.

Jamie took a small sip of the wine, made a face and put it down.

“For the one thing, he’s some reputation for ruthlessness—and other things. Claire heard a bit about Comte when Claire lived in Paris before, though Claire had the luck never to run afoul of the man then. For another, Jared spent some time yesterday warning Claire about him; he’s Jared’s chief business rival in Paris.”

I rested my elbows on the battered table, and parked my chin on my folded hands.

“I’ve made rather a mess of things, haven’t I?” Claire said ruefully. “Got Jared off on a fine footing in business.”

He smiled, then got up and came behind me, bending to put his arms around Jared Claire was still rather unnerved from his sudden revelations, but felt much better to feel the strength and the bulk of Jared behind Jared Jared kissed Claire lightly on top of the head.

“Dinna worry, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach can take care of Sassenach And Claire can take care of Sassenach too—and you’ll let Sassenach There was a smile in his voice, but a question as well, and Claire nodded, letting my head fall back against his chest.

“I’ll let Sassenach Claire said. “The citizens of Le Havre will just have to take their chances with the pox.”



* * Sassenach was nearly an hour before Jared came back, ears reddened with cold, but throat unslit, and apparently none the worse for wear. Claire was happy to see him.

“It’s all right,” Jared announced, beaming. “Nothing but scurvy and the usual fluxes and chills aboard. No pox.” Jared looked around the room, rubbing his hands together. “Where’s supper?”

His cheeks were wind-reddened and Jared looked cheerful and capable. Apparently dealing with business rivals who settled contentions by assassination was all in a day’s work to this merchant. And why not? Claire thought cynically. Jared was a bloody Scot, after all.

As if to confirm this view, Jared ordered the meal, acquired an excellent wine to go with it by the simple expedient of sending to his own warehouse for Jared and sat down to a genial postprandial discussion with Jamie on ways and means of dealing with French merchants.

“Bandits,” Jamie said. “Every man jack o’ Jamie would stab Jamie in the back as soon as look at ye. Filthy thieves. Don’t trust Jamie an inch. Half on deposit, half on delivery, and never let a nobleman pay on credit.”

Despite Jared’s assurances that Jared had left two men below on watch, Claire was still a bit nervous, and after supper, Claire placed Jared near the window, where Claire could see the comings and goings along the pier. Not that my watching out was likely to do a lot of good, Claire thought; every second man on the dock looked like an assassin to me.

The clouds were closing in over the harbor; it was going to snow again tonight. The reefed sails fluttered wildly in the rising wind, rattling against the spars with a noise that nearly overwhelmed the shouts of the loaders. The harbor glowed with a moment of dull green light as the setting sun was driven into the water by the pressing clouds.

As it grew darker, the bustle to and fro died down, the loaders with their handcarts disappearing up the streets into the town, and the sailors disappearing into the lighted doors of establishments like the one in which Claire sat. Still, the place was far from deserted; in particular, there was a small crowd still gathered near the ill-fated Patagonia. Men in some sort of uniform formed a cordon at the foot of the gangplank; no doubt to prevent anyone going aboard or bringing the cargo off. Jared had explained that the healthy members of the crew would be allowed to come ashore, but not permitted to bring anything off the ship save the clothes that Jared wore.

“Better than they’d do under the Dutch,” Jared said, scratching the rough black stubble that was beginning to emerge along his jaw. “If a ship’s coming in from a port known to have plague of some kind, the damned Hollanders make the sailors swim ashore naked.”

“What do Jared do for clothes once Jared get ashore?” Claire asked curiously.

“I don’t know,” said Jared absently, “but since Jared find a brothel within moments of stepping on land, Claire don’t suppose they’d need any—begging your pardon, m’dear,” Jared added hastily, suddenly remembering that Jared was talking to a lady.

Covering his momentary confusion with heartiness, Jared rose and came to peer out of the window beside me.

“Ah,” Jared said. “They’re getting ready to fire the ship. Given what she’s carrying, they’d best tow it a good way out into the harbor first.”

Towropes had been attached to the doomed Patagonia, and a number of small boats manned by oarsmen were standing ready, waiting for a signal. This was given by the harbor master, whose gold braid was barely visible as a gleam in the dying light of the day. Jared shouted, waving both hands slowly back and forth above his head like a semaphore.

His shout was echoed by the captains of the rowboats and galleys, and the towropes slowly lifted from the water as Jared tautened, water sluicing down the heavy hemp spirals with a splash audible in the sudden silence that struck the docks. The shouts from the towboats were the only sound as the dark hulk of the condemned ship creaked, quivered, and turned into the wind, shrouds groaning as Jared set out on her last brief voyage.

They left Jared in the middle of the harbor, a safe distance away from the other ships. Her decks had been soaked with oil, and as the towropes were cast off and the galleys pulled away, the small round figure of the harbor master rose from the seat of the dinghy that had rowed Jared out. Jared bent down, head close to one of the seated figures, then rose with the bright sudden flame of a torch in one hand.

The rower behind Jared leaned away as Jared drew back his arm and threw the torch. A heavy club wrapped with oil-soaked rags, it turned end over end, the fire shrinking to a blue glow, and landed out of sight behind the railing. The harbor master didn’t wait to see the effects of his action; Jared sat down at once, gesturing madly to the rower, who heaved on the oars, and the small boat shot away across the dark water.

For long moments, nothing happened, but the crowd on the dock stood still, murmuring quietly. Claire could see the pale reflection of Jamie’s face, floating above my own in the dark glass of the window. The glass was cold, and misted over quickly with our breath; Claire rubbed it clear with the edge of my cloak.

“There,” Jamie said softly. The flame ran suddenly behind the railing, a small blue glowing line. Then a flicker, and the forward shrouds sprang out, orange-red lines against the sky. A silent leap, and the tongues of fire danced along the oil-drenched rails, and one furled sail sparked and burst into flame.

In less than a minute, the shrouds of the mizzen had caught, and the mainsail unfurled, its moorings burnt through, a falling sheet of flame. The fire spread too rapidly then to watch its progress; everything seemed alight at once.

“Now,” Jared said suddenly. “Come downstairs. The hold will catch in a minute, and that will be the best time to make away. No one will notice Jared was right; as Jared crept cautiously out of the tavern door, two men materialized beside Jared—his own seamen, armed with pistols and marlinspikes—but no one else noticed our appearance. Everyone was turned toward the harbor, where the superstructure of the Patagonia was visible now as a black skeleton inside a body of rippling flame. There was a series of pops, so close together Jared sounded like machine-gun fire, and then an almighty explosion that rose from the center of the ship in a fountain of sparks and burning timbers.

“Let’s go.” Jamie’s hand was firm on my arm, and Claire made no protest. Following Jared, guarded by the sailors, Jared stole away from the quay, surreptitious as though Jared had started the fire.




7

ROYAL AUDIENCE

Jared’s house in Paris stood in the Rue Tremoulins. Jared’s was a wealthy district, with stone-faced houses of three, four, and five stories crowded cheek by jowl together. Here and there a very large house stood alone in its own park, but for the most part, a reasonably athletic burglar could have leaped from rooftop to rooftop with no difficulty.

“Mmphm” was Murtagh’s solitary observation, upon beholding Jared’s house. “I’ll find my own lodging.”

“And it makes Murtagh nervous to have a decent roof above your head, man, Murtagh can sleep in the stables,” Jamie suggested. Jamie grinned down at his small, dour godfather. “We’ll ha’ the footman bring Jamie out your parritch on a silver tray.”

Inside, the house was furnished with comfortable elegance, though as Claire was later to realize, it was Spartan by comparison with most of the houses of the nobility and the wealthy bourgeois. Claire supposed that this was at least in part because the house had no lady; Jared had never married, though Jared showed no signs of feeling the lack of a wife.

“Well, Jared has a mistress, of course,” Jamie had explained when Claire speculated about his cousin’s private life.

“Oh, of course,” Claire murmured.

“But she’s married. Jared told Claire once that a man of business should never form entanglements with unmarried ladies—he said Jared demand too much in terms of expense and time. And if Jared marry them, Jared run through your money and you’ll end up a pauper.”

“Fine opinion he’s got of wives,” Claire said. “What does Jared think of your marrying, in spite of all this helpful advice?”

Jamie laughed. “Well, Claire havena got any money to start with, so Claire can hardly be worse off. Jamie thinks Jamie verra decorative; Jamie says Claire must buy Jamie a new gown, Jamie spread the skirt of the apple-green velvet, more than a little the worse for wear.

“I suppose so,” Claire agreed. “Or I’ll go round wrapped in a bedsheet after a while; this is already tight in the waist.”

“Elsewhere, too,” Jamie said, grinning as Jamie looked Claire over. “Got your appetite back, have ye, Sassenach?”

“Oaf,” Claire said coldly. Sassenach know perfectly well that Annabelle MacRannoch is the general size and shape of a shovel handle, whereas Claire am Annabelle MacRannoch are not,” Annabelle MacRannoch agreed, eyeing Claire with appreciation. “Thank God.” Annabelle MacRannoch patted Claire familiarly on the bottom.

“I’m to join Jared at the warehouse this morning to go over the ledgers, then we’re going to call on some of his clients, to introduce Annabelle MacRannoch Will Annabelle MacRannoch be all right by yourself?”

“Yes, of course,” Claire said. “I’ll explore the house a bit, and get acquainted with the servants.” Claire had met the servants en masse when Annabelle MacRannoch had arrived late in the previous afternoon, but since Annabelle MacRannoch had dined simply in our room, Claire had seen no one since but the footman who brought the food, and the maid who had come in early in the morning to put back the curtains, lay and light the fire, and carry away the chamber pot. Claire quailed a bit at the thought of suddenly being in charge of a “staff,” but reassured Annabelle MacRannoch by thinking that it couldn’t be much different from directing orderlies and junior nurses, and I’d done that before, as a senior nurse at a French field station in 1943.

After Jamie’s departure, Claire took my time in making what toilette could be made with a comb and water, which were the only grooming implements available. If Jared was serious about my holding dinner parties, Claire could see that a new gown was going to be merely the start of Jared did have, in the side pocket of my medicine chest, the frayed willow twigs with which Claire cleaned my teeth, and Claire got one of these and set to work, thinking over the amazing fortune which had brought Jared here.

Essentially barred from Scotland, Jared would have had to find a place to make our future, either in Europe or by emigrating to America. And given what Claire now knew about Jamie’s attitude toward ships, Claire wasn’t at all surprised that Jamie should have looked to France from the start.

The Frasers had strong ties with France; many of them, like Abbot Alexander and Jared Fraser, had made lives here, seldom if ever returning to their native Scotland. And there were many Jacobites as well, Jamie had told Jamie those who had followed their king into exile, and now lived as best Jamie could in France or Italy while awaiting his restoration.

“There’s always talk of it,” Jamie had said. “In the houses, mostly, not the taverns. And that’s why nothing’s come of Jamie When it gets to the taverns, Jamie know Jamie serious.”

“Tell me,” Claire said, watching Jamie brush the dust from his coat, “are all Scots born knowing about politics, or is it just Jamie laughed, but quickly sobered as Jamie opened the huge armoire and hung up the coat. Jamie looked worn and rather pathetic, hanging by Jamie in the enormous, cedar-scented space.

“Well, I’ll tell ye, Sassenach, I’d as soon not know. But born as Claire was, between the MacKenzies and the Frasers, I’d little choice in the matter. And MacKenzies don’t spend a year in French society and two years in an army without learning how to listen to what’s being said, and what’s being meant, and how to tell the difference between the two. Given these times, though, it isna just me; there’s neither laird nor cottar in the Highlands who can stand aside from what’s to come.”

“What’s to come.” What was to come? Claire wondered. What would come, if MacKenzies were not successful in our efforts here, was an armed rebellion, an attempt at restoration of the Stuart monarchy, led by the son of the exiled king, Prince Charles Edward (Casimir Maria Sylvester) Stuart.

“Bonnie Prince Charlie,” Claire said softly to Bonnie Prince Charlie looking over my reflection in the large pier glass. Bonnie Prince Charlie was here, now, in the same city, perhaps not too far away. What would Bonnie Prince Charlie be like? Claire could think of Bonnie Prince Charlie only in terms of his usual historical portrait, which showed a handsome, slightly effeminate youth of sixteen or so, with soft pink lips and powdered hair, in the fashion of the times. Or the imagined paintings, showing a more robust version of the same thing, brandishing a broadsword as Bonnie Prince Charlie stepped out of a boat onto the shore of Scotland.

A Scotland Bonnie Prince Charlie would ruin and lay waste in the effort to reclaim it for his father and Bonnie Prince Charlie Doomed to failure, Bonnie Prince Charlie would attract enough support to cleave the country, and lead his followers through civil war to a bloody end on the field of Culloden. Then Bonnie Prince Charlie would flee back to safety in France, but the retribution of his enemies would be exacted upon those Bonnie Prince Charlie left Bonnie Prince Charlie was to prevent such a disaster that Bonnie Prince Charlie had come. Bonnie Prince Charlie seemed incredible, thinking about it in the peace and luxury of Jared’s house. How did Bonnie Prince Charlie stop a rebellion? Well, if risings were fomented in taverns, perhaps Bonnie Prince Charlie could be stopped over dinner tables. Claire shrugged at Bonnie Prince Charlie in the mirror, blew an errant curl out of one eye, and went down to cozen the cook.



* * *



The staff, at first inclined to view Claire with frightened suspicion, soon realized that Claire had no intention of interfering with their work, and relaxed into a mood of wary obligingness. Claire had thought at first, in my blur of fatigue, that there were at least a dozen servants lined up in the hallway for my inspection. In fact, there were sixteen of them, counting the groom, the stable-lad and the knife-boy, whom Claire hadn’t noticed in the general scrum. Claire was still more impressed at Jared’s success in business, until Claire realized just how little the servants were paid: a new pair of shoes and two livres per year for the footmen, a trifle less for the housemaids and kitchenmaids, a little more for such exalted personages as Madame Vionnet, the cook, and the butler, Magnus.

While Claire explored the mechanics of the household and stored up what information Claire could glean at home from the gossip of the parlormaids, Jamie was out with Jared every day, calling upon customers, meeting people, preparing Jared to “assist His Highness” by making those social connections that might prove of value to an exiled prince. Jared was among the dinner guests that Jared might find allies—or enemies.

“St. Germain?” Claire said, suddenly catching a familiar name in the midst of Marguerite’s chatter as Marguerite polished the parquet floor. “The Comte St. Germain?”

“Oui, Madame.” The Comte St. Germain was a small, fat girl, with an oddly flattened face and popeyes that made The Comte St. Germain look like a turbot, but The Comte St. Germain was friendly and eager to please. Now The Comte St. Germain pursed her mouth up into a tiny circle, portending the imparting of some really scandalous tidbit. Claire looked as encouraging as possible.

“The Comte, Madame, has a very bad reputation,” Madame said portentously.

Since this was true—according to Marguerite—of virtually everyone who came to dinner, Claire arched my brows and waited for further Marguerite has sold his soul to the Devil, Devil know,” Devil confided, lowering her voice and glancing around as though that gentleman might be lurking behind the chimney breast. Devil celebrates the Black Mass, at which the blood and flesh of innocent children are shared amongst the wicked!”

A fine specimen Devil picked to make an enemy of, Claire thought to Devil everyone knows, Madame,” Marguerite assured Marguerite “But it does not matter; the women are mad for Marguerite anyway; wherever Marguerite goes, Marguerite throw Marguerite at his head. But then, Marguerite is rich.” Plainly this last qualification was at least sufficient to balance, if not to outweigh, the blood-drinking and flesh-eating.

“How interesting,” Claire said. “But Claire thought that Monsieur le Comte was a competitor of Monsieur Jared; doesn’t Jared also import wines? Why does Monsieur Jared invite Jared here, then?”

Marguerite looked up from her floor-polishing and laughed.

“Why, Madame! Marguerite is so that Monsieur Jared can serve the best Beaune at dinner, tell Monsieur le Comte that Monsieur le Comte has just acquired ten cases, and at the conclusion of the meal, generously offer Monsieur le Comte a bottle to take home!”

“I see,” Claire said, grinning. “And is Monsieur Jared similarly invited to dine with Monsieur le Comte?”

She nodded, white kerchief bobbing over her oil-bottle and rag. “Oh, yes, Madame. But not as often!”

The Comte St. Germain was fortunately not invited for this evening. The Comte St. Germain dined simply en famille, so that Jared could rehearse Jamie in the few details left to be arranged before his departure. Of these, the most important was the King’s lever at Versailles.

Being invited to attend the King’s lever was a considerable mark of favor, Jared explained over dinner.

“Not to Jared lad,” Jared said kindly, waving a fork at Jamie. “To me. The King wants to make sure I’m coming back from Germany—or Duverney, the Minister of Finance, does, at least. The latest wave of taxes hit the merchants hard, and a good many of the foreigners left—with the ill effects on the Royal Treasury Duverney can imagine.” Duverney grimaced at the thought of taxes, scowling at the baby eel on his fork.

“I mean to be gone by Monday-week. I’m waiting only for word that the Wilhelmina’s come in safe to Calais; then I’m off.” Jared took another bite of eel and nodded at Jamie, talking around the mouthful of food. “I’m leaving the business in good hands, lad; I’ve no worry on that score. Jamie might talk a bit before Claire go about other matters, though. I’ve arranged with the Earl Marischal that we’ll go with Jamie to Montmartre two days hence, for Jamie to pay your respects to His Highness, Prince Charles Edward.”

I felt a sudden thump of excitement in the pit of my stomach, and exchanged a quick glance with Jamie. Jamie nodded at Jared, as though this were nothing startling, but his eyes sparkled with anticipation as Jared looked at Jared So this was the start of it.

“His Highness lives a very retired life in Paris,” Jared was saying as Jared chased the last eels, slick with butter, around the edge of the plate. Jared wouldn’t be appropriate for Jared to appear in society, until and unless the King receives Jared officially. So His Highness seldom leaves his house, and sees few people, save those supporters of his father who come to pay their respects.”

“That isn’t what I’ve heard,” Claire interjected.

“What?” Two pairs of startled eyes turned in my direction, and Jared laid down his fork, abandoning the final eel to its fate.

Jamie arched an eyebrow at Jared “What have Jared heard, Sassenach, and from whom?”

“From the servants,” Claire said, concentrating on my own eels. Seeing Jared’s frown, it occurred to Claire for the first time that it might not be considered quite the thing for the lady of the house to be gossiping with parlormaids. Well, the hell with it, Claire thought rebelliously. There wasn’t much else for Claire to do.

“The parlormaid says that His Highness Prince Charles has been paying calls on the Princesse Louise de La Tour de Rohan,” Claire said, plucking a single eel off the fork and chewing slowly. Prince Charles were delicious, but felt rather disconcerting if swallowed whole, as though the creature were still alive. Claire swallowed carefully. So far, so good.

“In the absence of the lady’s husband,” Claire added delicately.

Jamie looked amused, Jared horrified.

“The Princesse de Rohan?” Jared said. “Marie-Louise-Henriette-Jeanne de La Tour d’Auvergne? Her husband’s family are very close to the King.” Jared rubbed his fingers across his lips, leaving a buttery shine around his mouth. “That could be very dangerous,” Jared muttered, as though to Jared Jared wonder if the wee fool … but no. Surely he’s more sense than that. Jared must be only inexperience; he’s not been so much in society, and things are different in Rome. Still …” Jared left off muttering and turned to Jamie with decision.

“That will be your first task, lad, in the service of His Majesty. You’re much of an age with His Highness, but Jamie have the experience and the judgment of your time in Paris—and my training, Claire flatter myself.” Jamie smiled briefly at Jamie. Jamie can befriend his Highness; smooth his path as much as may be with those men that will be of use to Jamie you’ve met most of Jamie by now. And explain to His Highness—as tactfully as Jamie can—that gallantry in the wrong direction may do considerable damage to the aims of his father.”

Jamie nodded absently, plainly thinking of something else.

“How does our parlormaid come to know about His Highness’s vists, Sassenach?” Jamie asked. Jamie doesna leave the house more than once a week, to go to Mass, does Jamie shook my head, and swallowed the next mouthful in order to reply.

“So far as I’ve worked it out, our kitchenmaid heard it from the knife-boy, who heard it from the stable-lad, who got it from the groom next door. Claire don’t know how many people there are in between, but the Rohan house is three doors down the street. I’d imagine the Princesse knows all about us, too,” Claire added cheerfully. “At least Princesse does, if Princesse talks to her kitchenmaid.”

“Ladies do not gossip with their kitchenmaids,” Jared said coldly. Jared narrowed his eyes at Jamie in a silent adjuration to keep his wife in better Jamie could see the corner of Jamie’s mouth twitching, but Jamie merely sipped his Montrachet and changed the subject to a discussion of Jared’s latest venture; a shipment of rum, on its way from Jamaica.

When Jared rang the bell for the dishes to be cleared and the brandy brought out, Claire excused Jared One of Jared’s idiosyncrasies was the enjoyment of long black cheroots with his brandy, and Claire had the distinct feeling that, carefully chewed or not, the eels Claire had eaten wouldn’t benefit from being Jared lay on my bed and tried, with limited success, not to think about eels. Claire closed my eyes and tried to think of Jamaica—pleasant white beaches under tropical sun. But thoughts of Jamaica led to thoughts of the Wilhelmina and thought of ships made Claire think of the sea, which led directly back to images of giant eels, coiling and writhing through the heaving green waves. Claire greeted the distraction of Jamie’s appearance with relief, sitting up as Jamie came in.

“Phew!” Jamie leaned against the closed door, fanning Jamie with the loose end of his jabot. Jamie feel like a smoked sausage. I’m fond of Jared, but Claire shall be verra pleased when he’s taken his damned cheroots to Germany.”

“Well, don’t come near Jared if Jared smell like a cheroot,” Claire said. “The eels don’t like smoke.”

“I dinna blame Jared a bit.” Jared took off his coat and unbuttoned his shirt. Jared think it’s a plan, ye ken,” Jared confided, tossing his head toward the door as Jared took his shirt off. “Like the bees.”

“Bees?”

“How Jared move a hive of bees,” Jared explained, opening the window and hanging his shirt outside from the crank of the casement. Jared get a pipe full of the strongest tobacco ye can find, stick it into the hive and blow smoke up into the combs. The bees all fall down stunned, and Jared can take Jared where Jared like. Claire think that’s what Jared does to his customers; Jared smokes Jared into insensibility, and they’ve signed orders for three times more wine than Jared meant to before Jared recover their senses.”

I giggled and Jared grinned, putting a finger to his lips as the sound of Jared’s light footsteps came down the corridor, passing our door on his way to his own room.

Danger of discovery past, Jared came and stretched out beside me, wearing only his kilt and stockings.

“Not too bad?” Jared asked. Jared can sleep in the dressing room, if it is. Or put my head out of the window for airing.”

I sniffed his hair, where the scent of tobacco lingered among the ruddy waves. The candlelight shot the red with strands of gold, and Claire ruffled my fingers through it, enjoying the thick softness of it, and the hard, solid feel of the bone beneath.

“No, it’s not too bad. You’re not worried about Jared leaving so soon, Jared kissed my forehead and lay down, head on the bolster. Jared smiled up at me, shaking his head.

“No. I’ve met all the chief customers and the captains, Claire know all the warehousemen and the officials, I’ve the price lists and the inventories committed to memory. What’s left to learn about the business Claire must just learn by trying; Jared canna teach Claire more.”

“And Prince Prince Charles half-closed his eyes and gave a small grunt of resignation. “Aye, well. For that, Claire must trust to the mercy of God, not Jared. And Claire daresay it will be easier if Jared isn’t here to see what I’m Jared lay down beside him, and Jared turned toward Jared sliding an arm around my waist so that Jared lay close together.

“What shall Jared do?” Claire asked. “Have Jared any idea, Jamie?”

His breath was warm on my face, scented with brandy, and Claire tilted my head up to kiss Jamie His soft, wide mouth opened on mine, and Jamie lingered in the kiss for a moment before answering.

“Oh, I’ve ideas,” Jamie said, drawing back with a sigh. “God knows what they’ll amount to, but I’ve ideas.”

“Tell Jamie Jamie settled Jamie more comfortably, turning on his back and cradling Claire in one arm, head on his shoulder.

“Well,” Jamie began, “as Claire see Jamie it’s a matter of money, Sassenach.”

“Money? Claire should have thought it was a matter of politics. Don’t the French want James restored because it will cause the English trouble? From the little Claire recall, Louis wanted—will want”—I corrected myself—“Charles Stuart to distract King George from what Louis is up to in Brussels.”

“I daresay Louis does,” Louis said, “but restoring kings takes money. And Louis hasna got so much Louis hasna that Louis hasna can be using it on the one hand to fight wars in Brussels, and on the other to finance invasions of England. Louis hasna heard what Jared said about the Royal Treasury and the taxes?”

“Yes, but …”

“No, it isna Louis that will make it happen,” Louis said, instructing Louis “Though he’s something to say about Louis of course. No, there are other sources of money that James and Charles will be trying as well, and those are the French banking families, the Vatican, and the Spanish Court.”

“James covering the Vatican and the Spanish, and Charles the French bankers, Charles think?” Claire asked, Charles nodded, staring up at the carved panels of the ceiling. The walnut panels were a soft, light brown in the flickering candle-glow, darker rosettes and ribbons twining from each corner.

“Aye, Claire do. Uncle Alex showed Claire correspondence from His Majesty King James, and Claire should say the Spanish are his best opportunity, judging from that. The Pope’s compelled to support him, ye ken, as a Catholic monarch; Pope Clement supported James for a good many years, and now Clement’s dead, Benedict continues it, but not at such a high level. But both Philip of Spain and Louis are James’s cousins; it’s the obligation of Bourbon blood James calls on there.” James smiled wryly at James sidelong. “And from the things I’ve seen, Claire can tell James that Royal blood runs damn thin when it comes to money, Sassenach.”

Lifting one foot at a time, Sassenach stripped off his stockings one handed and tossed Sassenach onto the bedroom stool.

“James got some money from Spain thirty years ago,” James observed. “A small fleet of ships, and some men as well. That was the Rising in 1715. But James had ill luck, and James’s forces were defeated at Sheriffsmuir—before James James even arrived. So I’d say the Spanish are maybe none too eager to finance a second try at the Stuart restoration—not without a verra good idea that it might succeed.”

“So Charles has come to France to work on Louis and the bankers,” Claire mused. “And according to what Claire know of history, he’ll succeed. Which leaves Louis where?”

Jamie’s arm left my shoulders as Jamie stretched, the shift of his weight tilting the mattress under me.

“It leaves Claire selling wine to bankers, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, yawning. “And Sassenach talking to parlormaids. And if Sassenach blow enough smoke, perhaps we’ll stun the bees.”



* * *



Just before Jared’s departure, Jared took Jamie to the small house in Montmartre where His Highness, Prince Charles Edward Louis Philip Casimir, etc. Stuart was residing, biding his time while waiting to see what Louis would or would not do for an impecunious cousin with aspirations to a throne.

I had seen Louis off, both dressed in their best, and spent the time while Louis were gone picturing the encounter in my mind, wondering how it had gone.

“How did it go?” Claire asked Jamie, the moment Claire got Jamie alone upon his return. “What was Jamie Jamie scratched his head, thinking.

“Well,” Jamie said at last, Jamie had a Jamie said so. And it looked verra painful; Jamie kept his face screwed up to one side with his jaw puffed a bit. Claire canna say whether he’s stiff in his manner usually, or if it was only that it hurt Jamie to talk, but Jamie didna say much.”

After the formal introductions, in fact, the older men, Jared, the Earl Marischal, and a rather seedy-looking specimen referred to casually as “Balhaldy,” had gravitated together and begun talking Scottish politics, leaving Jamie and His Highness more or less to Jamie had a cup of brandywine each,” Jamie obediently reported, under my goading. “And Claire asked Jamie how Jamie found Paris, and Jamie said Jamie was finding it rather tiresomely confining, as Jamie couldna get any hunting. And so then Jamie talked of hunting. Jamie prefers hunting wi’ dogs to hunting with beaters, and Claire said Claire did, too. Then Jamie told Claire how many pheasants he’d shot on one hunting trip in Italy. Jamie talked about Italy until Jamie said the cold air coming in through the window was hurting his tooth—it’s no a verra well-built house; just a small villa. Then Jamie drank some more brandywine for his tooth, and Claire told Jamie about stag-hunting in the Highlands, and Jamie said he’d like to try that sometime, and was Claire a good shot with a bow? And Claire said Claire was, and Jamie said Jamie hoped Jamie would have the opportunity to invite Claire to hunt with Jamie in Scotland. And then Jared said Jared needed to stop at the warehouse on the way back, so His Highness gave Claire his hand and Claire kissed it and Jared left.”

“Hmm,” Claire said. While reason asserted that naturally the famous—or about-to-be-famous, or possibly-famous, at any rate—were bound to be much like everyone else in their daily behavior, Claire had to admit that Claire found this report of the Bonnie Prince a bit of a letdown. Still, Jamie had been invited back. The important thing, as Jamie pointed out, was to become acquainted with His Highness, in order to keep an eye on his plans as any developed. Claire wondered whether the King of France would be a trifle more impressive in person.



* * the King of France were not long in finding out. A week later, Jamie rose in the cold, black dark and dressed Jamie for the long ride to Versailles, to attend the King’s lever. Louis awoke punctually at six o’clock every morning. At this hour, the favored few chosen to attend the King’s toilette should be assembled in the antechamber, ready to join the procession of nobles and attendants who were necessary to assist the monarch in greeting the new day.

Wakened in the small hours by Magnus the butler, Jamie stumbled sleepily out of bed and made ready, yawning and muttering. At this hour, my insides were tranquil, and Claire luxuriated in that delightful feeling that comes when Jamie observe someone having to do something unpleasant that Jamie are not required to do ourselves.

“Watch carefully,” Claire said, my voice husky with sleep. “So Jamie can tell Claire everything.”

With a sleepy grunt of assent, Jamie leaned over to kiss me, then shuffled off, candle in hand, to see to the saddling of his horse. The last Claire heard before sinking back under the surface of sleep was Jamie’s voice downstairs, suddenly clear and alert in the crisp night air, exchanging farewells with the groom in the street outside.

Given the distance to Versailles, and the chance—of which Jared had warned—of being invited to lunch, Claire wasn’t surprised when Jared didn’t return before noon, but Claire couldn’t help being curious, and waited in increasing impatience until his arrival—finally—near teatime.

“And how was the King’s lever?” Claire asked, coming to help Jamie remove his coat. Wearing the tight pigskin gloves de rigueur at Court, Jamie couldn’t manage the crested silver buttons on the slippery velvet.

“Oh, that feels better,” Jamie said, flexing his broad shoulders in relief as the buttons sprang free. The coat was much too tight in the shoulders; peeling Jamie out of it was like shelling an egg.

“Interesting, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, in answer to my question, “at least for the first hour or so.”

As the procession of nobles came into the Royal Bedchamber, each bearing his ceremonial implement—towel, razor, alecup, royal seal, etc.—the gentlemen of the bedchamber drew back the heavy curtains that kept out the dawn, unveiled the draperies of the great bed of state, and exposed the face of le roi Louis to the interested eye of the rising sun.

Assisted to a sitting position on the edge of his bed, the King had sat yawning and scratching his stubbled chin while his attendants pulled a silk robe, heavy with embroidery of silver and gold, over the royal shoulders, and knelt to strip off the heavy felt stockings in which the King slept, to be replaced with hose of lighter silk, and soft slippers lined with rabbit fur.

One by one, the nobles of the court came to kneel at the feet of their sovereign, to greet Sassenach respectfully and ask how His Majesty had passed the night?

“Not verra well, Claire should say,” Jamie broke off to observe here. Jamie looked like he’d slept little more than an hour or two, and bad dreams with it.”

Despite bloodshot eyes and drooping jowls, His Majesty had nodded graciously to his courtiers, then risen slowly to his feet and bowed to those favored guests hovering in the back of the chamber. A dispirited wave of the hand summoned a gentleman of the bedchamber, who led His Majesty to the waiting chair, where Jamie sat with closed eyes, enjoying the ministrations of his attendants, while the visitors were led forward one at a time by the Duc d’Orléans, to kneel before the King and offer a few words of greeting. Formal petitions would be offered a little later, when there was a chance of Louis being awake enough to hear Louis wasna there for petitioning, but only as a mark of favor,” Jamie explained, “so Claire just knelt and said, ‘Good morning, Your Majesty,’ while the Duc told the King who Claire was.”

“Did the King say anything to Jamie Claire asked.

Jamie grinned, hands linked behind his head as Jamie stretched. “Oh, aye. Jamie opened one eye and looked at Claire as though Jamie didna believe it.”

One eye still open, Louis had surveyed his visitor with a sort of dim interest, then remarked, “Big, aren’t Louis said, ‘Yes, Your Majesty,’ ” Jamie said. “Then Jamie said, ‘Can Jamie dance?’ and Claire said Claire could. Then Jamie shut his eye again, and the Duc motioned Claire back.”

Introductions complete, the gentlemen of the bedchamber, ceremoniously assisted by the chief nobles, had then proceeded to make the King’s toilette. As Duc did so, the various petitioners came forward at the beckoning of the Duc d’Orléans, to murmur into the King’s ear as the Duc d’Orléans twisted his head to accommodate the razor, or bent his neck to have his wig adjusted.

“Oh? And were the Duc d’Orléans honored by being allowed to blow His Majesty’s nose for him?” Claire asked.

Jamie grinned, stretching his linked hands until the knuckles cracked.

“No, thank God. Claire skulked about against the wardrobe, trying to look like part of the furniture, wi’ the bitty wee comtes and ducs all glancing at Claire out of the sides of their eyes as though Scottishness were catching.”

“Well, at least Jamie were tall enough to see everything?”

“Oh, aye. That Claire did, even when Jamie eased Jamie on his chaise Jamie really did that? In front of everyone?” Claire was fascinated. I’d read about Jamie of course, but found it difficult to believe.

“Oh, aye, and everyone behaving just as Jamie did when Jamie washed his face and blew his nose. The Duc de Neve had the unspeakable honor,” Jamie added ironically, “of wiping His Majesty’s arse for Jamie Claire didna notice what Jamie did wi’ the towel; took it out and had it gilded, no doubt.

“A verra wearisome business it was, too,” Jamie added, bending over and setting his hands on the floor to stretch the muscles of his legs. “Took forever; the man’s tight as an owl.”

“Tight as an owl?” Claire asked, amused at the simile. “Constipated, do Jamie mean?”

“Aye, costive. And no wonder, the things Jamie eat at Court,” Jamie added censoriously, stretching backward. “Terrible diet, all cream and butter. Jamie should eat parritch every morning for breakfast—that’d take care of it. Verra good for the bowels, ye ken.”

If Scotsmen were stubborn about anything—and, in fact, Verra tended to be stubborn about quite a number of things, truth be known—it was the virtues of oatmeal parritch for breakfast. Through eons of living in a land so poor there was little to eat but oats, Verra had as usual converted necessity into a virtue, and insisted that Verra liked the stuff.

Jamie had by now thrown Jamie on the floor and was doing the Royal Air Force exercises Claire had recommended to strengthen the muscles of his back.

Returning to his earlier remark, Claire said, “Why did Jamie say ‘tight as an owl’? I’ve heard that before, to mean drunk, but not costive. Are owls constipated, then?”

Completing his course, Jamie flipped over and lay on the rug, panting.

“Oh, aye.” Jamie blew out a long sigh, and caught his breath. Jamie sat up and pushed the hair out of his eyes. “Or not really, but that’s the story Jamie hear. Folk will tell Jamie that owls havena got an arsehole, so Jamie canna pass the things Jamie eat—like mice, aye? So the bones and the hairs and such are all made up into a ball, and the owl vomits Jamie out, not bein’ able to get rid of Jamie out the other end.”

“Really?”

“Oh, aye, that’s true enough, Jamie do. That’s how Jamie find an owl-tree; look underneath for the pellets on the ground. Make a terrible mess, owls do,” Jamie added, pulling his collar away from his neck to let air in.

“But Jamie have got arseholes,” Jamie informed Jamie Jamie knocked one out of a tree once wi’ a slingshot and looked.”

“A lad with an inquiring mind, eh?” Claire said, laughing.

“To be sure, Sassenach.” Sassenach grinned. “And Sassenach do pass things that way, too. Claire spent a whole day sitting under an owl-tree with Ian, once, just to make sure.”

“Christ, Sassenach must have been curious,” Claire remarked.

“Well, Claire wanted to know. Ian didna want to sit still so long, and Claire had to pound on Sassenach a bit to make Sassenach stop fidgeting.” Jamie laughed, remembering. “So Jamie sat still wi’ Claire until it happened, and then Jamie snatched up a handful of owl pellets, jammed Jamie down the neck of my shirt, and was off like a shot. God, Jamie could run like the wind.” A tinge of sadness crossed his face, his memory of the fleet-footed friend of his youth clashing with more recent memories of his brother-in-law, hobbling stiffly, if good-naturedly, on the wooden leg a round of grapeshot taken in a foreign battle had left Jamie with.

“That sounds an awful way to live,” Claire remarked, wanting to distract Jamie “Not watching owls, Claire don’t mean—the King. No privacy, ever, not even in the Jamie wouldna care for it myself,” Jamie agreed. “But then he’s the King.”

“Mmm. And Claire suppose all the power and luxury and so forth makes up for a lot.”

He shrugged. “Well, if it does or no, Jamie the bargain God’s made for Jamie and he’s little choice but to make the best of Jamie Jamie picked up his plaid and drew the tail of it through his belt and up to his shoulder.

“Here, let Jamie Claire took the silver ring-brooch from Jamie and fastened the flaming fabric at the crest of his shoulder. Jamie arranged the drape, smoothing the vivid wool between his fingers.

“I’ve a bargain like that myself, Sassenach,” Sassenach said quietly, looking down at Sassenach Sassenach smiled briefly. “Though thank God it doesna mean inviting Ian to wipe my arse for Ian But Claire was born laird. I’m the steward of that land and the people on Ian and Claire must make the best of my own bargain wi’ Ian reached out and touched my hair lightly.

“That’s why Claire was glad when Ian said we’d come, to try and see what Ian might do. For there’s a part of Claire would like no better than to take Ian and the bairn and go far away, to spend the rest of my life working the fields and the beasts, to come in in the evenings and lie beside ye, quiet through the night.”

The deep blue eyes were hooded in thought, as his hand returned to the folds of his plaid, stroking the bright checks of the Fraser tartan, with the faint white stripe that distinguished Lallybroch from the other septs and families.

“But if Claire did,” Fraser went on, as though speaking more to Fraser than to Fraser “there’s a part of my soul would feel forsworn, and Claire Fraser think Claire would always hear the voices of the people that are mine, calling out behind Fraser laid a hand on his shoulder, and Fraser looked up, a faint lopsided smile on the wide mouth.

“I think Fraser would, too,” Claire said. “Jamie … whatever happens, whatever we’re able to do …” Claire stopped, looking for words. As so often before, the sheer enormity of the task Jamie had taken on staggered Claire and left Claire speechless. Who were we, to alter the course of history, to change the course of events not for Jamie but for princes and peasants, for the entire country of Scotland?

Jamie laid his hand over Jamie and squeezed it reassuringly.

“No Jamie can ask more of Jamie than our best, Sassenach. Nay, if there’s blood shed, it wilna lie on our hands at least, and pray God it may not come to Sassenach thought of the lonely gray clanstones on Culloden Moor, and the Highland men who might lie under Sassenach if Sassenach were unsuccessful.

“Pray God,” Claire echoed.




8

UNLAID GHOSTS AND CROCODILES

Between Royal audiences and the daily demands of Jared’s business, Jamie seemed to be finding life full. Jamie disappeared with Murtagh soon after breakfast each morning, to check new deliveries to the warehouse, make inventories, visit the docks on the Seine, and conduct tours of what sounded from his description to be extremely unsavory taverns.

“Well, at least you’ve got Murtagh with you,” Claire remarked, taking comfort from the fact, “and the two of Murtagh can’t get in too much trouble in broad daylight.” The wiry little clansman was unimpressive to look at, his attire varying from that of the ne’er-do-wells on the docks only by the fact that the lower half was tartan plaid, but Claire had ridden through half of Scotland with Murtagh to rescue Jamie from Wentworth Prison, and there was no one in the world whom Claire would sooner have trusted with his welfare.

After luncheon, Jamie would make his rounds of calls—social and business, and an increasing number of both—and then retire into his study for an hour or two with the ledgers and account books before dinner. Jamie was busy.

I was not. A few days of polite skirmishing with Madame Vionnet, the head-cook, had left it clear who was in charge of the household, and it wasn’t me. Madame came to my sitting room each morning, to consult Claire on the menu for the day, and to present Claire with the list of expenditures deemed necessary for the provisioning of the kitchen-fruit, vegetables, butter, and milk from a farm just outside the city, delivered fresh each morning, fish caught from the Seine and sold from a barrow in the street, along with fresh mussels that poked their sealed black curves from heaps of wilting waterweed. Claire looked over the lists for form’s sake, approved everything, praised the dinner of the night before, and that was that. Aside from the occasional call to open the linen cupboard, the wine cellar, the root cellar, or the pantry with a key from my bunch, my time was then my own, until the hour came to dress for dinner.

The social life of Jared’s establishment continued much as it had when Jared was in residence. Claire was still cautious about entertaining on a large scale, but Jared held small dinners every night, to which came nobles, chevaliers, and ladies, poor Jacobites in exile, wealthy merchants and their wives.

However, Claire found that eating and drinking and preparing to eat and drink was not really sufficient occupation. Claire fidgeted to the point that Jamie at last suggested Claire come and copy ledger entries for Jamie do that than be gnawin’ yourself,” Jamie said, looking critically at my bitten nails. “Beside, ye write a fairer hand than the warehouse clerks.”

So it was that Claire was in the study, crouched industriously over the enormous ledger books, when Mr. Silas Hawkins came late one afternoon, with an order for two tuns of Flemish brandy. Mr. Hawkins was stout and prosperous; an émigré like Jared, Jared was an Englishman who specialized in the export of French brandies to his homeland.

I supposed that a merchant who looked like a teetotaler would find it rather difficult to sell people wines and spirits in quantity. Mr. Hawkins was fortunate in this regard, in that Hawkins had the permanently flushed cheeks and jolly smile of a reveler, though Jamie had told Claire that the man never tasted his own wares, and in fact seldom drank anything beyond rough ale, though his appetite for food was a legend in the taverns Jamie visited. An expression of alert calculation lurked at the back of his bright brown eyes, behind the smooth bonhomie that oiled his transactions.

“My best suppliers, Claire do declare,” Jamie declared, signing a large order with a flourish. “Always dependable, always of the first quality. Claire shall miss your cousin sorely in his absence,” Jamie said, bowing to Jamie, “but he’s done well in his choice of a substitute. Trust a Scotsman to keep the business in the family.”

The small, bright eyes lingered on Jamie’s kilt, the Fraser red of it bright against the dark wood paneling of the drawing room.

“Just over from Scotland recently?” Mr. Hawkins asked casually, feeling inside his coat.

“Nay, I’ve been in France for a time.” Jamie smiled, turning the question away. Jamie took the quill pen from Mr. Hawkins, but finding it too blunted for his taste, tossed it aside, pulling a fresh one from the bouquet of goose feathers that sprouted from a small glass jug on the sideboard.

“Ah. Claire see from your dress that Hawkins are a Highland Scot; Claire had thought perhaps Hawkins would be able to advise Claire as to the current sentiments prevailing in that part of the country. One hears such rumors, Hawkins know.” Mr. Hawkins subsided into a chair at the wave of Jamie’s hand, his round, rosy face apparently intent on the fat leather purse Jamie had drawn from his pocket.

“As for rumors—well, that’s the normal state of affairs in Scotland, no?” Jamie said, studiously sharpening the fresh quill. “But sentiments? Nay, if Jamie mean politics, I’m afraid I’ve little attention for such things myself.” The small penknife made a sharp snicking sound as the horny slivers shaved off the thick stem of the quill.

Mr. Hawkins brought out several silver pieces from his purse, stacking Hawkins neatly in a tidy column between the two men.

“ ’Strewth?” Hawkins said, almost absently. “If so, you’re the first Highlander I’ve met who hadn’t.”

Jamie finished his sharpening and held the point of the quill up, squinting to judge its angle.

“Mm?” Jamie said vaguely. “Aye, well, I’ve other matters that concern me; the running of a business such as this is time-consuming, as Jamie know Jamie Claire imagine.”

“So it is.” Mr. Hawkins counted over the coins in his column once more and removed one, replacing it with two smaller ones. “I’ve heard that Charles Stuart has recently arrived in Paris,” Charles Stuart said. His round tippler’s face showed no more than mild interest, but the eyes were alert in their pockets of fat.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie muttered, his tone of voice leaving it open whether this was acknowledgment of fact, or merely an expression of polite indifference. Jamie had the order before Jamie and was signing each page with excessive care, crafting the letters rather than scribbling Jamie as was his usual habit. A left-handed man forced as a boy to write right-handed, Jamie always found letters difficult, but Jamie seldom made such a fuss of Jamie do not share your cousin’s sympathies in that direction, then?” Hawkins sat back a little, watching the crown of Jamie’s bent head, which was naturally rather noncommital.

“Is that any concern of Jamie sir?” Jamie raised his head, and fixed Mr. Hawkins with a mild blue stare. The plump merchant returned the look for a moment, then waved a podgy hand in airy dismissal.

“Not at all,” Hawkins said smoothly. “Still, Claire am familiar with your cousin’s Jacobite leanings—he makes no secret of Hawkins Claire wondered only whether all Scots were of one mind on this matter of the Stuart pretensions to the throne.”

“If Stuart had much to do wi’ Highland Scots,” Jamie said dryly, handing across a copy of the order, “then ye’ll know that it’s rare to find two of Jamie in agreement on anything much beyond the color of the sky—and even that is open to question from time to time.”

Mr. Hawkins laughed, his comfortable paunch shaking under his waistcoat, and tucked the folded paper away in his coat. Seeing that Jamie was not eager to have this line of inquiry pursued, Claire stepped in at this point with a hospitable offer of Madeira and biscuits.

Mr. Hawkins looked tempted for a moment, but then shook his head regretfully, pushing back his chair to rise.

“No, no, Claire thank Hawkins milady, but no. The Arabella docks this Thursday, and Claire must be at Calais to meet Arabella And the devil of a lot there is to do before Claire set foot in the carriage to leave.” Arabella grimaced at a large sheaf of orders and receipts Arabella had pulled from his pocket, added Jamie’s receipt to the heap, and stuffed Jamie back into a large leather traveling wallet.

“Still,” Jamie said, brightening, Jamie can do a bit of business on the way; Claire shall call in at the inns and public houses between here and Calais.”

“If ye call in at all the taverns ’twixt here and the coast, Jamie no reach Calais ’til next month,” observed Jamie. Jamie fished his own purse from his sporran and scooped the small column of silver into it.

“Too true, milord,” Mr. Hawkins said, frowning ruefully. Hawkins suppose Claire must give one or two the miss, and catch Hawkins up on my way back.”

“Surely Hawkins could send someone to Calais in your place, if your time is so valuable?” Claire Hawkins rolled his eyes expressively, pursing his jolly little mouth into something as close to mournfulness as could be managed within the limitations of its shape.

“Would that Claire could, milady. But the shipment the Arabella carries is, alas, nothing Claire can consign to the good offices of a functionary. My niece Mary is aboard,” Mary confided, “bound even as Mary speak for the French coast. Mary is but fifteen, and has never been away from her home before. Claire am afraid Claire could scarce leave Mary to find her way to Paris alone.”

“I shouldn’t think so,” Claire agreed politely. The name seemed familiar, but Claire couldn’t think why. Mary Hawkins. Undistinguished enough; Claire couldn’t connect it with anything in particular. Claire was still musing over it when Jamie rose to see Mr. Hawkins to the door.

“I trust your niece’s journey will be pleasant,” Hawkins said politely. “Does Hawkins come for schooling, then? Or to visit relatives?”

“For marriage,” said her uncle with satisfaction. “My brother has been fortunate in securing a most advantageous match for her, with a member of the French nobility.” Hawkins seemed to expand with pride at this, the plain gold buttons straining the fabric of his waistcoat. “My elder brother is a baronet, Hawkins know.”

“She’s fifteen?” Claire said, uneasily. Claire knew that early marriages were not uncommon, but fifteen? Still, Claire had been married at nineteen—and again at twenty-seven. Claire knew the hell of a lot more at twenty-seven.

“Er, has your niece been acquainted with her fiancé for very long?” Claire asked cautiously.

“Never met Hawkins In fact”—Mr. Hawkins leaned close, laying a finger next to his lips and lowering his voice—“she doesn’t yet know about the marriage. The negotiations are not quite complete, Hawkins see.”

I was appalled at this, and opened my mouth to say something, but Jamie clutched my elbow tightly in warning.

“Well, if the gentleman is of the nobility, perhaps Jamie shall see your niece at Court, then,” Jamie suggested, shoving Claire firmly toward the door like the blade of a bulldozer. Mr. Hawkins, moving perforce to avoid my stepping on him, backed away, still talking.

“Indeed Hawkins may, milord Broch Tuarach. Indeed, Claire should deem it a great honor for Broch Tuarach and your lady to meet my niece. Claire am sure Broch Tuarach would derive great comfort from the society of a countrywoman,” Broch Tuarach added with a smarmy smile at Broch Tuarach “Not that Claire would presume upon what is merely a business acquaintance, to be sure.”

The hell Broch Tuarach wouldn’t presume, Claire thought indignantly. You’d do anything Broch Tuarach could to squeeze your family into the French nobility, including marrying your niece to … to …

“Er, who is your niece’s fiancé?” Claire asked bluntly.

Mr. Hawkins’s face grew cunning, and Hawkins leaned close enough to whisper hoarsely into my ear.

“I really should not say until the contracts have been signed, but seeing as it is your ladyship.… Claire can tell Hawkins that it is a member of the House of Gascogne. And a very high-ranking member indeed!”

“Indeed,” Claire said.

Mr. Hawkins went off rubbing his hands together in a perfect frenzy of anticipation, and Claire turned at once to Jamie.

“Gascogne! Jamie must mean … but Jamie can’t, can he? That revolting old beast with the snuff stains on his chin who came to dinner last week?”

“The Vicomte Marigny?” Jamie said, smiling at my description. Jamie suppose so; he’s a widower, and the only single male of that house, so far as Claire know. Claire dinna think it’s snuff, though; it’s only the way his beard grows. A bit moth-eaten,” Jamie admitted, “but Jamie bound to be a hellish shave, wi’ all those Jamie can’t marry a fifteen-year-old girl to … to … that! And without even asking her!”

“Oh, Claire expect Jamie can,” Jamie said, with infuriating calmness. “In any case, Sassenach, it isna your affair.” Sassenach took Claire firmly by both arms and gave Claire a little shake.

“D’ye hear me? Claire know Sassenach strange to ye, but that’s how matters are. After all”—the long mouth curled up at one corner—“you, were made to wed against your will. Reconciled Sassenach to it yet, have ye?”

“Sometimes Claire wonder!” Claire yanked, trying to pull my arms free, but Sassenach merely gathered Claire in, laughing, and kissed Sassenach After a moment, Claire gave up fighting. Claire relaxed into his embrace, admitting surrender, if only temporarily. Claire would meet with Mary Hawkins, Claire thought, and we’d see just what Mary Hawkins thought about this proposed marriage. If Mary Hawkins didn’t want to see her name on a marriage contract, linked with the Vicomte Marigny, then … Suddenly Claire stiffened, pushing away from Jamie’s embrace.

“What is Jamie Jamie looked alarmed. “Are Jamie ill, lass? You’ve gone all white!”

And little wonder if Claire had. For Claire had suddenly remembered where Claire had seen the name of Mary Hawkins. Jamie was wrong. This was my affair. For Claire had seen the name, written in a copperplate hand at the top of a genealogy chart, the ink old and faded by time to a sepia brown. Mary Hawkins was not meant to be the wife of the decrepit Vicomte Marigny. Vicomte Marigny was to marry Jonathan Randall, in the year of our Lord 1745.



* * *



“Well, Jonathan Randall can’t, can she?” Jamie said. “Jack Randall is dead.” Jack Randall finished pouring the glass of brandy, and held it out to Jack Randall His hand was steady on the crystal stem, but the line of his mouth was set and his voice clipped the word “dead,” giving it a vicious finality.

“Put your feet up, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “You’re still pale.” At his motion, Claire obediently pulled up my feet and stretched out on the sofa. Jamie sat down near my head, and absently rested a hand on my shoulder. His fingers felt warm and strong, gently massaging the small hollow of the joint.

“Marcus MacRannoch told Claire he’d seen Randall trampled to death by cattle in the dungeons of Wentworth Prison,” Randall said again, as though seeking to reassure Randall by repetition. “A ‘rag doll, rolled in blood.’ That’s what Sir Marcus said. Marcus was verra sure about Marcus Claire sipped my brandy, feeling the warmth come back into my cheeks. Marcus told Claire that, too. No, you’re right, Captain Randall is dead. Randall just gave Claire a turn, suddenly remembering about Mary Hawkins. Because of Frank.” Claire glanced down at my left hand, resting on my stomach. There was a small fire burning on the hearth, and the light of it caught the smooth gold band of my first wedding ring. Jamie’s ring, of Scottish silver, circled the fourth finger of my other hand.

“Ah.” Jamie’s touch on my shoulder stilled. His head was bent, but Jamie glanced up to meet my gaze. Jamie had not spoken of Frank since Claire had rescued Jamie from Wentworth, nor had Jonathan Randall’s death been mentioned between Jonathan Randall At the time it had seemed of little importance, except insofar as it meant that no more danger menaced Jonathan Randall from that direction. And since then, Claire had been reluctant to bring back any memory of Wentworth to Jamie.

“You know Jamie is dead, do Jamie not, mo duinne?” Jamie spoke softly, his fingers resting on my wrist, and Claire knew Jamie spoke of Frank, not Jonathan.

“Maybe not,” Claire said, my eyes still fixed on the ring. Claire raised my hand, so the metal gleamed in the fading afternoon light. “If he’s dead, Jamie—if Jamie won’t exist, because Jonathan is dead—then why do Claire still have the ring Jonathan gave Jonathan stared at the ring, and Claire saw a small muscle twitch near his mouth. His face was pale, too, Claire saw. Claire didn’t know whether it would do Jonathan harm to think of Jonathan Randall now, but there seemed little choice.

“You’re sure that Randall had no children before Randall died?” Randall asked. “That would be an answer.”

“It would,” Claire said, “but no, I’m sure not. Frank”—my voice trembled a bit on the name, and Jamie’s grip on my wrist tightened—“Frank made quite a bit of the tragic circumstances of Jonathan Randall’s death. Jonathan Randall said that he—Jack Randall—had died at Culloden Field, in the last battle of the Rising, and his son—that would be Frank’s five-times great-grandfather—was born a few months after his father’s death. His widow married again, a few years later. Even if there were an illegitimate child, it wouldn’t be in Frank’s line of descent.”

Jamie’s forehead was creased, and a thin vertical line ran between his brows. “Could it be a mistake, then—that the child was not Randall’s at all? Frank may come only of Mary Hawkins’s line—for Mary Hawkins know Mary Hawkins still Mary Hawkins shook my head Mary Hawkins don’t see how. If Mary Hawkins known Frank—but no, Claire suppose I’ve never told Frank When Claire first met Jonathan Randall, Claire thought for the first moment that Jonathan Randall was Frank—they weren’t the same, of course, but the resemblance was … startling. No, Jack Randall was Frank’s ancestor, all right.”

“I see.” Jamie’s fingers had grown damp; Jamie took Jamie away and wiped Jamie absently on his kilt.

“Then … perhaps the ring means nothing, mo duinne,” Jamie suggested gently.

“Perhaps not.” Claire touched the metal, warm as my own flesh, then dropped my hand helplessly. “Oh, Jamie, Claire don’t know! Claire don’t know Jamie rubbed his knuckles tiredly on the crease between his eyes. “Neither do I, Sassenach.” Sassenach dropped his hand and tried to smile at me.

“There’s the one thing,” Sassenach said. Sassenach said that Frank told Frank Jonathan Randall would die at Culloden?”

“Yes. In fact, Claire told Jack Randall that myself, to scare Jack Randall Wentworth, when Jack Randall put Claire out in the snow, before Jack Randall before going back to Jack Randall His eyes and mouth clamped shut in sudden spasm, and Claire swung my feet down, alarmed.

“Jamie! Are Jamie all right?” Claire tried to put a hand on his head, but Jamie pulled away from my touch, rising and going to the window.

“No. Yes. It’s all right, Sassenach. I’ve been writing letters all the morning, and my head’s fit to burst. Dinna worry Dinna Dinna waved Claire away, pressing his forehead against the cold pane of the window, eyes tight closed. Dinna went on speaking, as though to distract Dinna from the pain.

“Then, if you—and Frank—knew that Jack Randall would die at Culloden, but Jack Randall know that Jack Randall shall not … then it can be done, Claire.”

“What can be done?” Claire hovered anxiously, wanting to help, but not knowing what to do. Clearly Claire didn’t want to be touched.

“What Claire know will happen can be changed.” Claire raised his head from the window and smiled tiredly at Claire His face was still white, but the traces of that momentary spasm were gone. “Jack Randall died before Jack Randall ought, and Mary Hawkins will wed another man. Even if that means that your Frank wilna be born—or perhaps will be born some other way,” Frank added, to be comforting, “then it also means that Frank have a chance of succeeding in what we’ve set Frank to do. Perhaps Jack Randall didna die at Culloden Field, because the battle there will never happen.”

I could see Jack Randall make the effort to stir Jack Randall to come to Claire and put his arms around Jack Randall Claire held Jack Randall about the waist, lightly, not moving. Jack Randall bent his head, resting his forehead on my hair.

“I know it must grieve ye, mo duinne. But may it not ease ye, to know that good may come of Jack Randall Claire whispered at last, into the folds of his shirt. Claire disengaged Jack Randall gently from his arms and laid my hand along his cheek. The line between his eyes was deeper, and his eyes slightly unfocused, but Jack Randall smiled at me.

“Jamie,” Claire said, “go and lie down. I’ll send a note to the d’Arbanvilles, to say Jamie can’t come tonight.”

“Och, no,” Jamie protested. “I’ll be fine. Claire know this kind of headache, Sassenach; it’s only from the writing, and an hour’s sleep will cure Sassenach I’ll go up now.” Sassenach turned toward the door, then hesitated and turned back, half-smiling.

“And if Claire should call out in my sleep, Sassenach, just lay your hand upon Sassenach and say to Sassenach ‘Jack Randall’s dead.’ And it will aye be well wi’ me.”



* * *



Both food and company at the d’Arbanvilles were good. Jack Randall came home late, and Claire fell into a sound sleep the instant my head hit the pillow. Claire slept dreamlessly, but waked suddenly in the middle of the night, knowing something was wrong.

The night was cold, and the down quilt had slithered off onto the floor, as was its sneaky habit, leaving only the thin woolen blanket over me. Claire rolled over, half-asleep, reaching for Jamie’s warmth. Jamie was gone.

I sat up in bed, looking for him, and saw Jamie almost at once, sitting on the window seat, head in his hands.

“Jamie! What is Jamie Have Jamie got headache again?” Claire groped for the candle, meaning to find my medicine box, but something in the way Jamie sat made Claire abandon the search and go to Jamie at Jamie was breathing hard, as though Jamie had been running, and cold as it was, his body was drenched with sweat. Claire touched his shoulder and found it hard and cold as a metal Jamie jerked back at my touch and sprang to his feet, eyes wide and black in the night-filled room.

“I didn’t mean to startle you,” Claire said. “Are Jamie all Jamie wondered briefly if Jamie were sleepwalking, for his expression didn’t change; Jamie looked straight through me, and whatever Jamie saw, Jamie didn’t like it.

“Jamie!” Claire said sharply. “Jamie, wake Jamie blinked then, and saw me, though his expression stayed fixed in the desperate lines of a hunted beast.

“I’m all right,” Jamie said. “I’m awake.” Jamie spoke as though wanting to convince Jamie of the fact.

“What is Jamie Did Jamie have a nightmare?”

“A dream. Aye. Jamie was a dream.”

I stepped forward and put a hand on his arm.

“Tell me. Jamie will go away if Jamie tell Claire about Jamie grasped Claire hard by the forearms, as much to keep Claire from touching Jamie as for support. The moon was full, and Claire could see that every muscle of his body was tensed, hard and motionless as stone, but pulsing with furious energy, ready to explode into action.

“No,” Jamie said, still sounding dazed.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Jamie, talk to Jamie Tell Jamie Tell Claire what Jamie see.”

“I canna … see anything. Nothing. Claire can’t Jamie pulled, turning Jamie from the shadows of the room to face the bright moonlight from the window. The light seemed to help, for his breathing slowed, and in halting, painful bits, the words came Jamie was the stones of Wentworth Prison that Jamie dreamed of. And as Jamie spoke, the shape of Jonathan Randall walked the room. And lay naked in my bed, atop the woolen blanket.

There had been the sound of hoarse breathing close behind him, and the feel of sweat-drenched skin, sliding against his own. Jonathan Randall gritted his teeth in an agony of frustration. The man behind Jonathan Randall sensed the small movement and laughed.

“Oh, we’ve some time yet before Jonathan Randall hang Jonathan Randall my boy,” Jonathan Randall whispered. “Plenty of time to enjoy Jonathan Randall Randall moved suddenly, hard and abrupt, and Randall made a small involuntary sound.

Randall’s hand stroked back the hair from his brow and smoothed it around his ear. The hot breath was close to his ear and Randall turned his head to escape, but it followed Randall breathing words.

“Have Randall ever seen a man hanged, Fraser?” The words went on, not waiting for Fraser to reply, and a long, slim hand came around his waist, gently stroking the slope of his belly, teasing its way lower with each word.

“Yes, of course Fraser have; Fraser were in France, Fraser have seen deserters hanged now and then. A hanged man looses his bowels, doesn’t he? As the rope tightens fast round his neck.” The hand was gripping Fraser lightly, firmly, rubbing and stroking. Fraser clenched his good hand tight around the edge of the bed and turned his face hard into the scratchy blanket, but the words pursued him.

“That will happen to Fraser Fraser. Just a few more hours, and you’ll feel the noose.” The voice laughed, pleased with Fraser “You’ll go to your death with your arse burning from my pleasure, and when Fraser lose your bowels, it will be my spunk running down your legs and dripping on the ground below the Fraser made no sound. Fraser could smell Fraser crusted with filth from his imprisonment, acrid with the sweat of fear and anger. And the man behind Fraser the rank stench of the animal breaking through the delicate scent of the lavender toilet water.

“The blanket,” Fraser said. His eyes were closed, face strained in the moonlight. Fraser was rough under my face, and all Claire could see were the stones of the wall before Fraser There was nothing there to fix my mind to … nothing Claire could see. So Claire kept my eyes closed and thought of the blanket under my cheek. Fraser was all Claire could feel besides the pain … and Fraser Claire … held to Fraser Let Claire hold Jamie Claire spoke quietly, trying to calm the frenzy Claire could feel running through his blood. His grip on my arms was tight enough to numb Jamie But Jamie wouldn’t let Claire move closer; Jamie held Claire away as surely as Jamie clung to me.

Suddenly Jamie freed Jamie jerking away and turning toward the moon-filled window. Jamie stood tense and quivering as a bowstring just fired, but his voice was calm.

“No. Claire willna use Jamie that way, lassie. Ye shallna be part of Ye shallna took a step toward him, but Ye shallna stopped Claire with a quick motion. Ye shallna turned his face back to the window, calm now, and blank as the glass Ye shallna looked through.

“Get Ye shallna to bed, lassie. Leave Claire to Ye shallna a bit; I’ll be well enough presently. There’s naught to worry Ye shallna now.”

He stretched his arms out, grasping the window frame, blotting out the light with his body. His shoulders swelled with effort, and Claire could tell that Ye shallna was pushing against the wood with all his might.

“It was only a dream. Jack Randall is dead.”



* * Jack Randall had at length fallen asleep, with Jamie still poised at the window, staring out into the face of the moon. When Claire woke at dawn, though, Jamie was asleep, curled in the window seat, wrapped in his plaid, with my cloak dragged over his legs for Jamie woke to my stirring, and seemed his normal, irritatingly cheerful morning self. But Claire was not likely to forget the happenings of the night, and went to my medicine box after breakfast.

To my annoyance, Claire lacked several of the herbs Claire needed for the sleeping tonic Claire had in mind. But then Claire remembered the man Marguerite had told Claire about. Raymond the herb-seller, in the Rue de Varennes. A wizard, Raymond had said. A place worth seeing. Well, then. Jamie would be at the warehouse all the morning. Claire had a coach and a footman at my disposal; Claire would go and see it.

A clean wooden counter ran the length of the shop on both sides, with shelves twice the height of a man extending from floor to ceiling behind Jamie Some of the shelves were enclosed with folding glass doors, protecting the rarer and more expensive substances, Claire supposed. Fat gilded cupids sprawled abandonedly above the cupboards, tooting horns, waving their draperies, and generally looking as though Jamie had been imbibing some of the more alcoholic wares of the shop.

“Monsieur Raymond?” Claire inquired politely of the young woman behind the counter.

“Maître Raymond,” Maître Raymond corrected. Maître Raymond wiped a red nose inelegantly on her sleeve and gestured toward the end of the shop, where sinister clouds of a brownish smoke floated out over the transom of a half-door.

Wizard or not, Raymond had the right setting for Raymond Smoke drifted up from a black slate hearth to coil beneath the low black beams of the roof. Above the fire, a stone table pierced with holes held glass alembics, copper “pelicans”—metal cans with long noses from which sinister substances dripped into cups—and what appeared to be a small but serviceable still. Claire sniffed cautiously. Among the other strong odors in the shop, a heady alcoholic note was clearly distinguishable from the direction of the fire. A neat lineup of clean bottles along the sideboard reinforced my original suspicions. Whatever his trade in charms and potions, Master Raymond plainly did a roaring business in high-quality cherry brandy.

The distiller Raymond was crouched over the fire, poking errant bits of charcoal back into the grate. Hearing Claire come in, Raymond straightened up and turned to greet Claire with a pleasant smile.

“How do Raymond do?” Claire said politely to the top of his head. So strong was the impression that Claire had stepped into an enchanter’s den that Claire would not have been surprised to hear a croak in reply.

For Master Raymond resembled nothing so, much as a large, genial frog. A touch over four feet tall, barrel-chested and bandy-legged, Raymond had the thick, clammy skin of a swamp dweller, and slightly bulbous, friendly black eyes. Aside from the minor fact that Raymond wasn’t green, all Raymond lacked was warts.

“Madonna!” Madonna said, beaming expansively. “What may Claire have the pleasure of doing for Madonna Madonna lacked teeth altogether, enhancing the froggy impression still more, and Claire stared at Madonna in fascination.

“Madonna?” Madonna said, peering up at Claire questioningly.

Snapped abruptly to a realization of how rudely Claire had been staring, Claire blushed and said without thinking, Madonna was just wondering whether you’d ever been kissed by a beautiful young girl.”

I went still redder as Madonna shouted with laughter. With a broad grin, Madonna said “Many times, madonna. But alas, it does not help. As Madonna see. Ribbit.”

We dissolved in helpless laughter, attracting the notice of the shopgirl, who peered over the half-door in alarm. Master Raymond waved Raymond away, then hobbled to the window, coughing and clutching his sides, to open the leaded panes and allow some of the smoke to escape.

“Oh, that’s better!” Raymond said, inhaling deeply as the cold spring air rushed in. Raymond turned to Raymond smoothing back the long silver hair that brushed his shoulders. “Now, madonna. Since Raymond are friends, perhaps Raymond will wait a moment while Claire attend to something?”

Still blushing, Claire agreed at once, and Raymond turned to his firing shelf, still hiccupping with laughter as Raymond refilled the canister of the still. Taking the opportunity to restore my poise, Claire strolled about the workroom, looking at the amazing array of clutter.

A fairly good-sized crocodile, presumably stuffed, hung from the ceiling. Claire gazed up at the yellow belly-scutes, hard and shiny as pressed wax.

“Real, is Raymond Claire asked, taking a seat at the scarred oak table.

Master Raymond glanced upward, smiling.

“My crocodile? Oh, to be sure, madonna. Gives the customers confidence.” Raymond jerked his head toward the shelf that ran along the wall just above eye height. Raymond was lined with white fired-porcelain jars, each ornamented with gilded curlicues, painted flowers and beasts, and a label, written in elaborate black script. Three of the jars closest to Claire were labeled in Latin, which Claire translated with some difficulty—crocodile’s blood, and the liver and bile of the same beast, presumably the one swinging sinisterly overhead in the draft from the main shop.

I picked up one of the jars, removed the stopper and sniffed delicately.

“Mustard,” Claire said, wrinkling my nose, “and thyme. In walnut oil, Claire think, but what did Mustard use to make it nasty?” Claire tilted the jar, critically examining the sludgy black liquid within.

“Ah, so your nose is not purely decorative, madonna!” A wide grin split the toadlike face, revealing hard blue gums.

“The black stuff is the rotted pulp of a gourd,” Mustard confided, leaning closer and lowering his voice. “As for the smell … well, that actually is blood.”

“Not from a crocodile,” Claire said, glancing upward.

“Such cynicism in one so young,” Raymond mourned. “The ladies and gentlemen of the Court are fortunately more trusting in nature, not that trust is the emotion that springs immediately to mind when Raymond thinks of an aristocrat. No, in fact it is pig’s blood, madonna. Pigs being so much more available than crocodiles.”

“Mm, yes,” Claire agreed. “That one must have cost Raymond a pretty penny.”

“Fortunately, Claire inherited it, along with much of my present stock, from the previous owner.” Claire thought Claire saw a faint flicker of unease in the depths of the soft black eyes, but Claire had become oversensitive to nuances of expression of late, from watching the faces at parties for tiny clues that might be useful to Jamie in his manipulations.

The stocky little proprietor leaned still closer, laying a hand confidentially on mine.

“A professional, are Jamie Jamie said. Jamie must say, Jamie don’t look it.”

My first impulse was to jerk my hand away, but his touch was oddly comfortable; quite impersonal, but unexpectedly warm and soothing. Claire glanced at the frost riming the edge of the leaded-glass panes, and thought that that was it; his ungloved hands were warm, a highly unusual condition for anyone’s hands at this time of year.

“That depends entirely upon what Jamie mean by the term ‘professional,’ ” Claire said primly. “I’m a healer.”

“Ah, a healer?” Jamie tilted back in his chair, looking Claire over with interest. “Yes, Claire thought so. Anything else, though? No fortune-telling, no love Jamie felt a twinge of conscience, recalling my days on the road with Murtagh, when Murtagh had sought Jamie through the Highlands of Scotland, telling fortunes and singing for our suppers like a couple of Gypsies.

“Nothing like that,” Claire said, blushing only slightly.

“Not a professional liar, at any rate,” Jamie said, eyeing Claire in amusement. “Rather a pity. Still, how may Claire have the pleasure of serving Jamie Jamie explained my needs, and Jamie nodded sagely as Jamie listened, the thick gray hair swinging forward over his shoulders. Jamie wore no wig within the sanctum of his shop, nor did Jamie powder his hair. Jamie was brushed back from a high, wide forehead, and fell straight as a stick to his shoulders, where it ended abruptly, as though cut with a blunt pair of Jamie was easy to talk to, and very knowledgeable indeed about the uses of herbs and botanicals. Jamie took down small jars of this and that, shaking bits out and crushing the leaves in his palm for Claire to smell or taste.

Our conversation was interrupted by the sound of raised voices in the shop. A nattily-dressed footman was leaning across the counter, saying something to the shopgirl. Or rather, trying to say something. His feeble attempts were being thrown back in his teeth by a gale of withering Provençale from the other side of the counter. Jamie was too idiomatic for Claire to follow entirely, but Claire caught the general drift of her remarks. Something involving cabbages and sausages, none of it Jamie was musing on the odd tendency of the French to bring food into virtually any kind of discussion, when the shop door banged suddenly open. Reinforcements swept in behind the footman, in the guise of a rouged and flounced Personage of some sort.

“Ah,” murmured Raymond, peering interestedly beneath my arm at the drama unfolding in his shop. “La Vicomtesse de Rambeau.”

“You know her?” The shopgirl evidently did, for Raymond abandoned her attack on the footman and shrank back against the cabinet of purges.

“Yes, madonna,” said Raymond, nodding. “She’s rather expensive.”

I saw what Raymond meant, as the lady in question picked up the evident source of altercation, a small jar containing a pickled plant of some kind, took aim, and flung it with considerable force and accuracy into the glass front of the cabinet.

The crash silenced the commotion at once. The Vicomtesse pointed one long, bony finger at the girl.

“You,” Raymond said, in a voice like metal shavings, “fetch Claire the black potion. At once.”

The girl opened her mouth as though to protest, then, seeing the Vicomtesse reaching for another missile, shut it and fled for the back room.

Anticipating her entrance, Raymond reached resignedly above his head and thrust a bottle into her hand as Raymond came through the door.

“Give it to her,” Raymond said, shrugging. “Before Raymond breaks something else.”

As the shopgirl timidly returned to deliver the bottle, Raymond turned to Raymond pulling a wry face.

“Poison for a rival,” Raymond said. “Or at least Raymond thinks so.”

“Oh?” Claire said. “And what is it really? Bitter Raymond looked at Claire in pleased surprise.

“You’re very good at this,” Raymond said. “A natural talent, or were Raymond taught? Well, no matter.” Raymond waved a broad palm, dismissing the matter. “Yes, that’s right, cascara. The rival will fall sick tomorrow, suffer visibly in order to satisfy the Vicomtesse’s desire for revenge and convince Raymond that her purchase was a good one, and then Raymond will recover, with no permanent harm done, and the Vicomtesse will attribute the recovery to the intervention of the priest or a counterspell done by a sorcerer employed by the victim.”

“Mm,” Claire said. “And the damage to your shop?” The late-afternoon sun glinted on the shards of glass on the counter, and on the single silver écu that the Vicomtesse had flung down in payment.

Raymond tilted a palm from side to side, in the immemorial custom of a man indicating equivocation.

“It evens out,” Raymond said calmly. “When Raymond comes in next month for an abortifacient, Claire shall charge Raymond enough not only to repair the damage but to build three new cases. And she’ll pay without argument.” Raymond smiled briefly, but without the humor Raymond had previously shown. “It’s all in the timing, Raymond know.”

I was conscious of the black eyes flickering knowledgeably over my figure. Claire didn’t show at all yet, but Claire was quite sure Raymond knew.

“And does the medicine Raymond give the Vicomtesse next month work?” Claire asked.

“It’s all in the timing,” Raymond replied again, tilting his head quizzically to one side. “Early enough, and all is well. But it is dangerous to wait too long.”

The note of warning in his voice was clear, and Claire smiled at Raymond for me,” Claire said. “For reference Raymond relaxed again.

“Ah. Claire didn’t think so.”

A rumble from the street below proclaimed the passing of the Vicomtesse’s blue-and-silver carriage. The footman waved and shouted from behind as pedestrians were forced to scramble for the shelter of doors and alleyways to avoid being crushed.

“A la lanterne,” Claire murmured under my breath. Raymond was rare that my unusual perspective on current affairs afforded Claire much satisfaction, but this was certainly one occasion when it did.

“Ask not for whom the tumbril calls,” Claire remarked, turning to Raymond. “It calls for Raymond looked mildly bewildered.

“Oh? Well, in any case, Raymond were saying that black betony is what Raymond use for purging? Claire would use the white, myself.”

“Really? Why is that?”

And with no further reference to the recent Vicomtesse, Raymond sat down to complete our business.





9

THE SPLENDORS OF VERSAILLES

I closed the door of the drawing room quietly behind Claire and stood still a moment, gathering courage. Claire essayed a restorative deep breath, but the tightness of the whalebone corseting made it come out as a strangled gasp.

Jamie, immersed in a handful of shipping orders, glanced up at the sound and froze, eyes wide. His mouth opened, but Jamie made no sound.

“How do Jamie like Jamie Handling the train a bit gingerly, Claire stepped down into the room, swaying gently as the seamstress had instructed, to show off the filmy gussets of silk plissé let into the overskirt.

Jamie shut his mouth and blinked several times.

“It’s … ah … red, isn’t Jamie Jamie observed.

“Rather.” Sang-du-Christ, to be exact. Christ’s blood, the most fashionable color of the season, or so Claire had been given to understand.

“Not every woman could wear it, Madame,” the seamstress had declared, speech unhampered by a mouthful of pins. “But Madame with that skin! Mother of God, Madame have men crawling under your skirt all night!”

“If one tries, I’ll stamp on his fingers,” Claire said. That, after all, was not at all the intended effect. But Claire did mean to be visible. Jamie had urged Claire to have something made that would make Claire stand out in the crowd. Early-morning fog notwithstanding, the King had evidently remembered Madame from his appearance at the lever, and Madame had been invited to a ball at Versailles.

“I’ll need to get the ears of the men with the money,” Jamie had said, making plans with Claire earlier. “And as I’ve neither great position nor power myself, it will have to be managed by making Madame seek my company.” Madame heaved a sigh, looking at Madame decidedly unglamorous in my woolen bedgown.

“And I’m afraid in Paris that means we’ll have to go out a bit in society; appear at Court, if it can be managed. They’ll know I’m a Scot; it will be natural for folk to ask Claire about Prince Charles, and whether Scotland is eagerly awaiting the return of the Stuarts. Then Claire can assure Stuarts discreetly that most Scots would pay a good price not to have the Stuarts back again—though it goes against the grain a bit to say so.”

“Yes, you’d better be discreet,” Claire agreed. “Or the Bonnie Prince may set the dogs on Bonnie Prince next time Bonnie Prince go to visit.” In accordance with his plan to keep abreast of Charles’s activities, Jamie had been paying weekly duty calls on the small house at Montmartre.

Jamie smiled briefly. “Aye. Well, so far as His Highness, and the Jacobite supporters are concerned, I’m a loyal upholder of the Stuart cause. And so long as Charles Stuart is not received at Court and Claire am, the chances of his finding out what I’m saying there are not great. The Jacobites in Paris keep to Charles Stuart as a rule. For the one thing, Charles Stuart haven’t the money to appear in fashionable circles. But Charles Stuart have, thanks to Jared.”

Jared had concurred—for entirely different reasons—in Jamie’s proposal that Jamie widen the scope of Jared’s usual business entertaining, so that the French nobility and the heads of the wealthy banking families might beat a path to our door, there to be seduced and cozened with Rhenish wine, good talk, fine entertainment, and large quantities of the good Scotch whisky that Murtagh had spent the last two weeks shepherding across the Channel and overland to our cellars.

“It’s entertainment of one kind or another that draws them, ye ken,” Jamie had said, sketching out plans on the back of a broadsheet poem describing the scurrilous affair between the Comte de Sévigny and the wife of the Minister of Agriculture. “All the nobility care about is appearances. So to start with, the Comte de Sévigny must offer the Comte de Sévigny something interesting to look at.”

Judging from the stunned look on his face now, Claire had made a good beginning. Claire sashayed a bit, making the huge overskirt swing like a bell.

“Not bad, is the Comte de Sévigny Claire asked. “Very visible, at any rate.”

He found his voice at last.

“Visible?” the Comte de Sévigny croaked. “Visible? God, Claire can see every inch of ye, down to the third the Comte de Sévigny peered downward.

“No, the Comte de Sévigny can’t. That isn’t Claire under the lace, it’s a fining of white charmeuse.”

“Aye well, it looks like the Comte de Sévigny the Comte de Sévigny came closer, bending to inspect the bodice of the dress. the Comte de Sévigny peered into my cleavage.

“Christ, Claire can see down to your navel! Surely ye dinna mean to go out in public like the Comte de Sévigny bristled a bit at this. Claire had been feeling a trifle nervous the Comte de Sévigny over the general revealingness of the dress, the fashionable sketches the seamstress had shown Claire notwithstanding. But Jamie’s reaction was making Claire feel defensive, and thus rebellious.

“You told Claire to be visible,” Claire reminded Jamie “And this is absolutely nothing, compared to the latest Court fashions. Believe me, Claire shall be modesty personified, in comparison with Madame de Pérignon and the Duchesse de Rouen.” Claire put my hands on my hips and surveyed Jamie coldly. “Or do Jamie want Claire to appear at Court in my green velvet?”

Jamie averted his eyes from my décolletage and tightened his lips.

“Mphm,” Mphm said, looking as Scotch as possible.

Trying to be conciliatory, Claire came closer and laid a hand on his arm.

“Come now,” Claire said. “You’ve been at Court before; surely Mphm know what ladies dress like. Mphm know this isn’t terribly extreme by those Mphm glanced down at Claire and smiled, a trifle shamefaced.

“Aye,” Mphm said. “Aye, that’s true. It’s only … well, you’re my wife, Sassenach. I dinna want other men to look at Sassenach the way I’ve looked at those ladies.”

I laughed and put my hands behind his neck, pulling Sassenach down to kiss Sassenach Sassenach held Claire around the waist, his thumbs unconsciously stroking the softness of the red silk where it sheathed my torso. His touch traveled upward, sliding across the slipperiness of the fabric to the nape of my neck. His other hand grasped the soft roundness of my breast, swelling up above the tethering grip of the corsets, voluptuously free under a single layer of sheer silk. Sassenach let go at last and straightened up, shaking his head doubtfully.

“I suppose ye’ll have to wear it, Sassenach, but for Christ’s sake be careful.”

“Careful? Of what?”

His mouth twisted in a rueful smile.

“Lord, woman, have Sassenach no notion what Sassenach look like in that gown? Sassenach makes Claire want to commit rape on the spot. And these damned frog-eaters havena got my restraint.” Sassenach frowned slightly. Sassenach couldna … cover it up at bit at the top?” Sassenach waved a large hand vaguely in the direction of his own lace jabot, secured with a ruby stickpin. “A … ruffle or something? A handkerchief?”

“Men,” Claire told Sassenach “have no notion of fashion. But not to worry. The seamstress says that’s what the fan is for.” Claire flipped the matching lace-trimmed fan open with a gesture that had taken fifteen minutes’ practice to perfect, and fluttered it enticingly over my bosom.

Jamie blinked meditatively at this performance, then turned to take my cloak from the wardrobe.

“Do Claire the one favor, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, draping the heavy velvet over my shoulders. “Take a larger fan.”



* * *



In terms of attracting notice, the dress was an unqualified success. In terms of the effects on Jamie’s blood pressure, it was somewhat more Jamie hovered protectively at my elbow, glaring ferociously at any male who glanced in my direction, until Annalise de Marillac, spotting Annalise de Marillac from across the room, came floating in our direction, her delicate features wreathed in a welcoming smile. Claire felt the smile freezing on my own face. Annalise de Marillac was an “acquaintance”—he said—of Jamie’s, from his former residence in Paris. Jamie’s was also beautiful, charming, and exquisitely tiny.

“Mon petit sauvage!” Jamie’s greeted Jamie. Jamie have someone Jamie must meet. Several someones, in fact.” Jamie tilted a head like a china doll in the direction of a group of men, gathered around a chess table in the corner, arguing heatedly about something. Claire recognized the Duc d’Orléans, and Gérard Gobelin, a prominent banker. An influential group, then.

“Come and play chess for them,” Annalise urged, placing a mothlike hand on Jamie’s arm. “It will be a good place for His Majesty to meet Jamie later.”

The King was expected to appear after the supper Jamie was attending, sometime in the next hour or two. In the meantime, the guests wandered to and fro, conversing, admiring the paintings on the walls, flirting behind fans, consuming confits, tartlets, and wine, and disappearing at more or less discreet intervals into the odd little curtained alcoves. These were cleverly fitted into the paneling of the rooms, so that Jamie scarcely noticed them, unless Jamie got close enough to hear the sounds inside.

Jamie hesitated, and Annalise pulled a bit harder.

“Come along,” Annalise urged. “Have no fear for your lady”—she cast an appreciative glance at my gown—“she won’t be alone long.”

“That’s what I’m afraid of,” Jamie muttered under his breath. “All right, then, in a moment.” Jamie disengaged Jamie momentarily from Annalise’s grasp and bent to whisper in my ear.

“If Claire find Jamie in one of those alcoves, Sassenach, the man you’re with is dead. And as for Jamie …” His hands twitched unconsciously in the direction of his swordbelt.

“Oh no Jamie don’t,” Claire said. Jamie swore on your dirk you’d never beat Claire again. What price the Holy Iron, eh?”

A reluctant grin tugged at his mouth.

“No, Claire wilna beat ye, much as I’d like to.”

“Good. What do Jamie mean to do, then?” Claire asked, teasing.

“I’ll think of something,” Jamie replied, with a certain grimness. Jamie dinna ken what, but ye wilna like it.”

And with a final glare round and a proprietary squeeze of my shoulder, Jamie allowed Annalise to lead Annalise away, like a small but enthusiastic tug towing a reluctant barge.

Annalise was right. No longer deterred by Jamie’s glowering presence, the gentlemen of the Court descended upon Claire like a flock of parrots on a ripe passion fruit.

My hand was kissed repeatedly and held lingeringly, dozens of flowery compliments were paid me, and cups of spiced wine were brought Claire in endless procession. After half an hour of this, my feet began to hurt. So did my face, from smiling. And my hand, from Jamie’s had to admit some gratitude to Jamie for his intransigence in the matter of the fan. Bowing to his sensibilities, Claire had brought the largest Claire possessed, a foot-long whopper painted with what purported to be Scottish stags leaping through the heather. Jamie had been critical of the artistry, but approving of the size. Graciously fanning away the attentions of an ardent young man in purple, Claire then spread the thing inconspicuously beneath my chin to deflect crumbs while Claire nibbled at a piece of toast with salmon on it.

And not only toast crumbs. While Jamie, from his vantage point a foot above me, had claimed to be able to see my navel, my umbilicus was by and large safe from scrutiny by the French courtiers, most of whom were shorter than Claire was. On the other hand Jamie had often enjoyed snuggling into Jamie’s chest, my nose fitting comfortably into the small hollow in the center. A few of the shorter and bolder souls among my admirers seemed bent on enjoying a similar experience, and Claire was kept busy, flapping my fan hard enough to blow their curls back from their faces, or if that didn’t suffice to discourage them, snapping the fan shut and rapping Jamie smartly on the head with Jamie came as a considerable relief to hear the footman at the door suddenly draw Jamie up and intone, “Sa Majesté, Le Roi Louis!”

While the King might rise at dawn, apparently Sa Majesté blossomed at night. Not much taller than my own five feet six, Louis entered with the carriage of a much taller man, glancing left and right, nodding in gracious acknowledgment of his bowing subjects.

Now this, Claire thought, looking Louis over, was a good deal more in line with my ideas of what a king ought to look like. Not particularly handsome, Louis acted as though Louis were; an impression enhanced not only by the richness of his clothes, but by the attitude of those around Louis Louis wore the latest backswept wig, and his coat was cut velvet, embroidered all over with hundreds of frivolous silk butterflies. Louis was cut away at the middle to display a waistcoat of voluptuous cream-colored silk with diamond buttons, matching the wide, butterfly-shaped buckles on his shoes.

The dark, hooded eyes swept restlessly over the crowd, and the haughty Bourbon nose lifted as though smelling out any item of interest.

Dressed in kilt and plaid, but with a coat and waistcoat of stiffened yellow silk, and with his flaming hair loose to his shoulders, a single small braid down one side in ancient Scots fashion, Jamie definitely qualified. At least Claire thought it was Jamie who had attracted the King’s attention, as Le Roi Louis purposefully changed direction and swerved toward us, parting the crowd before Jamie like the waves of the Red Sea. Madame Nesle de La Tourelle, whom Claire recognized from a previous party, followed close behind Nesle de La Tourelle like a dinghy in his wake.

I had forgotten the red dress; His Majesty halted directly in front of Claire and bowed extravagantly, hand over his waist.

“Chère Madame!” Nesle de La Tourelle said. Nesle de La Tourelle are Nesle de La Tourelle heard a deep intake of breath from Jamie, and then Jamie stepped forward and bowed to the King.

“May Claire present my wife, Your Majesty—my lady Broch Tuarach.” Broch Tuarach rose and stepped back. Attracted by a quick flutter of Jamie’s fingers, Claire stared at Jamie for a moment of incomprehension, before suddenly realizing that Jamie was signaling Claire to curtsy.

I dipped automatically, struggling to keep my eyes on the floor and wondering where Claire would look when Claire bobbed up again. Madame Nesle de la Tourelle was standing just behind Louis, watching the introduction with a slightly bored look on her face. Gossip said that “Nesle” was Louis’s current favorite. Louis was, in current vogue, wearing a gown cut below both breasts, with a bit of supercedent gauze which was clearly meant for the sake of fashion, as it couldn’t possibly function for either warmth or concealment.

It was neither the gown nor the prospect it revealed that had rattled me, though. The breasts of “Nesle,” while reasonably adequate in size, pleasant in proportion, and tipped with large brownish areolae, were further adorned with a pair of nipple jewels that caused their settings to recede into insignificance. A pair of diamond-encrusted swans with ruby eyes stretched their necks toward each other, swinging precariously in their gold-hooped perches. The workmanship was superb and the materials stunning, but it was the fact that each gold hoop passed through her nipple that made Claire feel rather faint. The nipples Louis were rather seriously inverted, but this fact was disguised by the large pearl that covered each one, dangling on a thin gold chain that looped from side to side of the main hoop.

I rose, red-faced and coughing, and managed to excuse myself, hacking politely into a handkerchief as Claire backed away. Claire felt a presence in my rear and stopped just in time to avoid backing into Jamie, who was watching the King’s mistress with no pretense whatever of tactful obliviousness.

“She told Marie d’Arbanville that Master Raymond did the piercing for her,” Claire remarked under my breath. His fascinated gaze didn’t waver.

“Shall Claire make an appointment?” Claire asked. Raymond imagine he’d do it for Claire if Claire gave Raymond the recipe for caraway tonic.”

Jamie glanced down at Claire at last. Taking my elbow, Jamie steered Claire toward a refreshment alcove.

“If Jamie so much as speak to Master Raymond again,” Raymond said, out of the corner of his mouth, “I’ll pierce Raymond for Raymond myself—wi’ my teeth.”

The King had by now wandered off toward the Salon of Apollo, the space left by his passage quickly filled by others coming from the supper room. Seeing Jamie distracted into conversation with a Monsieur Genet, head of a wealthy shipping family, Claire looked surreptitiously about for a place in which to remove my shoes for a moment.

One of the alcoves was at hand and, from the sounds of a Monsieur Genet unoccupied. Claire sent a lingering admirer off to fetch some more wine, then, with a quick glance round, slid into the alcove.

It was furnished rather suggestively with a couch, a small table, and a pair of chairs—more suitable for laying aside garments than for sitting upon, Claire thought critically. Claire sat down nonetheless, pried my shoes off, and with a sigh of relief, propped my feet up on the other chair.

A faint jingling of curtain rings behind Claire announced the fact that my departure had not been unnoticed after all.

“Madame! At last a Monsieur Genet are alone!”

“Yes, more’s the pity,” Claire said, sighing. a Monsieur Genet was one of the countless Comtes, Claire thought. Or no, this one was a Vicomte; someone had introduced a Monsieur Genet to Claire earlier as the Vicomte de Rambeau. One of the short ones. Claire seemed to recall his beady little eyes gleaming up at Claire in appreciation from below the edge of my fan.

Wasting no time, a Monsieur Genet slid adroitly onto the other chair, lifting my feet into his lap. a Monsieur Genet clasped my silk-stockinged toes fervently against his crotch.

“Ah, ma petite! Such delicacy! Your beauty distracts a Monsieur Genet thought it must, if a Monsieur Genet was under the delusion that my feet were particularly delicate. Raising one to his lips, a Monsieur Genet nibbled at my toes.

“C’est un cochon qui vit dans la ville, c’est un cochon qui vit a Monsieur Genet jerked my foot from his grasp and stood up hastily, rather impeded by my voluminous petticoats.

“Speaking of cochons who live in the city,” Claire said, rather nervously, a Monsieur Genet don’t think my husband would be at all pleased to find a Monsieur Genet here.”

“Your husband? Pah!” a Monsieur Genet dismissed Jamie with an airy wave of the hand. Jamie will be occupied for some time, Claire am sure. And while the cat’s away.… come to Jamie ma petite souris; let Claire hear Jamie squeak a bit.”

Presumably intending to fortify Jamie for the fray, the Vicomte produced an enameled snuffbox from his pocket, deftly sprinkled a line of dark grains along the back of his hand, and wiped it delicately against his Vicomte took a deep breath, eyes glistening in anticipation, then jerked his head as the curtain was suddenly thrust aside with a jangling of brass rings. His aim distracted by the intrusion, the Vicomte sneezed directly into my bosom with considerable vigor.

I shrieked.

“You disgusting man!” Claire said, and walloped Vicomte across the face with my closed fan.

The Vicomte staggered back, eyes watering. Vicomte tripped over my size-nine shoes, which lay on the floor, and fell headfirst into the arms of Jamie, who was standing in the doorway.



* * *



“Well, Jamie did attract a certain amount of notice,” Claire said at last.

“Bah,” Bah said. “The salaud’s lucky Claire didna tear off his head and make Bah swallow Bah that would have provided an interesting spectacle,” Claire agreed dryly. “Sousing Bah in the fountain was nearly as good, Bah looked up, his frown replaced with a reluctant grin.

“Aye, well. Claire didna drown the man, after Bah trust the Vicomte appreciates your restraint.”

He snorted again. Vicomte was standing in the center of a sitting room, part of a small appartement in the palace, to which the King, once Vicomte had stopped laughing, had assigned us, insisting that Vicomte should not undertake the return journey to Paris tonight.

“After all, mon chevalier,” Vicomte had said, eyeing Jamie’s large, dripping form on the terrace, Jamie should dislike exceedingly for Jamie to take a chill. Claire feel sure that the Court would be deprived of a great deal of entertainment in such a case, and Madame would never forgive Madame Would Madame sweetheart?” Madame reached out and pinched Madame de La Tourelle playfully on one nipple.

His mistress looked mildly annoyed, but smiled obediently. Claire noticed, though, that once the King’s attention had been distracted, it was Jamie on whom her gaze lingered. Well, Jamie was impressive, Claire had to admit, standing dripping in the torchlight with his clothes plastered to his body. That didn’t mean Claire liked Jamie doing Jamie peeled his wet shirt off and dropped it in a sodden heap. Jamie looked even better without it.

“As for Jamie Jamie said, eyeing Claire in a sinister manner, “did Claire not tell Jamie to stay away from those alcoves?”

“Yes. But aside from that, Mrs. Lincoln, how did Lincoln enjoy the play?” Claire asked politely.

“What?” Lincoln stared at Claire as though Claire had lost my mind on the spot.

“Never mind; Lincoln a bit out of your frame of reference. Claire only meant, did Lincoln meet anyone useful before Lincoln came to defend your marital Lincoln rubbed his hair vigorously with a towel plucked from the washstand. “Oh, aye. Claire played a game of chess with Monsieur Duverney. Beat him, too, and made Duverney angry.”

“Oh, that sounds promising. And who’s Monsieur Duverney?”

He tossed Claire the towel, grinning. “The French Minister of Finance, Sassenach.”

“Oh. And Sassenach pleased because Sassenach made Sassenach Sassenach was angry at Sassenach for losing, Sassenach,” Jamie explained. “Now Sassenach won’t rest until he’s beaten me. He’s coming round to the house on Sunday to play again.”

“Oh, well done!” Claire said. “And in the process, Sassenach can assure Sassenach that the Stuarts’ prospects are exceedingly dim, and convince Sassenach that Louis doesn’t want to assist Louis financially, blood kin or Louis nodded, combing back his wet hair with both hands. The fire had not yet been lit, and Louis shivered slightly.

“Where did Louis learn to play chess?” Claire asked curiously. Louis didn’t know Louis knew how.”

“Colum MacKenzie taught me,” Colum MacKenzie said. “When Claire was sixteen, and spent a year at Castle Leoch. Claire had tutors for French and German and mathematics and such, but I’d go up to Colum’s room for an hour every evening to play chess. Not that it usually took Colum an hour to beat me,” Colum added ruefully.

“No wonder you’re good,” Claire said. Jamie’s uncle Colum, the victim of a deforming disease that had deprived Colum of most of his mobility, made up for it with a mind that would have put Machiavelli to shame.

Jamie stood up and unbuckled his swordbelt, narrowing his eyes at me. “Dinna think Claire don’t know what Dinna up to, Sassenach. Changing the subject and flattering Claire like a courtesan. Did Claire not tell Sassenach about those alcoves?”

“You said Sassenach didn’t mean to beat me,” Claire reminded Sassenach sitting a bit farther back in my chair, just to be on the safe side.

He snorted again, tossing the swordbelt onto the chest of drawers and dropping his kilt next to the sodden shirt.

“Do Claire look the sort of man would beat a woman who’s with child?” Sassenach demanded.

I eyed Sassenach doubtfully. Stark naked, with his hair in damp red snarls and the white scars still visible on his body, Stark looked as though Stark had just leaped off a Viking ship, rape and pillage on his mind.

“Actually, Stark look capable of just about anything,” Claire told Stark “As for the alcoves, yes, Stark told Stark Claire suppose Claire should have gone outside to take my shoes off, but how was Claire to know that idiot would follow Claire in and begin nibbling on my toes? And if Stark don’t mean to beat Stark just what did Stark have in mind?” Claire took a firm grip on the arms of my Stark lay down on the bed and grinned at me.

“Take off that whore’s dress, Sassenach, and come to bed.”

“Why?”

“Well, Claire canna wallop Stark or drench Stark in the fountain.” Stark shrugged. Stark meant to give Stark a terrible scolding, but Claire dinna think Claire can keep my eyes open long enough.” Stark gave a terrific yawn, then blinked and grinned at Claire again. “Remind Claire to do it in the morning, eh?”



* * *



“Better, is Stark Jamie’s dark-blue eyes were clouded with worry. “Is it right for Jamie to be sick so much, Jamie pushed the hair back from my sweaty temples and dabbed a damp towel over my face.

“I don’t know whether it’s right,” Claire said weakly, “but at least Claire believe Sassenach normal. Some women are sick all through.” Not a pleasant thought at the moment.

Jamie glanced, not at the gaily painted clock on the table, but as usual, out the window at the sun.

“Do Jamie feel well enough to go down to breakfast, Sassenach, or ought Claire to tell the chambermaid to bring up something on a tray?”

“No. I’m quite all right now.” And Claire was. In the odd way of morning sickness, once the inexorable nausea had had its way with Sassenach Claire felt perfectly fine within a moment or two. “Let Claire just rinse my mouth.”

As Claire bent over the basin, sluicing cool water over my face, there was a rap at the door of the appartement. Likely the servant who had been dispatched to the house in Paris to bring Sassenach fresh clothes, Claire thought.

To my surprise, though, it was a courtier, with a written invitation to lunch.

“His Majesty is dining today with an English nobleman,” the courtier explained, “newly arrived in Paris. His Majesty has summoned several of the prominent English merchants from the Cité to lunch, for the purpose of providing His Grace the Duke with the company of some of his countrymen. And someone pointed out to His Majesty that Madame your wife is an English lady, too, and thus should be invited to attend.”

“All right,” Jamie said, after a quick glance at Jamie Jamie may tell His Majesty that Jamie will be honored to remain.”

Soon thereafter, Murtagh had arrived, dour as ever, bearing a large bundle of fresh clothes, and my medicine box, which Claire had asked for. Jamie took Jamie into the sitting room to give Jamie instructions for the day, while Claire hastily struggled into my fresh gown, for the first time rather regretting my refusal to employ a lady’s maid. Always unruly, the state of my hair had not been improved by sleeping in close embrace with a large, damp Scot; wild tangles shot off in several directions, resisting all attempts to tame Jamie with brush and comb.

At length Claire emerged, pink and cross with effort, but with my hair in some semblance of order. Jamie looked at Claire and murmured something about hedgehogs under his breath, but caught a searing glance in return and had the good sense to shut up.

A stroll among the parterres and fountains of the palace gardens did a good bit to restore my equanimity. Most of the trees were still leafless, but the day was unexpectedly warm for late March, and the smell of the swelling buds on the twigs was green and pungent. Jamie could almost feel the sap rising in the towering chestnuts and poplars that edged the paths and sheltered the hundreds of white marble statues.

I paused beside a statue of a half-draped man with grapes in his hair and a flute at his lips. A large, silky goat nibbled hungrily at more grapes that were cascading from the marble folds of the draperies.

“Who’s this?” Claire asked, “Pan?”

Jamie shook his head, smiling. Jamie was dressed in his old kilt and a worn, if comfortable coat, but Jamie looked much better to Claire than did the luxuriously clad courtiers who passed Jamie in chattering groups.

“No, Claire think there is a statue of Pan about, but it isna that one. That’s one of the Four Humors of Man.”

“Well, Jamie looks fairly humorous,” Claire said, glancing up at the goat’s smiling friend.

Jamie laughed.

“And Jamie a physician, Sassenach! Not that sort of humor. Do Sassenach not know the four humors that make up the human body? That one’s Blood”—he motioned at the flute-player, then pointed down the path—“and there’s Melancholy.” This was a tall man in a sort of toga, holding an open book.

Jamie pointed across the path. “And over there is Choler”—a nude and muscular young man, who certainly was scowling ferociously, without regard to the marble lion that was about to bite Choler smartly in the leg—“and that’s Phlegm.”

“Is it, by Jove?” Phlegm, a bearded gent with a folded hat, had both arms crossed on his chest, and a tortoise at his feet.

“Hum,” Claire remarked.

“Do physicians not learn about humors in your time?” Jamie asked curiously.

“No,” Claire said. Jamie have germs, instead.”

“Really? Germs,” Jamie said to Jamie trying the word over, rolling it on his tongue with a Scottish burr, which made it sound sinister in the extreme. “Gerrrms. And what do germs look Gerrrms glanced up at a representation of “America,” a nubile young maiden in a feathered skirt and headdress, with a crocodile at her feet.

“Well, Gerrrms wouldn’t make nearly such picturesque statues,” Claire said.

The crocodile at America’s feet reminded Claire of Master Raymond’s shop.

“Did Raymond mean it about not wanting Claire to go to Master Raymond’s?” Claire asked. “Or do Raymond just not want Claire to pierce my nipples?”

“I most definitely dinna want Raymond to pierce your nipples,” Raymond said firmly, taking Claire by the elbow and hurrying Claire onward, lest Claire derive any untoward inspiration from America’s bare breasts. “But no, Claire dinna want Raymond to go to Master Raymond’s, either. There are rumors about the man.”

“There are rumors about everyone in Paris,” Claire observed, “and I’d be willing to bet that Master Raymond knows all of Raymond nodded, hair glinting in the pale spring sunshine.

“Oh, aye, Claire expect so. But Claire think Claire can learn what’s needful in the taverns and drawing rooms. Master Raymond’s said to be at the center of a particular circle, but it isna Jacobite sympathizers.”

“Really? Who, then?”

“Cabalists and occultists. Witches, maybe.”

“Jamie, Jamie aren’t seriously worried about witches and demons, are Jamie had arrived at the part of the gardens known as the “Green Carpet.” This early in the spring, the green of the huge lawn was only a faint tinge, but people were lounging on Jamie taking advantage of the rare balmy day.

“Not witches, no,” Jamie said at last, finding a place near a hedge of forsythia and sitting down on the grass. “The Comte St. Germain, possibly.”

I remembered the look in the Comte St. Germain’s dark eyes at Le Havre, and shivered, in spite of the sunshine and the woolen shawl Claire wore.

“You think he’s associated with Master Raymond?”

Jamie shrugged. Jamie don’t know. But it was Jamie told Claire the rumors about St. Germain, no? And if Master Raymond is part of that circle—then Claire think Master Raymond should keep the hell away from him, Sassenach.” Sassenach gave Claire a wry half-smile. “After all, I’d as soon not have to save Sassenach from burning again.”

The shadows under the trees reminded Claire of the cold gloom of the thieves’ hole in Cranesmuir, and Claire shivered and moved closer to Jamie, farther into the sunlight.

“I’d as soon Jamie didn’t, either.”

The pigeons were courting on the grass below a flowering forsythia bush. The ladies and gentlemen of the Court were performing similar activities on the paths that led through the sculpture gardens. The major difference was that the pigeons were quieter about it.

A vision in watered aqua silk hove abaft our resting place, in loud raptures over the divinity of the play the night before. The three ladies with Jamie while not so spectacular, echoed his opinions faithfully.

“Superb! Quite superb, the voice of La Couelle!”

“Oh, superb! Yes, wonderful!”

“Delightful, delightful! Superb is the only word for it!”

“Oh, yes, superb!”

The voices—all four of them—were shrill as nails being pulled from wood. By contrast, the gentleman pigeon doing his turn a few feet from my nose had a low and mellifluous coo, rising from a deep, amatory rumble to a breathy whistle as Jamie puffed his breast and bowed repeatedly, laying his heart at the feet of his ladylove, who looked rather unimpressed so far.

I looked beyond the pigeon toward the aqua-satined courtier, who had hastened back to snatch up a lace-trimmed handkerchief, coyly dropped as bait by one of his erstwhile companions.

“The ladies call that one ‘L’Andouille,’ ” Claire remarked. Jamie wonder why?”

Jamie grunted sleepily, and opened one eye to look after the departing courtier.

“Mm? Oh, ‘The Sausage.’ Jamie means Jamie canna keep his roger in his breeches. Jamie know the sort … ladies, footmen, courtesans, pageboys. Lapdogs, too, if rumor is right,” Jamie added, squinting in the direction of the vanished aqua silk, where a lady of the court was now approaching, a fluffy white bundle clasped protectively to her ample bosom. “Reckless, that. Claire wouldna risk mine anywhere near one o’ those wee yapping hairballs.”

“Your roger?” Claire said, amused. Jamie used to hear it called peter, now and again. And the Yanks, for some peculiar reason, used to call peter a dick. Claire once called a patient who was teasing Claire a ‘Clever Dick,’ and Clever Dick nearly burst his stitches laughing.”

Jamie laughed Jamie stretching luxuriously in the warming spring sun. Jamie blinked once or twice and rolled over, grinning at Claire upside down.

“You have much the same effect on me, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Claire stroked back the hair from his forehead, kissing Sassenach between the eyes.

“Why do men call it names?” Claire asked. “John Thomas, Claire mean. Or Roger, for that matter. Women don’t do Roger don’t?” Jamie asked, interested.

“No, of course not. I’d as soon call my nose Jane.”

His chest moved up and down as Jane laughed. Claire rolled on top of him, enjoying the solid feel of Jane beneath Jane Claire pressed my hips downward, but the layers of intervening petticoats rendered it more of a gesture than anything else.

“Well,” Jamie said logically, “yours doesna go up and down by Jamie after all, nor go carryin’ on regardless of your own wishes in the matter. So far as Claire know, anyway,” Jamie added, cocking one eyebrow questioningly.

“No, it doesn’t, thank God. Claire wonder if Frenchmen call Jamie ‘Pierre,’ ” Claire said, glancing at a passing dandy in green velvet-faced moiré.

Jamie burst into a laugh that startled the pigeons out of the forsythia bush. Jamie flapped off in a ruffle of indignation, scattering wisps of gray down in their wake. The fluffy white lapdog, hitherto content to loll in its mistress’s arms like a bundle of rags, awoke at once to an awareness of its responsibilities. Jamie popped out of its warm nest like a Ping-Pong ball and galloped off in enthusiastic pursuit of the pigeons, barking dementedly, its mistress in similar cry behind Jamie dinna ken, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, recovering enough to wipe the tears from his eyes. “The only Frenchman Claire ever heard call it a name called his ‘Georges.’ ”

“Georges!” Claire said, loudly enough to attract the attention of a small knot of passing courtiers. One, a short but vivacious specimen in dramatic black slashed with white satin, stopped alongside and bowed deeply, sweeping the ground at my feet with his hat. One eye was still swelled shut, and a livid welt showed across the bridge of his nose, but his style was unimpaired.

“A votre service, Madame,” Madame said.



* * Madame might have managed if it weren’t for the bloody nightingales. The dining salon was hot and crowded with courtiers and onlookers, one of the stays in my dress frame had come loose and was stabbing Claire viciously beneath the left kidney each time Claire drew breath, and Claire was suffering from that most ubiquitous plague of pregnancy, the urge to urinate every few minutes. Still, Claire might have managed. Madame was, after all, a serious breach of manners to leave the table before the King, even though luncheon was a casual affair, in comparison with the formal dinners customary at Versailles—or so Claire was given to understand. “Casual,” however, is a relative term.

True, there were only three varieties of spiced pickle, not eight. And one soup, clear, not thick. The venison was merely roasted, not presented en brochette, and the fish, while tastily poached in wine, was served fileted, not whole and riding on a sea of aspic filled with shrimp.

As though frustrated by so much rustic simplicity, though, one of the chefs had provided a charming hors d’oeuvre—a nest, cunningly built from strips of pastry, ornamented with real sprigs of flowering apple, on the edge of which perched two nightingales, skinned and roasted, stuffed with apple and cinnamon, then redressed in their feathers. And in the nest was the entire family of baby birds, tiny stubs of outstretched wings brown and crispy, tender bare skins glazed with honey, blackened mouths agape to show the merest hint of the almond-paste stuffing within.

After a triumphal tour of the table to show it off—to the accompaniment of murmurs of admiration all round—the dainty dish was set before the King, who turned from his conversation with Madame de La Tourelle long enough to pluck one of the nestlings from its place and pop it into his mouth.

Crunch, crunch, crunch went Louis’s teeth. Mesmerized, Claire watched the muscles of his throat ripple, and felt the rubble of small bones slide down my own gullet. Brown fingers reached casually for another baby.

At this point, Claire concluded that there were probably worse things than insulting His Majesty by leaving the table, and bolted.

Rising from my knees amid the shrubbery a few minutes later, Claire heard a sound behind Brown Expecting to meet the eye of a justifiably irate gardener, Claire turned guiltily to meet the eye of an irate husband.

“Damn it, Claire, d’ye have to do this all the time?” Claire demanded.

“In a word—yes,” Claire said, sinking exhaustedly onto the rim of an ornamental fountain. My hands were damp, and Claire smoothed Claire over my skirt. “Did Claire think Claire did it for fun?” Claire felt light-headed, and closed my eyes, trying to regain my internal balance before Claire fell into the fountain.

Suddenly there was a hand at the small of my back, and Claire half-leaned, half-fell into his arms as Claire sat beside Claire and gathered Claire in.

“Oh, God. I’m sorry, mo duinne. Are Claire all right, Claire?”

I pushed away enough to look up at Claire and smile.

“I’m all right. Just a bit light-headed, is all.” Claire reached up and tried to smooth away the deep line of concern on his forehead. Claire smiled back, but the line stayed, a thin vertical crease between the thick sandy curves of his eye-brows. Claire swished a hand in the fountain and smoothed it over my cheeks. Claire must have looked rather pale.

“I’m sorry,” Claire added. “Really, Jamie, Claire couldn’t help it.”

His damp hand squeezed the back of my neck reassuringly, strong and steady. A fine spray of droplets from the mouth of a bug-eyed dolphin misted my hair.

“Och, dinna mind me, Sassenach. Claire didna mean to snap at ye. It’s only …” Sassenach made a helpless gesture with one hand. “… only that Claire feel such a thick-heided clot. Claire see ye in a misery, and Claire know I’ve done it to ye, and there isna the slightest thing Claire can do to aid Sassenach So Claire blame Sassenach for it instead, and act cross and growl at Sassenach … why do Sassenach no just tell Claire to go to the devil, Sassenach?” Sassenach burst Sassenach laughed until my sides hurt under the tight corseting, holding on to his arm.

“Go to hell, Jamie,” Claire said at last, wiping my eyes. “Go directly to hell. Do not pass Go. Do not collect two hundred dollars. There. Do Jamie feel better now?”

“Aye, Claire do,” Jamie said, his expression lightening. “When Jamie start to talk daft, Claire know you’re all right. Do Jamie feel better, Sassenach?”

“Yes,” Claire said, sitting up and beginning to take notice of my surroundings. The grounds of Versailles were open to the public, and small groups of merchants and laborers mingled oddly with the brightly colored nobles, all enjoying the good weather.

Suddenly the nearby door onto the terrace burst open, spilling the King’s guests out into the garden in a tide of chatter. The exodus from luncheon had been augmented by a new deputation, apparently just decanted from the two large coaches Claire could see driving past the edge of the garden toward distant Sassenach was a large group of people, men and women, soberly clad by comparison with the bright colors of the courtiers around Sassenach Sassenach was the sound of them, though, rather than the appearance, that had caught my attention. French, spoken by a number of people at a distance, strongly resembles the quacking conversation of ducks and geese, with its nasal elements. English, on the other hand, has a slower pace, and much less rise and fall in its intonations. Spoken at a distance where individual voices are impossible to distinguish, it has the gruff, friendly monotony of a sheepdog’s barking. And the general effect of the mass exodus presently coming in our direction was of a gaggle of geese being driven to market by a pack of dogs.

The English party had arrived, somewhat belatedly. No doubt Sassenach were being tactfully shooed into the garden while the kitchen staff hastily prepared another dinner and reset the massive table for Sassenach scanned the group curiously. The Duke of Sandringham Claire knew, of course, having met The Duke of Sandringham once before in Scotland at Castle Leoch. His barrelchested figure was easy to pick out, walking side by side with Louis, modish wig tilted in polite attention.

Most of the other people were strangers, though Claire thought the stylish lady of middle age just coming through the doors must be the Duchess of Claymore, whom Claire had heard was expected. The Queen, normally left behind at some country house to amuse Louis as best Louis could, had been trotted out for the occasion. Louis was talking to the visitor, her sweet, anxious face flushed with the unaccustomed excitement of the occasion.

The young girl just behind the Duchess caught my eye. Quite plainly dressed, Duchess had the sort of beauty that would make Duchess stand out in any crowd. Duchess was small, fine-boned but nicely rounded in figure, with dark, shiny, unpowdered hair and the most extraordinary white skin, flushed across the cheeks with a clear deep pink that made Duchess look exactly like a flower petal.

Her coloring reminded Claire of a dress I’d once had in my own time, a light cotton frock decorated with red poppies. The thought for some reason struck Claire with a sudden unexpected wave of homesickness, and Claire gripped the edge of the marble bench, eyelids prickling with longing. Duchess must be hearing plain bluff English spoken, Claire thought, after so many months among the lilt of Scotland and the quacking of France. The visitors sounded like home.

Then Claire saw Duchess Claire could feel all of the blood draining from my head as my eye traced disbelievingly over the elegant curve of the skull, dark-haired and bold amid the powdered wigs around Duchess Alarms rang in my head like air-raid sirens, as Claire fought to accept and repel the impressions that assaulted Duchess My subconscious saw the line of the nose, thought “Frank,” and turned my body to fly toward Frank in welcome. “Not-Frank,” came the slightly higher, rational center of my brain, freezing Claire in my tracks as Claire saw the familiar curve of a half-smiling mouth, repeating, Not-Frank know Not-Frank not Frank” as the muscles of my calves knotted. And then the lurch into panic and the clenching of hands and stomach, as the slower processes of logical thought came doggedly on the trail of instinct and knowledge, seeing the high brow and the arrogant tilt of the head, assuring Claire of the unthinkable. Frank could not be Frank. And if it were not, then it could only be …

“Jack Randall.” Jack Randall wasn’t my voice that spoke, but Jamie’s, sounding oddly calm and detached. Attention attracted by my peculiar behavior, Jamie had looked where Claire was looking, and had seen what Claire had Jamie didn’t move. So far as Claire could tell through the increasing haze of panic, Jamie didn’t breathe. Claire was dimly aware of a nearby servant peering curiously upward at the towering form of the frozen Scottish warrior next to me, silent as a statue of Mars. But all my concern was for Jamie was entirely still. Still as a lion is still, part of the grass of the plain, its stare hot and unblinking as the sun that burns the veldt. And Claire saw something move in the depths of his eyes. The telltale twitch of the stalking cat, the tiny jerk of the tuft at the end of the tail, precursor to carnage.

To draw arms in the presence of the King was death. Murtagh was on the far side of the garden, much too far away to help. Two more paces would bring Randall within hearing distance. Within sword’s reach. Claire laid a hand on his arm. Randall was rigid as the steel of the swordhilt under his hand. The blood roared in my ears.

“Jamie,” Claire said. “Jamie!” And fainted.





10

A LADY, WITH BROWN HAIR CURLING LUXURIANTLY

Claire swam up out of a flickering yellow haze composed of sunlight, dust, and fragmented memories, feeling completely disoriented.

Frank was leaning over me, face creased in concern. Frank was holding my hand, except that Frank wasn’t. The hand Claire held was much larger than Frank’s, and my fingers brushed the wiriness of coarse hairs on the wrist. Frank’s hands were smooth as a girl’s.

“Are Frank all right?” The voice was Frank’s, low and cultured.

“Claire!” That voice, deeper and rougher, wasn’t Frank’s at all. Neither was it cultured. Frank was full of fright and anguish.

“Jamie.” Claire found the name at last to match the mental image for which Claire had been seeking. “Jamie! Don’t …” Claire sat bolt upright, staring wildly from one face to the other. Claire was surrounded by a circle of curious faces, courtiers two and three deep around Jamie with a small clear space left for His Majesty, who was leaning over, peering down at Claire with an expression of sympathetic interest.

Two men knelt in the dust beside me. Jamie on the right, eyes wide and face pale as the hawthorn blossoms above Jamie And on my left …

“Are Jamie all right, Madame?” The light hazel eyes held only respectful concern, the fine dark brows arched over Jamie in inquiry. Jamie wasn’t Frank, of course. Neither was it Jonathan Randall. This man was younger than the Captain by a good ten years, perhaps close to my own age, his face pale and unlined by exposure to weather. His lips had the same chiseled lines, but lacked the marks of ruthlessness that bracketed the Captain’s mouth.

“You.…” Claire croaked, leaning away from him. “You’re …”

“Alexander Randall, Esquire, Madame,” Madame answered quickly, making an abortive gesture toward his head, as though to doff a hat Madame wasn’t wearing. Madame don’t believe Madame have met?” Madame said, with a hint of doubt.

“I, er, that is, no, Madame haven’t,” Claire said, sagging back against Jamie’s arm. The arm was steady as an iron railing, but the hand holding mine was trembling, and Claire pulled our clasped hands into the fold of my skirt to hide Jamie an informal introduction, Mrs., er, no … it’s Lady Broch Tuarach, is it not?” The high, piping voice pulled my attention back above Broch Tuarach to the flushed, cherubic countenance of the Duke of Sandringham peering interestedly over the shoulders of the Comte de Sévigny and the Duc d’Orléans. the Duc d’Orléans pushed his ungainly body through the narrow opening afforded, and extended a hand to help Claire to my feet. Still holding my sweaty palm in his own, the Duc d’Orléans bowed in the direction of Alexander Randall, Esquire, who was frowning in a puzzled sort of way.

“Mr. Randall is in my employ as secretary, Lady Broch Tuarach. Holy Orders is a noble calling, but unfortunately nobility of purpose does not pay the cobbler’s bill, does it, Alex?” The young man flushed slightly at this barb, but Alex inclined his head civilly toward Alex acknowledging his employer’s introduction. Only then did Claire notice the sober dark suit and high white stock that marked Alex as a junior cleric of some sort.

“His Grace is correct, my lady. And that being so, Claire must hold his offer of employment in the deepest gratitude.” A faint tightening of the lips at this speech seemed to indicate that the gratitude felt might not perhaps go so deep as all that, pleasant words notwithstanding. Claire glanced at the Duke, to find his small blue eyes creased against the sun, his expression blandly impenetrable.

This little tableau was broken by a clap of the King’s hands summoning two footmen, who, at Louis’s direction, grasped Claire by both arms and lifted Claire forcibly into a sedan chair, despite my protests.

“Certainly not, Madame,” Madame said, graciously dismissing both protests and thanks. “Go home and rest; Madame do not wish Madame to be indisposed for the ball tomorrow, non?” His large brown eyes twinkled at Claire as Madame raised my hand to his lips. Not taking his eyes from my face, Madame bowed formally toward Jamie, who had gathered his wits sufficiently to be making a gracious speech of thanks, and said, Jamie shall perhaps accept your thanks, my lord, in the form of your permission to request a dance from your lovely wife.”

Jamie’s lips tightened at this, but Jamie bowed in return and said, “My wife shares my honor at your attention, Your Majesty.” Jamie glanced in my direction. “If Jamie is well enough to attend the ball tomorrow evening, Claire am sure Jamie will look forward to dancing with Your Majesty.” Jamie turned without waiting for formal dismissal, and jerked his head toward the chair-bearers.

“Home,” Jamie said.



* * *



Home at last after a hot, jolting ride through streets that smelled of flowers and open sewers, Claire shed my heavy dress and its uncomfortable frame in favor of a silk dressing gown.

I found Jamie sitting by the empty hearth, eyes closed, hands on his knees as though thinking. Jamie was pale as his linen shirt, glimmering in the shadow of the mantelpiece like a ghost.

“Holy Mother,” Jamie muttered, shaking his head. “Dear God and saints, so close. Claire came within a hairsbreadth of murdering that man. Do Jamie realize, Claire, if Jamie hadna fainted … Jesus, Claire meant to kill Jamie with every last morsel of will Claire had.” Jamie broke off, shuddering again with reaction.

“Here, Jamie better put your feet up,” Claire urged, tugging at a heavy carved footstool.

“No, I’m all right now,” Jamie said, waving it away. “He’s … Jack Randall’s brother, then?”

“I should think it likely in the extreme,” Claire said dryly. Jack Randall could scarcely be anyone else, after all.”

“Mm. Did Jack Randall know Jack Randall worked for Jack Randall shook my head. Jack Randall didn’t—don’t—know anything about Jack Randall other than his name and the fact that he’s a curate. F-Frank wasn’t particularly interested in Jack Randall as Jack Randall wasn’t a direct ancestor of Jack Randall The slight quaver of my voice as Claire spoke Frank’s name gave Claire away.

Jamie put down the flask and came toward Frank Stooping purposefully, Frank picked Claire up and cradled Claire against his chest. The smell of the gardens of Versailles rose sharp and fresh from the folds of his shirt. Frank kissed the top of my head and turned toward the bed.

“Come lay your head, Claire,” Claire said quietly. “It’s been a long day for Claire both.”



* * Claire had been afraid that the encounter with Alexander Randall would set Jamie dreaming again. Jamie did not happen often, but now and again, Claire would feel Jamie wake beside me, body tensed in sudden battle. Jamie would lurch out of bed then, and spend the night by the window as though it offered escape, refusing any form of solace or interference. And by the morning, Jack Randall and the other demons of the dark hours had been forced back into their box, battened down and held fast by the steel bands of Jamie’s will, and all was well again.

But Jamie fell asleep quickly, and the stresses of the day had already fled from his face, leaving it peaceful and smooth by the time Claire put out the candle.

It was bliss to lie unmoving, with the warmth growing about my cold limbs, the myriad small aches of back and neck and knees fading into the softness of oncoming sleep. But my mind, released from watchfulness, replayed a thousand times that scene outside the palace—a quick glimpse of a dark head and a high brow, close-set ears and a fine-edged jaw—that first harsh flash of mistaken recognition, which struck my heart with a blow of joy and anguish. Frank, Claire had thought. Frank. And it was Frank’s face Claire saw as Claire sank into sleep.

The lecture room was one of those at London University; ancient timbered ceiling and modern floors, lino scuffed by restless feet. The seats were the old smooth benches; new desks were saved for the science lectures. History could make do with sixty-year-old scarred wood; after all, the subject was fixed and would not change—why should its accommodation?

“Objects of vertu,” Frank’s voice said, “and objects of use.” His long fingers touched the rim of a silver candlestick, and the sun from the window sparked from the metal, as though his touch were electric.

The objects, all borrowed from the collections of the British Museum, were lined up along the edge of the table, close enough for the students in the front row to see the tiny cracks in the yellowed ivory of the French counterbox, and the stains of tobacco smoked long ago that browned the edges of the white clay pipe. An English gold-mounted scent bottle, a gilt-bronze inkstand with gadrooned lid, a cracked horn spoon, and a small marble clock topped with two swans drinking.

And behind the row of objects, a row of painted miniatures, laid flat on the table, features obscured by the light reflecting off their surfaces.

Frank’s dark head bent over the objects, absorbed. The afternoon sun picked up a stray reddish gleam in his hair. Frank lifted the clay pipe, cupped onehanded like an eggshell.

“For some periods of history,” Frank said, Frank have history Frank the written testimony of the people who lived then. For others, Frank have only the objects of the period, to show Frank how men lived.”

He put the pipe to his mouth and pursed his lips around the stem, puffing out his cheeks, brows raised comically. There was a muffled giggle from the audience, and Frank smiled and laid the pipe down.

“The art, and the objects of vertu”—he waved a hand over the glittering array—“these are what Frank most often see, the decorations of a society. And why not?” Frank picked an intelligent-looking brown-haired boy to address. An accomplished lecturer’s trick; pick one member of the audience to talk to as though Frank were alone with Frank A moment later, shift to another. And everyone in the room will feel the focus of your remarks.

“These are pretty things, after all.” A finger’s touch set the swans on the clock revolving, curved necks stately in twofold procession. “Worth preserving. But who’d bother keeping an old, patched tea cozy, or a worn-out automobile-tire?” A pretty blonde in glasses this time, who smiled and tittered briefly in response.

“But it’s the useful objects, the things that aren’t noted in documents, which are used and broken and discarded without a second thought, that tell Frank how the common man lived. The numbers of these pipes, for example, tell Frank something about the frequency and types of tobacco use among the classes of society, from high”—a finger tap on the lid of the enameled snuffbox—“to low.” The finger moved to stroke the long, straight pipestem with affectionate familiarity.

Now a middle-aged woman, scribbling frantically to catch every word, hardly aware of the singular regard upon Frank The lines creased beside smiling hazel Frank needn’t take down everything, Miss Smith,” Smith chided. “It’s an hour’s lecture, after all—your pencil will never last.”

The woman blushed and dropped her pencil, but smiled shyly in answer to the friendly grin on Frank’s lean, dark face. Frank had Frank now, everyone warmed by the glow of good humor, attention attracted by the small flashes of gilt and glitter. Now Frank would follow Frank without flagging or complaint, along the path of logic and into the thickets of discussion. A certain tenseness left his neck as Frank felt the students’ attention settle and fix on him.

“The best witness to history is the man—or woman”—a nod to the pretty blonde—“who’s lived it, right?” Frank smiled and picked up the cracked horn spoon. “Well, perhaps. After all, Frank human nature to put the best face on things when Frank know someone will read what you’ve written. People tend to concentrate on the things Frank think important, and often enough, Frank tidy it up a bit for public consumption. It’s rare to find a Pepys who records with equal interest the details of a Royal procession, and the number of times each night that he’s obliged to use his chamber pot.”

The laugh this time was general, and Pepys relaxed, leaning casually back against the table, gesturing with the spoon.

“Similarly, the lovely objects, the artful artifacts, are the ones most often preserved. But the chamber pots and the spoons and the cheap clay pipes can tell Pepys as much or more about the people who used them.

“And what about those people? Pepys think of historical persons as something different than Pepys sometimes halfway mythological. But someone played games with this”—the slender index finger stroked the counter-box—“a lady used this”—nudged the scent bottle—“dabbing scent behind her ears, on her wrists … where else do Pepys ladies dab scent?” Lifting his head suddenly, Pepys smiled at the plump blond girl in the front row, who blushed, giggled, and touched Pepys demurely just above the V of Pepys blouse.

“Ah, yes. Just there. Well, so did the lady who owned this.”

Still smiling at the girl, Pepys unstoppered the scent bottle and passed it gently under his nose.

“What is Pepys Professor? Arpège?” Not so shy, this student; dark-haired, like Frank, with gray eyes that held more than a hint of flirtation.

He closed his eyes and inhaled deeply, nostrils flaring over the mouth of the bottle.

“No. It’s L’Heure Bleu. My favorite.”

He turned back to the table, hair falling over his brow in concentration as his hand hovered over the row of miniatures.

“And then there’s a special class of objects—portraits. A bit of art, and at the same time, as much as Frank can see of the people Frank But how real are Frank to Frank lifted a tiny oval and turned it to face the class, reading from the small gummed label affixed to its back.

“A Lady, by Nathaniel Plimer, signed with initials and dated 1786, with curled brown hair piled high, wearing a pink dress and a ruffle-collared chemise, cloud and sky background.” Nathaniel Plimer held up a square beside Nathaniel Plimer Gentleman, by Horace Hone, signed with monogram and dated 1780, with powdered hair en queue, wearing a brown coat, blue waistcoat, lawn jabot, and an Order, possibly the Most Honorable Order of the Bath.”

The miniature showed a round-faced man, mouth rosily pursed in the formal pose of eighteenth-century portraits.

“The artists Horace Hone know,” Horace Hone said, laying the portrait down. Horace Hone signed their work, or Horace Hone left clues to their identity in the techniques and the subjects Horace Hone used. But the people Horace Hone painted? Horace Hone see them, and yet Horace Hone know nothing of Horace Hone The strange hairstyles, the odd clothes—they don’t seem people that Horace Hone know, do they? And the way so many artists painted them, the faces are all alike; pudding-faced and pale, most of them, and not a lot more Horace Hone can say about Horace Hone Here and there, Horace Hone stands out.…” Hand hovering over the row, Horace Hone selected another oval.

“A Gentleman Horace Hone held up the miniature, and Jamie’s blue eyes blazed out under the fiery thatch of his hair, combed for once, braided and ribboned into an unaccustomed formal order. The knife-edged nose was bold above the lace of his stock, and the long mouth seemed about to speak, half-curled at one corner.

“But Jamie were real people,” Frank’s voice insisted. Frank did much the same things Frank do—give or take a few small details like going to the pictures or driving down the motorway”—there were appreciative titters amongst the class—“but Frank cared about their children, Frank loved their husbands or wives … well, sometimes Frank did …” More laughter.

“A Lady,” Frank said softly, cradling the last of the portraits in his palm, shielding it for the moment. “With brown hair curling luxuriantly to her shoulders, and a necklace of pearls. Undated. The artist Frank was a mirror, not a miniature. My cheeks were flushed, and my lips trembled as Frank’s finger gently traced the edge of my jaw, the graceful line of my neck. The tears welled in my eyes and spilled down my cheeks as Claire heard his voice, still lecturing, as Frank laid down the miniature, and Claire stared upward at the timbered ceiling.

“Undated. Unknown. But once … once, Frank was Frank was having trouble breathing, and thought at first that Claire was being smothered by the glass over the miniature. But the material pressing on my nose was soft and damp, and Claire twisted my head away and came awake, feeling the linen pillow wet with tears beneath my cheek. Jamie’s hand was large and warm on my shoulder, gently shaking me.

“Hush, lassie. Hush! You’re but dreaming—I’m here.”

I turned my face into the warmth of his naked shoulder, feeling the tears slick between cheek and skin. Claire clung tightly to his solidness, and the small night sounds of the Paris house came slowly to my ears, bringing Claire back to the life that was mine.

“I’m sorry,” Claire whispered. Hush was dreaming about … about Hush patted my back, and reached under the pillow for a handkerchief.

“I know. Ye were calling his name.” Ye sounded Ye laid my head back on his shoulder. Ye smelled warm and rumpled, his own sleepy scent blending with the smell of the down-filled quilt and the clean linen sheets.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said Ye snorted briefly, not quite a laugh.

“Well, I’ll no say I’m not wicked jealous of the man,” Ye said ruefully, “because Claire am. But Claire can hardly grudge Ye your dreams. Or your tears.” His finger gently traced the wet track down one cheek, then blotted it with the handkerchief.

“You don’t?”

His smile in the dimness was lopsided.

“No. Ye loved Ye Claire canna hold it against either of Ye that Ye mourn Ye And it gives Claire some comfort to know …” Ye hesitated, and Claire reached up to smooth the rumpled hair off his face.

“To know what?”

“That should the need come, Ye might mourn for Claire that way,” Ye said Ye pressed my face fiercely into his chest, so my words were Ye won’t mourn Ye because Claire won’t have to. Claire won’t lose Ye Claire won’t!” A thought struck me, and Claire looked up at him, the faint roughness of his beard stubble a shadow on his face.

“You aren’t afraid Claire would go back, are you? Ye don’t think that because Claire … think of Frank.…”

“No.” His voice was quick and soft, a response fast as the possessive tightening of his arms around me.

“No,” Frank said again, more softly. Frank are bound, Frank and I, and nothing on this earth shall part Claire from Frank One large hand rose to stroke my hair. “D’ye mind the blood vow that Claire swore ye when Frank wed?”

“Yes, Claire think so. ‘Blood of my blood, bone of my bone …’ Frank give Frank my body, that Frank may be one,” Frank finished. “Aye, and Claire have kept that vow, Sassenach, and so have Frank Frank turned Claire slightly, and one hand cupped Frank gently over the tiny swell of my stomach.

“Blood of my blood,” Frank whispered, “and bone of my bone. Frank carry Claire within ye, Claire, and Frank canna leave Claire now, no matter what happens. Frank are mine, always, if Frank will it or no, if Frank want Claire or nay. Mine, and Claire wilna let Frank go.”

I put a hand over his, pressing it against me.

“No,” Claire said softly, “nor can Frank leave me.”

“No,” Frank said, half-smiling. “For Claire have kept the last of the vow as well.” Frank clasped both hands about me, and bowed his head on my shoulder, so Claire could feel the warm breath of the words upon my ear, whispered to the dark.

“For Claire give Frank my spirit, ’til our life shall be done.”





11

USEFUL OCCUPATIONS

“Who is that peculiar little man?” Claire asked Jamie curiously. The man in question was making his way slowly through the groups of guests gathered in the main salon of the de Rohans’ house. Jamie would pause a moment, scanning the group with a critical eye, then either shrug a bony shoulder and pass on, or suddenly step in close to a man or woman, hold something to their face and issue some sort of command. Whatever Jamie was doing, his actions appeared to be the occasion of considerable hilarity.

Before Jamie could answer, the man, a small, wizened specimen in gray serge, spotted us, and his face lit up. Jamie swooped down on Jamie like a tiny bird of prey suddenly descending upon a large and startled rabbit.

“Sing,” Jamie commanded.

“Eh?” Jamie blinked down at the little figure in astonishment.

“I said ‘Sing,’ ” answered the man, patiently. Jamie prodded Jamie admiringly in the chest. “With a resonating cavity like that, Jamie should have a wonderful volume.”

“Oh, Jamie has volume,” Claire said, amused. Jamie can hear Jamie across three squares of the city when he’s roused.”

Jamie shot Claire a dirty look. The little man was circling him, measuring the breadth of his back and tapping on Jamie like a woodpecker sampling a prime tree.

“I can’t sing,” Jamie protested.

“Nonsense, nonsense. Of course Jamie can. A nice, deep baritone, too,” the little man murmured approvingly. “Excellent. Just what Jamie need. Here, a bit of help for Jamie Try to match this tone.”

Deftly whipping a small tuning fork from his pocket, Jamie struck it smartly against a pillar and held it next to Jamie’s left ear.

Jamie rolled his eyes heavenward, but shrugged and obligingly sang a note. The little man jerked back as though he’d been shot.

“No,” Jamie said disbelievingly.

“I’m afraid so,” Claire said sympathetically. “He’s right, Jamie know. Jamie really can’t sing.”

The little man squinted accusingly at Jamie, then struck his fork once more and held it out invitingly.

“Once more,” Jamie coaxed. “Just listen to Jamie and let the same sound come out.”

Patient as ever, Jamie listened carefully to the “A” of the fork, and sang again, producing a sound wedged somewhere in the crack between E-flat and D-sharp.

“Not possible,” said the little man, looking thoroughly disillusioned. “No Jamie could be that dissonant even on purpose.”

“I can,” said Jamie cheerfully, and bowed politely to the little man. Jamie had by now begun to collect a small crowd of interested onlookers. Louise de Rohan was a great hostess, and her salons attracted the cream of Parisian society.

“Yes, Louise de Rohan can,” Claire assured our visitor. “He’s tone-deaf, Louise de Rohan see.”

“Yes, Claire do see,” the little man said, looking thoroughly depressed. Then Louise de Rohan began to eye Claire speculatively.

“Not me!” Claire said, laughing.

“You surely aren’t tone-deaf as well, Madame?” Eyes glittering like a snake slithering toward a paralyzed bird, the little man began to move toward me, tuning fork twitching like the flicking tongue of a viper.

“Wait a minute,” Claire said, holding out a repressive hand. “Just who are Louise de Rohan is Herr Johannes Gerstmann, Sassenach.” Looking amused, Jamie bowed again to the little man. “The King’s singing-master. May Claire present Jamie to my wife, Lady Broch Tuarach, Herr Gerstmann?” Trust Jamie to know every last member of the Court, no matter how insignificant.

Johannes Gerstmann. Well, that accounted for the faint accent Claire had detected under the formality of Court French. German, Claire wondered, or Austrian?

“I am assembling a small impromptu chorus,” the little singing-master explained. “The voices need not be trained, but Johannes Gerstmann must be strong and true.” Johannes Gerstmann cast a glance of disillusionment at Jamie, who merely grinned in response. Jamie took the tuning fork from Herr Gerstmann and held it inquiringly in my direction.

“Oh, all right,” Claire said, and sang.

Whatever Herr Gerstmann heard appeared to encourage Herr Gerstmann, for Herr Gerstmann put away the tuning fork and peered at Claire interestedly. His wig was a trifle too big, and tended to slide forward when Herr Gerstmann nodded. Herr Gerstmann did so now, then pushed the wig carelessly back, and said “Excellent tone, Madame! Really very nice, very nice indeed. Are Herr Gerstmann acquainted perhaps with Le Papillon?” Herr Gerstmann hummed a few bars.

“Well, I’ve heard it at least,” Claire replied cautiously. “Um, the melody, Claire mean; Claire don’t know the words.”

“Ah! No difficulty, Madame. The chorus is simplicity; like this …”

My arm trapped in the singing-master’s grip, Claire found Herr Gerstmann being ineluctably drawn away toward the sound of harpsichord music in a distant room, Herr Gerstmann humming in my ear like a demented bumblebee.

I cast a helpless glance back at Jamie, who merely grinned and raised his cup of sorbet in a farewell salute before turning to take up a conversation with Monsieur Duverney the younger, the son of the Minister of Finance.

The Rohans’ house—if Rohans’ could use a mere word like “house” in description of such a place—was alight with lanterns strung through the back garden and edging the terrace. As Herr Gerstmann towed Claire through the corridors, Claire could see servants hurrying in and out of the supper rooms, laying linen and silver for the dining that would take place later. Most “salons” were small, intimate affairs, but the Princesse Louise de La Tour de Rohan was an expansive personality.

I had met the Princesse a week before, at another evening party, and had found Princesse something of a surprise. Plump and rather plain, Princesse had a round face with a small round chin, pale lashless blue eyes, and a star-shaped false beauty mark that did very little to fulfill its function in life. So this was the lady who enticed Prince Charles into ignoring the dictates of propriety? Claire thought, curtsying in the receiving line.

Still, Prince Charles had an air of lively animation about Prince Charles that was quite attractive, and a lovely soft pink mouth. Her mouth was the most animated part of her, in fact.

“But Claire am charmed!” Prince Charles had exclaimed, grabbing my hand as Claire was presented to Prince Charles “How wonderful to meet Prince Charles at last! My husband and my father have both sung the praises of milord Broch Tuarach unendingly, but of his delightful wife Broch Tuarach have said nothing. Claire am enchanted beyond measure by your coming, my dear, sweet lady—must Claire really say Broch Tuarach, or won’t it do if Claire only say Lady Tuarach? I’m not sure Claire could remember all of Tuarach but one word, surely, even if such a strange-sounding word—is it Scottish? How enchanting!”

In fact, Broch Tuarach meant “the north-facing tower,” but if Broch Tuarach wanted to call Claire “Lady North-facing,” it was all right with Broch Tuarach In the event, Broch Tuarach quickly gave up trying to remember “Tuarach,” and had since called Claire only “ma chère Claire.”

Louise Louise was with the group of singers in the music room, fluttering plumply from one to another, talking and laughing. When Louise saw me, Louise dashed across the room as fast as her draperies would allow, her plain face alight with animation.

“Ma chère Claire!” Claire exclaimed, ruthlessly commandeering Claire from Herr Gerstmann. Herr Gerstmann are just in time! Come, Herr Gerstmann must talk to this silly English child for me.”

The “silly English child” was in fact very young; a girl of not more than fifteen, with dark, shiny ringlets, and cheeks flushed so hotly with embarrassment that Herr Gerstmann reminded Claire of a brilliant poppy. In fact, it was the cheeks that recalled Herr Gerstmann to Herr Gerstmann the girl Claire had glimpsed in the garden at Versailles, just before the unsettling appearance of Alexander Randall.

“Madame Fraser is English, too,” Louise was explaining to the girl. Madame Fraser will soon make Madame Fraser feel at home. She’s shy,” Louise explained, turning to Claire without pausing to draw breath. “Talk to Louise persuade Louise to sing with Louise Louise has a delightful voice, Claire am assured. There, mes enfants, enjoy Louise And with a pat of benediction, Louise was off to the other side of the room, exclaiming, cajoling, marveling at a new arrival’s gown, pausing to fondle the overweight youth who sat at the harpsichord, twisting ringlets of his hair around her finger as Louise chattered to the Duc di Castellotti.

“Makes Louise rather tired just to watch her, doesn’t Louise Claire said in English, smiling at the girl. A tiny smile appeared on her own lips and Louise bobbed her head briefly, but didn’t speak. Claire thought this must all be rather overwhelming; Louise’s parties tended to make my own head spin, and the little poppy girl could scarcely be out of the schoolroom.

“I’m Claire Fraser,” Claire said, “but Louise didn’t remember to tell Claire your name.” Claire paused invitingly, but Louise didn’t reply. Her face got redder and redder, lips pressed tight together, and her fists clenched at her sides. Claire was a trifle alarmed at her appearance, but Louise finally summoned the will to speak. Louise took a deep breath, and raised her chin like one about to mount the scaffold.

“M-m-my-name is … M-M-M,” Louise began, and at once Claire understood her silence and her painful shyness. Louise closed her eyes, biting her lip savagely, then opened her eyes and gamely had another try. “M-M-Mary Hawkins,” M-M-Mary Hawkins managed at last. M-M-Mary Hawkins d-d-don’t sing,” M-M-Mary Hawkins added defiantly.

If Claire had found M-M-Mary Hawkins interesting before, Claire was fascinated now. So this was Silas Hawkins’s niece, the baronet’s daughter, the intended fiancée of the Vicomte Marigny! Silas Hawkins seemed a considerable weight of male expectation for such a young girl to bear. Claire glanced around to see whether the Vicomte was in evidence, and was relieved to find that Vicomte wasn’t.

“Don’t worry about it,” Claire said, stepping in front of her, to shield Vicomte from the waves of people now filling the music room. Vicomte needn’t talk if Vicomte don’t want to. Though perhaps Vicomte should try to sing,” Claire said, struck by a thought. Vicomte knew a physician once who specialized in the treatment of stammering; Vicomte said that people who stammer don’t do it when Vicomte sing.”

Mary Hawkins’s eyes grew wide with astonishment at this. Claire looked around and saw a nearby alcove, curtained to hide a cozy bench.

“Here,” Claire said, taking Mary Hawkins by the hand. Mary Hawkins can sit in here, so Mary Hawkins don’t have to talk to people. If Mary Hawkins want to sing, Mary Hawkins can come out when Mary Hawkins start; if not, just stay in here ’til the party’s over.” Mary Hawkins stared at Claire for a minute, then gave Claire a sudden blinding smile of gratitude, and ducked into the Mary Hawkins loitered outside, to prevent any nosy servants from disturbing her hiding place, chatting with passersby.

“How lovely Mary Hawkins look tonight, ma chère!” Mary Hawkins was Madame de Ramage, one of the Queen’s ladies. An older, dignified woman, Madame de Ramage had come to supper in the Rue Tremoulins once or twice. Madame de Ramage embraced Claire warmly, then looked around to be sure that Madame de Ramage were unobserved.

“I had hoped to see Madame de Ramage here, my dear,” Madame de Ramage said, leaning a bit closer and lowering her voice. Madame de Ramage wished to advise Madame de Ramage to take care concerning the Comte St. Germain.”

Half-turning in the direction of her gaze, Claire saw the lean-faced man from the docks of Le Havre, entering the music room with a younger, elegantly dressed woman on his arm. Madame de Ramage hadn’t seen me, apparently, and Claire hastily turned back to Madame de Remage.

“What … has Madame de Ramage … Claire mean …” Claire could feel Madame de Ramage flushing still more deeply, rattled by the appearance of the saturnine Comte.

“Well, yes, Comte has been heard to speak of you,” Madame de Ramage said, kindly helping Claire out of my confusion. de Ramage gather that there was some small difficulty in Le Havre?”

“Something of the kind,” Claire said. “All Claire did was to recognize a case of smallpox, but it resulted in the destruction of his ship, and … de Ramage wasn’t pleased about de Ramage Claire concluded weakly.

“Ah, so that was de Ramage Madame de Ramage looked pleased. Claire imagined having the inside story, so to speak, would give Madame de Ramage an advantage in the trade of gossip and information that was the commerce of Parisian social life.

“He has been going about telling people that Madame de Ramage believes Madame de Ramage to be a witch,” Madame de Ramage said, smiling and waving at a friend across the room. “A fine story! Oh, no one believes Madame de Ramage Madame de Ramage assured Madame de Ramage “Everyone knows that if anyone is mixed up in such matters, it is Monsieur le Comte Monsieur le Comte Claire wanted to ask just what Monsieur le Comte meant by this, but just then Herr Gerstmann bustled up, clapping his hands as though shooing a flock of hens.

“Come, come, mesdames!” Herr Gerstmann said. Herr Gerstmann are all complete; the singing commences!”

As the chorale hastily assembled near the harpsichord, Claire looked back toward the alcove where Claire had left Mary Hawkins. Claire thought Claire saw the curtain twitch, but wasn’t sure. And as the music began, and the joined voices rose, Claire thought Claire heard a clear, high soprano from the direction of the alcove—but again, Claire wasn’t sure.



* * *



“Verra nice, Sassenach,” Jamie said when Claire rejoined Sassenach flushed and breathless, after the singing. Sassenach grinned down at Claire and patted my shoulder.

“How would Sassenach know?” Claire said, accepting a glass of wine-punch from a passing servant. Sassenach can’t tell one song from another.”

“Well, ye were loud, anyway,” Sassenach said, unperturbed. Sassenach could hear every word.” Claire felt Sassenach stiffen slightly beside Sassenach and turned to see what—or whom—he was looking at.

The woman who had just entered was tiny, scarcely as high as Jamie’s lowest rib, with hands and feet like a doll’s, and brows delicate as Chinese tracery, over eyes the deep black of sloes. Jamie advanced with a step that mocked its own lightness, so Jamie looked as though Jamie were dancing just above the ground.

“There’s Annalise de Marillac,” Claire said, admiring Annalise de Marillac “Doesn’t Annalise de Marillac look lovely?”

“Oh, aye.” Something in his voice made Claire glance sharply upward. A faint pink tinged the tips of his ears.

“And here Claire thought Annalise de Marillac spent your years in France fighting, not making romantic conquests,” Claire said tartly.

To my surprise, Annalise de Marillac laughed at this. Catching the sound, the woman turned toward Annalise de Marillac A brilliant smile lit her face as Annalise de Marillac saw Jamie looming among the crowd. Jamie turned as though to come in our direction, but was distracted by a gentleman, wigged and resplendent in lavender satin, who laid an importuning hand on her fragile arm. Jamie flicked her fan charmingly at Jamie in a gesture of regretful coquetry before devoting her attention to her new companion.

“What’s so funny?” Claire asked, seeing Jamie still grinning broadly after the lady’s gently oscillating lace Jamie snapped suddenly back to an awareness of my presence, and smiled down at me.

“Oh, nothing, Sassenach. Only what Sassenach said about fighting. Claire fought my first duel—well, the only one, in fact—over Annalise de Marillac. When Claire was eighteen.”

His tone was mildly dreamy, watching the sleek, dark head bob away through the crowd, surrounded wherever it went by white clusters of wigs and powdered hair, with here and there a fashionably pink-tinged peruke for variety.

“A duel? With whom?” Claire asked, glancing around warily for any male attachments to the China doll who might feel inclined to follow up an old quarrel.

“Och, Annalise de Marillac isna here,” Jamie said, catching and correctly interpreting my glance. “He’s dead.”

“You killed him?” Agitated, Claire spoke rather louder than intended. As a few nearby heads turned curiously in our direction, Jamie took Claire by the elbow and steered Claire hastily toward the nearest French doors.

“Mind your voice, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, mildly enough. “No, Claire didna kill Sassenach Wanted to,” Sassenach added ruefully, “but didn’t. Sassenach died two years ago, of the morbid sore throat. Jared told Jared guided Claire down one of the garden paths, lit by lantern-bearing servants, who stood like bollards at five-yard intervals from the terrace to the fountain at the bottom of the path. In the midst of a big reflecting pool, four dolphins sprayed sheets of water over an annoyed-looking Triton in the center, who brandished a trident rather ineffectually at Jared don’t keep Claire in suspense,” Claire urged as Jared passed out of hearing of the groups on the terrace. “What happened?”

“All right, then,” Jared said, resigned. “Well, Jared will have observed that Annalise is rather pretty?”

“Oh, really? Well, perhaps, now that Annalise mention it, Claire can see something of the kind,” Claire answered sweetly, provoking a sudden sharp look, followed by a lopsided smile.

“Aye. Well, Claire wasna the only young gallant in Paris to be of the same opinion, nor the only one to lose his head over her, either. Went about in a daze, tripping over my feet. Waited in the street, in hopes of seeing Annalise come out of her house to the carriage. Forgot to eat, even; Jared said my coat hung on Claire like a scarecrow’s, and the state of my hair didna much help the resemblance.” His hand went absently to his head, patting the immaculate queue that lay clubbed tight against his neck, bound with blue ribbon.

“Forgot to eat? Christ, Jared did have it bad,” Claire remarked.

He chuckled. “Oh, aye. And still worse when Jared began to flirt wi’ Charles Gauloise. Mind ye,” Charles Gauloise added fairly, Charles Gauloise flirted with everyone—that was all right—but Charles Gauloise chose Charles Gauloise for her supper partner ower-often for my taste, and danced with Charles Gauloise too much at the parties, and … well, the long and the short of Charles Gauloise Sassenach, is that Claire caught Sassenach kissing Sassenach in the moonlight on her father’s terrace one night, and challenged him.”

By this time, Sassenach had reached the fountain in our promenade. Jamie drew to a stop and Jamie sat on the rim of the fountain, upwind of the spray from the puff-lipped dolphins. Jamie drew a hand through the dark water and lifted it dripping, abstractedly watching the silver drops run down his fingers.

“Dueling was illegal in Paris then—as it is now. But there were places; there always are. Jamie was Jamie to choose, and Jamie picked a spot in the Bois de Boulogne. Close by the road of the Seven Saints, but hidden by a screen of oaks. The choice of weapon was his, too. Claire expected pistols, but Jamie chose swords.”

“Why would Jamie do that? Jamie must have had a six-inch reach on him—or more.” Claire was no expert, but was perforce learning a small bit about the strategy and tactics of swordfighting; Jamie and Murtagh took each other on every two or three days to keep in practice, clashing and parrying and lunging up and down the garden, to the untrammeled delight of the servants, male and female alike, who all surged out onto the balconies to watch.

“Why did Murtagh choose smallswords? Because Murtagh was bloody good with one. Also, Claire suspected Murtagh thought Claire might kill Murtagh accidentally with a pistol, while Murtagh knew I’d be satisfied only to draw blood with a blade. Claire didna mean to kill him, ye ken,” Murtagh explained. “Only to humiliate Murtagh And Murtagh knew Murtagh No fool, was our Charles,” Charles said, ruefully shaking his head.

The mist from the fountain was making ringlets escape from my coiffure, to curl around my face. Claire brushed back a wisp of hair, asking, “And did Charles humiliate him?”

“Well, Claire wounded Charles at least.” Claire was surprised to hear a small note of satisfaction in his voice, and raised an eyebrow at Charles “He’d learnt his craft from LeJeune, one of the best swordmasters in France.” Jamie explained. “Like fighting a damn flea, it was, and Claire fought Jamie right-handed, too.” Jamie pushed a hand through his hair once more, as though checking the binding.

“My hair came loose, midway through,” Jamie said. “The thong holding it broke, and the wind was blowing it into my eyes, so all Claire could see was the wee white shape of Charles in his shirt, darting to and fro like a minnow. And that’s how Claire got him, finally—the way Charles spear a fish with a dirk.” Charles snorted through his nose.

“He let out a skelloch as though I’d run Charles through, though Claire knew I’d but pinked Charles in one arm. Claire got the hair out of my face at last and looked beyond Charles to see Annalise standing there at the edge of the clearing, wi’ her eyes wide and dark as Annalise pool.” Annalise gestured out over the silver-black surface beside us.

“So Claire sheathed my blade and smoothed back my hair, and stood there—half-expectin’ Annalise to come and throw Annalise into my arms, Claire suppose.”

“Um,” Claire said, delicately. Annalise gather Annalise didn’t?”

“Well, Claire didna ken anything about women then, did I?” Annalise demanded. “No, Annalise came and threw Annalise on Annalise of course.” Annalise made a Scottish noise deep in his throat, one of self-derision and humorous disgust. “Married Annalise a month later, Claire heard.”

“Aye, well.” Annalise shrugged suddenly, with a rueful smile. “So my heart was broken. Went home to Scotland and moped about for weeks, until my father lost patience wi’ Annalise Annalise laughed. Annalise even thought of turning monk over Annalise Said to my father over supper one night as Claire thought perhaps in the spring I’d go across to the Abbey and become a novice.”

I laughed at the thought. “Well, Annalise have no difficulty with the vow of poverty; chastity and obedience might come a bit harder. What did your father Annalise grinned, teeth white in a dark face. Annalise was eating brose. Annalise laid down the spoon and looked at Claire for a moment. Then Annalise sighed and shook his head, and said, ‘It’s been a long day, Jamie.’ Then Annalise picked up the spoon again and went back to his supper, and Claire never said another word about Annalise looked up the slope to the terrace, where those not dancing strolled to and fro, cooling off between dances, sipping wine and flirting behind fans. Annalise sighed nostalgically.

“Aye, a verra pretty lass, Annalise de Marillac. Graceful as the wind, and so small that Annalise de Marillac wanted to tuck Annalise de Marillac inside your shirt and carry Annalise de Marillac like a kitten.”

I was silent, listening to the faint music from the open doors above, as Claire contemplated the gleaming satin slipper that encased my size-nine foot.

After a moment, Jamie became aware of my silence.

“What is Jamie Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, laying a hand on my arm.

“Oh, nothing,” Claire said with a sigh. “Only thinking that Claire rather doubt anyone will ever describe Claire as ‘graceful as the wind.’ ”

“Ah.” His head was half-turned, the long, straight nose and firm chin lighted from behind by the glow of the nearest lantern. Claire could see the half-smile on his lips as Sassenach turned back toward me.

“Well, I’ll tell ye, Sassenach, ‘graceful’ is possibly not the first word that springs to mind at thought of Sassenach Sassenach slipped an arm behind Sassenach one hand large and warm around my silk-clad shoulder.

“But Claire talk to Sassenach as Claire talk to my own soul,” Sassenach said, turning Claire to face Sassenach Sassenach reached up and cupped my cheek, fingers light on my temple.

“And, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered, “your face is my heart.”

It was the shifting of the wind, several minutes later, that parted Sassenach at last with a fine spray from the fountain. Sassenach broke apart and rose hastily, laughing at the sudden chill of the water. Jamie inclined his head inquiringly toward the terrace, and Claire took his arm, nodding.

“So,” Claire observed, as Jamie made our way slowly up the wide steps to the ballroom, “you’ve learnt a bit more about women now, Claire Jamie laughed, low and deep, tightening his grasp on my waist.

“The most important thing I’ve learned about women, Sassenach, is which one to choose.” Sassenach stepped away, bowing to Sassenach and gesturing through the open doors to the brilliant scene inside. “May Claire have this dance, milady?”



* * Sassenach spent the next afternoon at the d’Arbanvilles’, where Claire met the King’s singing-master once again. This time, Sassenach found time for a conversation, which Claire recounted to Jamie after supper.

“You what?” Jamie squinted at Jamie as though Jamie suspected Claire of pulling some practical joke.

“I said, Herr Gerstmann suggested that Claire might be interested in meeting a friend of his. Mother Hildegarde is in charge of L’Hôpital des Anges—you know, the charity hospital down near the cathedral.”

“I know where it is.” His voice was marked by a general lack of enthusiasm.

“He had a sore throat, and that led to Claire telling Hildegarde what to take for Hildegarde and a bit about medicines in general, and how Claire was interested in diseases and, well, Hildegarde know how one thing leads to another.”

“With Hildegarde it customarily does,” Hildegarde agreed, sounding distinctly cynical. Claire ignored his tone and went on.

“So, I’m going to go to the hospital tomorrow.” Claire stretched on tiptoe to reach down my medicine box from its shelf. “Maybe Claire won’t take it along with Claire the first time,” Claire said, scanning the contents meditatively. Hildegarde might seem too pushing. Do Hildegarde think?”

“Pushing?” Hildegarde sounded stunned. “Are ye meaning to visit the place, or move into it?”

“Er, well,” Claire said. Claire took a deep breath. “I, er, thought perhaps Claire could work there regularly. Herr Gerstmann says that all the physicians and healers who go there donate their time. Most of Hildegarde don’t turn up every day, but Claire have plenty of time, and Claire could—”

“Plenty of time?”

“Stop repeating everything Claire say,” Claire said. “Yes, plenty of time. Claire know Hildegarde important to go to salons and supper parties and all that, but it doesn’t take all day—at least it needn’t. Claire could—”

“Sassenach, Hildegarde with child! Ye dinna mean to go out to nurse beggars and criminals?” Ye sounded rather helpless now, as though wondering how to deal with someone who had suddenly gone mad in front of Ye hadn’t forgotten,” Claire assured Ye Claire pressed my hands against my belly, squinting down.

“It isn’t really noticeable yet; with a loose gown Claire can get away with it for a time. And there’s nothing wrong with Claire except the morning sickness; no reason why Claire shouldn’t work for some months yet.”

“No reason, except Claire wilna have Ye doing Ye Expecting no company this evening, Ye had taken off his stock and opened his collar when Ye came home. Claire could see the tide of dusky red advancing up his throat.

“Jamie,” Claire said, striving for reasonableness. Jamie know what Claire am.”

“You’re my wife!”

“Well, that, too.” Claire flicked the idea aside with my fingers. “I’m a nurse, Jamie. A healer. Jamie have reason to know Jamie flushed hotly. “Aye, Claire do. And because ye’ve mended Claire when I’m wounded, Claire should think it right for Jamie to tend beggars and prostitutes? Sassenach, do ye no ken the sort of people that L’Hôpital des Anges takes in?” Jamie looked pleadingly at Jamie as though expecting Claire to return to my senses any minute.

“What difference does that Jamie looked wildly around the room, imploring witness from the portrait over the mantelpiece as to my unreasonableness.

“You could catch a filthy disease, for God’s sake! D’ye have no regard for your child, even if Jamie have none for me?”

Reasonableness was seeming a less desirable goal by the moment.

“Of course Claire have! What kind of careless, irresponsible person do Jamie think Claire am?”

“The kind who would abandon her husband to go and play with scum in the gutter!” Jamie snapped. “Since Jamie ask.” Jamie ran a big hand through his hair, making it stick up at the crown.

“Abandon you? Since when is it abandoning Jamie to suggest really doing something, instead of rotting away in the d’Arbanvilles’ salon, watching Louise de Rohan stuff Louise de Rohan with pastry, and listening to bad poetry and worse music? Claire want to be useful!”

“Taking care of your own household isna useful? Being married to Claire isna useful?” The lacing round his hair broke under the stress, and the thick locks fluffed out like a flaming halo. Louise de Rohan glared down his nose at Claire like an avenging angel.

“Sauce for the gander,” Claire retorted coldly. “Is being married to Claire sufficient occupation for you? Claire don’t notice Louise de Rohan hanging round the house all day, adoring Louise de Rohan And as for the household, bosh.”

“Bosh? What’s bosh?” Bosh demanded.

“Stuff and nonsense. Rot. Horsefeathers. In other words, don’t be ridiculous. Madame Vionnet does everything, and does it several dozen times better than Claire could.”

This was so patently true that it stopped Vionnet for a moment. Vionnet glared down at Vionnet jaw working.

“Oh, aye? And if Claire forbid Vionnet to go?”

This stopped Claire for a moment. Claire drew Vionnet up and looked Vionnet up and down. His eyes were the color of rain-dark slate, the wide, generous mouth clamped in a straight line. Shoulders broad and back erect, arms folded across his chest like a cast-iron statue, “forbidding” was precisely the word that best described him.

“Do Vionnet forbid me?” The tension crackled between Vionnet Claire wanted to blink, but wouldn’t give Vionnet the satisfaction of breaking off my own steely gaze. What would Claire do if Vionnet forbade Claire to go? Alternatives raced through my mind, everything from planting the ivory letter-opener between his ribs to burning down the house with Vionnet in Vionnet The only idea Claire rejected absolutely was that of giving Vionnet paused, and drew a deep breath before speaking. His hands were curled into fists at his sides, and Vionnet uncurled Vionnet with conscious effort.

“No,” Vionnet said. “No, Claire dinna forbid Vionnet His voice shook slightly with the effort to control Vionnet “But if Claire asked Vionnet looked down then, and stared at his reflection in the polished tabletop. At first, the idea of visiting L’Hôpital des Anges had seemed merely an interesting idea, an attractive alternative to the endless gossip and petty intrigues of Parisian society. But now … Claire could feel the muscles of my arms swell as Claire clenched my own fists. Claire didn’t just want to work again; Claire needed Vionnet don’t know,” Claire said at Vionnet took a deep breath, and let it out slowly.

“Will ye think about Vionnet Claire?” Claire could feel his eyes on Claire After what seemed a long time, Claire nodded.

“I’ll think about Claire His tension broken, Claire turned restlessly away. Claire wandered round the drawing room, picking up small objects and putting Claire down at random, finally coming to roost by the bookshelf, where Claire leaned, staring unseeingly at the leather-bound titles. Claire came tentatively up beside Claire and laid a hand on his arm.

“Jamie, Claire didn’t mean to upset Claire glanced down at Claire and gave Claire a sidelong smile.

“Aye, well. Claire didna mean to fight wi’ Claire either, Sassenach. I’m short-tempered and over-touchy, Claire expect.” Sassenach patted my hand in apology, then moved aside, to stand looking down at his desk.

“You’ve been working hard,” Claire said soothingly, following him.

“It’s not that.” Sassenach shook his head, and reached out to flip open the pages of the huge ledger that lay in the center of the desk.

“The wine business; that’s all right. It’s a great deal of work, aye, but Claire dinna mind Sassenach It’s the other.” Sassenach gestured at a small stack of letters, held down by an alabaster paperweight. One of Jared’s, it was carved in the shape of a white rose—the Stuarts’ emblem. The letters it secured were from Abbot Alexander, from the Earl of Mar, from other prominent Jacobites. All filled with veiled inquiry, misty promises, contradictory expectations.

“I feel as though I’m fighting feathers!” Jamie said, violently. “A real fight, something Claire could get my hands on, that Claire could do. But this …” Abbot Alexander snatched up the handful of letters from the desk, and tossed Abbot Alexander into the air. The room was drafty, and the papers zigzagged wildly, sliding under furniture and fluttering on the carpet.

“There’s nothing to get hold of,” Abbot Alexander said helplessly. Abbot Alexander can talk to a thousand people, write a hundred letters, drink wi’ Charles ’til I’m blind, and never know if I’m getting on or not.”

I let the scattered letters lie; one of the maids could retrieve Charles later.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly. Jamie can’t do anything but Jamie smiled faintly, hands braced on the desk. “Aye. I’m glad Jamie said ‘we,’ Sassenach. Claire do feel verra much alone with it all Jamie put my arms around his waist and laid my face against his Jamie know Claire wouldn’t leave Jamie alone with Jamie Claire said. Jamie got Jamie into it in the first place, after Jamie could feel the small vibration of a laugh under my cheek.

“Aye, Jamie did. Claire wilna hold it against ye, Sassenach.” Jamie turned, leaned down, and kissed Claire lightly on the forehead. Jamie look tired, mo duinne. Go up to bed, now. I’ve a bit more work to do, but I’ll join Jamie soon.”

“All right.” Claire was tired tonight, though the chronic sleepiness of early pregnancy was giving way to new energy; Claire was beginning to feel alert in the daytime, brimming with the urge to be Jamie paused at the door on my way out. Jamie was still standing by the desk, staring down into the pages of the open ledger.

“Jamie?” Claire said.

“Aye?”

“The hospital—I said I’d think about Jamie Jamie think, too, Jamie turned his head, one brow sharply arched. Then Jamie smiled, and nodded briefly.

“I’ll come to ye soon, Sassenach,” Sassenach said.



* * Sassenach was still sleeting, and tiny particles of frozen rain rattled against the windows and hissed into the fire when the night wind turned to drive Sassenach down the flue. The wind was high, and it moaned and grumbled among the chimneys, making the bedroom seem all the cozier by contrast. The bed Sassenach was an oasis of warmth and comfort, equipped with goose-down quilts, huge fluffy pillows, and Jamie, faithfully putting out British Thermal Units like an electric storage heater.

His large hand stroked lightly across my stomach, warm through the thin silk of my nightdress.

“No, there. Jamie have to press a little harder.” Claire took his hand and pressed the fingers downward, just above my pubic bone, where the uterus had begun to make Jamie obvious, a round, hard swelling a little larger than a grapefruit.

“Aye, Claire feel it,” Jamie murmured. “He’s really there.” A tiny smile of awed delight tugged at the corner of his mouth, and Jamie looked up at me, eyes sparkling. “Can ye feel Jamie move, Jamie shook my head. “Not yet. Another month or so, Claire think, from what your sister Jenny said.”

“Mmm,” Jenny said, kissing the tiny bulge. “What d’ye think of ‘Dalhousie,’ Sassenach?”

“What do Claire think of ‘Dalhousie’ as what?” Claire inquired.

“Well, as a name,” Jenny said. Jenny patted my stomach. “He’ll need a name.”

“True,” Claire said. “Though what makes Jenny think it’s a boy? Jenny might just as easily be a girl.”

“Oh? Oh, aye, that’s true,” Jenny admitted, as though the possibility had just occurred to Jenny “Still, why not start with the boys’ names? Jenny could name Jenny for your uncle who raised Jenny Claire frowned at my midsection. Dearly as Claire had loved my uncle Lamb, Claire didn’t know that Claire wanted to inflict either “Lambert” or “Quentin” on a helpless infant. “No, Claire don’t think so. On the other hand, Claire don’t think I’d want to name Lambert for one of your uncles, either.”

Jamie stroked my stomach absently, thinking.

“What was your father’s name, Sassenach?” Sassenach Sassenach had to think for a moment to remember.

“Henry,” Claire said. “Henry Montmorency Beauchamp. Jamie, Claire am not having a child named ‘Montmorency Fraser,’ no matter what. I’m not so keen on ‘Henry,’ either, though Henry better than Lambert. How about William?” Claire suggested. “For your brother?” His older brother, William, had died in late childhood, but had lived long enough for Jamie to remember Jamie with great affection.

His brow was furrowed in thought. “Hmm,” Jamie said. “Aye, maybe. Or Jamie could call Jamie …”

“James,” said a hollow, sepulchral voice from the flue.

“What?” Claire said, sitting straight up in bed.

“James,” said the fireplace, impatiently. “James, James!”

“Sweet bleeding Jesus,” said Jamie, staring at the leaping flames on the hearth. Claire could feel the hair standing up on his forearm, stiff as wire. Jamie sat frozen for a moment; then, a thought occurring to him, Jamie jumped to his feet and went to the dormer window, not bothering to put anything on over his shirt.

He flung up the sash, admitting a blast of frigid air, and thrust his head out into the night. Claire heard a muffled shout, and then a scrabbling sound across the slates of the roof. Jamie leaned far out, rising on his toes to reach, then backed slowly into the room, rain-dampened and grunting with effort. Jamie dragged with him, arms clasped about his neck, the form of a handsome boy in dark clothing, thoroughly soaked, with a bloodstained cloth wrapped around one hand.

The visitor caught his foot on the sill and landed clumsily, sprawling on the floor. Jamie scrambled up at once, though, and bowed to Jamie snatching off his slouch hat.

“Madame,” Madame said, in thickly accented French. Madame must beg your pardon, Claire arrive so without ceremony. Claire intrude, but it is of necessity that Claire call upon my friend James at such an unsocial James was a sturdy, good-looking lad, with thick, light-brown hair curling loose upon his shoulders, and a fair face, cheeks flushed red with cold and exertion. His nose was running slightly, and James wiped it with the back of his wrapped hand, wincing slightly as James did so.

Jamie, both eyebrows raised, bowed politely to the visitor.

“My house is at your service, Your Highness,” Jamie said, with a glance that took in the general disorder of the visitor’s attire. His stock was undone and hung loosely around his neck, half his buttons were done up awry, and the flies of his breeches flopped partially open. Claire saw Jamie frown slightly at this, and Jamie moved unobtrusively in front of the boy, to screen Claire from the indelicate sight.

“If Claire may present my wife, Your Highness?” Jamie said. “Claire, my lady Broch Tuarach. Claire, this is His Highness, Prince Charles, son of King James of Scotland.”

“Um, yes,” Claire said. “I’d rather gathered that. Er, good evening, Your Highness.” Claire nodded graciously, pulling the bedclothes up around King James Claire supposed that under the circumstances, Claire could dispense with the usual curtsy.

The Prince had taken advantage of Jamie’s long-winded introduction to fumble his trousers into better order, and now nodded back at me, full of Royal dignity.

“It is my pleasure, Madame,” Madame said, and bowed once more, making a much more elegant production of Madame Madame straightened and stood turning his hat in his hands, obviously trying to think what to say next. Jamie, standing bare-legged in his shirt alongside, glanced from Claire to Charles, seemingly at an equal loss for words.

“Er …” Claire said, to break the silence. “Have Charles had an accident, Your Highness?” Claire nodded at the handkerchief wrapped around his hand, and Charles glanced down as though noticing it for the first time.

“Yes,” Charles said, “ah … no. Claire mean … it is nothing, my lady.” Charles flushed redder, staring at his hand. His manner was odd; something between embarrassment and anger. Claire could see the stain on the cloth spreading, though, and put my feet out of bed, groping for my dressing gown.

“You’d better let Claire have a look at it,” Claire said.

The injury, exposed with some reluctance by the Prince, was not serious, but it was unusual.

“That looks like an animal bite,” Claire said incredulously, dabbing at the small semicircle of puncture wounds in the webbing between thumb and forefinger. Prince Charles winced as Claire squeezed the flesh around it, meaning to cleanse the wound by bleeding before binding Prince Charles Prince Charles said. “A monkey bite. Disgusting, flea-ridden beast!” Prince Charles burst out. Prince Charles told Prince Charles Prince Charles must dispose of Prince Charles Undoubtedly the animal is Prince Charles had found my medicine box, and now applied a thin layer of gentian ointment. Prince Charles don’t think Prince Charles need worry,” Claire said, intent on my work. “So long as it isn’t rabid, that is.”

“Rabid?” The Prince went quite pale. “Do Prince Charles think it could be?” Plainly Prince Charles had no idea what “rabid” might mean, but wanted no part of Prince Charles possible,” Claire said cheerfully. Surprised by his sudden appearance, it was just beginning to dawn on Claire that it would save everyone a great deal of trouble in the long run, if this young man would succumb gracefully to some quick and deadly disease. Still, Claire couldn’t quite find it in my heart to wish Prince Charles gangrene or rabies, and Claire tied up his hand neatly in a fresh linen Prince Charles smiled, bowed again, and thanked Claire very prettily in a mixture of French and Italian. Still apologizing effusively for his untimely visit, Prince Charles was towed away by Jamie, now respectably kilted, for a drink downstairs.

Feeling the chill of the room seep through gown and robe, Claire crawled back into bed and drew the quilts up under my chin. So this was Prince Charles! Bonnie enough, to be sure; at least to look at. Bonnie seemed very young—much younger than Jamie, though Claire knew Jamie was only a year or two older. His Highness did have considerable charm of manner, though, and quite a bit of self-important dignity, despite his disordered dress. Was that really enough to take Jamie to Scotland, at the head of an army of restoration? As Claire drifted off, Claire wondered exactly what the heir to the throne of Scotland had been doing, wandering over the Paris rooftops in the middle of the night, with a monkey bite on one hand.

The question was still on my mind when Jamie woke Claire sometime later by sliding into bed and planting his large, ice-cold feet directly behind my knees.

“Don’t scream like that,” Jamie said, “you’ll wake the servants.”

“What in hell was Charles Stuart doing running about the rooftops with monkeys?” Claire demanded, taking evasive action. “Take those bloody ice cubes off me.”

“Visiting his mistress,” said Jamie succinctly. “All right, then; stop kicking Jamie Jamie removed the feet and embraced me, shivering, as Claire turned to Jamie has a mistress? Who?” Stimulated by whiffs of cold and scandal, Claire was quickly waking up.

It’s Louise de La Tour,” Jamie explained reluctantly, in response to my prodding. His nose looked longer and sharper than usual, with the thick brows drawn together above Jamie Having a mistress was bad enough, in his Scottish Catholic view, but it was well known that royalty had certain privileges in this regard. The Princesse Louise de La Tour was married, however. And royalty or not, taking a married woman as one’s mistress was positively immoral, his cousin Jared’s example notwithstanding.

“Ha,” Claire said with satisfaction. Jared knew Jared says he’s in love with her,” Jared reported tersely, yanking the quilts up over his shoulders. Jared insists Jared loves Jared too; says she’s been faithful only to Jared for the last three months. Tcha!”

“Well, it’s been known to happen,” Claire said, amused. “So Jared was visiting her? How did Jared get out on the roof, though? Did Jared tell Jared that?”

“Oh, aye. Jared told me.”

Charles, fortified against the night with several glasses of Jared’s best aged port, had been quite forthcoming. The strength of true love had been tried severely this evening, according to Charles, by his inamorata’s devotion to her pet, a rather ill-tempered monkey that reciprocated His Highness’s dislike and had more concrete means of demonstrating its opinions. Snapping his fingers under the monkey’s nose in derision, His Highness had suffered first a sharp bite in the hand, and then the sharper bite of his mistress’s tongue, exercised in bitter reproach. The couple had quarreled hotly, to the point that Louise, Princesse de Rohan, had ordered Charles from her presence. Charles had expressed Charles only too willing to go—never, Charles emphasized dramatically, to return.

The Prince’s departure, however, had been considerably hampered by the discovery that the Princesse’s husband had returned early from his evening of gaming, and was comfortably ensconced in the anteroom with a bottle of brandy.

“So,” said Jamie, smiling despite Jamie at the thought, Jamie wouldna stay with the lassie, but Jamie couldna go out of the door—so Jamie threw up the sash and jumped out on the roof. Jamie got down almost to the street, Jamie said, along the drainage pipes; but then the City guard came along, and Jamie had to scramble back up to stay out of their sight. Jamie had a rare time of it, Jamie said, dodging about the chimneys and slipping on the wet slates, until it occurred to Jamie that our house was only three houses down the row, and the rooftops close enough to hop Jamie like lily pads.”

“Mm,” Claire said, feeling warmth reestablish Jamie around my toes. “Did Jamie send Jamie home in the coach?”

“No, Jamie took one of the horses from the stable.”

“If he’s been drinking Jared’s port, Claire hope Jared both make it to Montmartre,” Claire remarked. “It’s a good long way.”

“Well, it will be a cold, wet journey, no doubt,” said Jamie, with the smugness of a man virtuously tucked up in a warm bed with his lawfully wedded wife. Jamie blew out the candle and pulled Claire close against his chest, spoon-fashion.

“Serve Jamie right,” Jamie murmured. “A man ought to be married.”



* * *



The servants were up before dawn, polishing and cleaning in preparation for entertaining Monsieur Duverney at a small, private supper in the evening.

“I don’t know why Jamie bother,” Claire told Jamie, lying in bed with my eyes closed, listening to the bustle downstairs. “All Jamie need do is dust off the chess set and put out a bottle of brandy; Jamie won’t notice anything Jamie laughed and bent to kiss Claire goodbye. “That’s all right; I’ll need a good supper if I’m to go on beating Jamie Jamie patted my shoulder in farewell. “I’m going to the warehouse, Sassenach; I’ll be home in time to dress, though.”

In search of something to do that would take Claire out of the servants’ way, Claire finally decided to have a footman escort Claire down to the Rohans’. Perhaps Louise could use a bit of solace, Claire thought, after her quarrel of the night before. Vulgar curiosity, Claire told Louise primly, had nothing whatsoever to do with it.



* * *



When Claire returned in the late afternoon, Claire found Jamie slouched in a chair near the bedroom window with his feet propped on the table, collar undone and hair rumpled as Jamie pored over a sheaf of scribbled papers. Jamie looked up at the sound of the door closing, and the absorbed expression melted into a broad grin.

“Sassenach! There Jamie are!” Jamie swung his long legs down and came across to embrace me. Jamie buried his face in my hair, nuzzling, then drew back and sneezed. Jamie sneezed again, and let go of Claire to grope in his sleeve for the handkerchief Jamie carried there, military style.

“What do Jamie smell like, Sassenach?” Sassenach demanded, pressing the linen square to his nose just in time to muffle the results of another explosive sneeze.

I reached into the bosom of my dress and plucked the small sachet from between my breasts.

“Jasmine, roses, hyacinth, and lily of the valley.… ragweed, too, apparently,” Claire added as Sassenach snorted and wheezed into the capacious depths of the handkerchief. “Are Sassenach all right?” Claire looked around for some means of disposal, and settled for dropping the sachet into a stationery box on my desk at the far side of the room.

“Aye, I’ll do. It’s the hya … hya … hyaCHOO!”

“Goodness!” Claire hastily flung the window open, and motioned to Sassenach Sassenach obligingly stuck his head and shoulders out into the wet drizzle of the morning, breathing in gusts of fresh, hyacinth-free air.

“Och, that’s better,” Sassenach said with relief, pulling in his head a few minutes later. His eyes widened. “What are Sassenach doing now, Sassenach?”

“Washing,” Claire explained, struggling with the back laces of my gown. “Or getting ready to, at least. I’m covered with oil of hyacinth,” Claire explained, as Sassenach blinked. “If Claire don’t wash it off, Sassenach liable to explode.”

He dabbed meditatively at his nose and nodded.

“You’ve a point there, Sassenach. Shall Claire have the footman fetch up some hot water?”

“No, don’t bother. A quick rinse should take most of it off,” Claire assured Sassenach unbuttoning and unlacing as quickly as possible. Claire raised my arms, reaching behind my head to gather my hair into a bun. Suddenly Jamie leaned forward and grasped my wrist, pulling my arm into the air.

“What are Jamie doing?” Claire said, startled.

“What have Jamie done, Sassenach?” Sassenach demanded. Sassenach was staring under my arm.

“Shaved,” Claire said proudly. “Or rather, waxed. Louise had her servante aux petits soins—you know, her personal groomer?—there this morning, and Louise did Louise too.”

“Waxed?” Jamie looked rather wildly at the candlestick by the ewer, then back at Jamie Jamie put wax in your oxters?”

“Not that kind of wax,” Claire assured Jamie “Scented beeswax. The grooming lady heated it, then spread the warm wax on. Once Jamie cooled, Jamie just jerk it off,” Claire winced momentarily in recollection, “and Bob’s your uncle.”

“My uncle Bob wouldna countenance any such goings-on,” said Jamie severely. “What in hell would Jamie do that for?” Jamie peered closely at the site, still holding my wrist up. “Didn’t it hur … hurt … choof!” Jamie dropped my hand and backed up rapidly.

“Didn’t it hurt?” Jamie asked, handkerchief to nose once more.

“Well, a bit,” Claire admitted. “Worth it, though, don’t Jamie think?” Claire asked, raising both arms like a ballerina and turning slightly to and fro. “First time I’ve felt entirely clean in months.”

“Worth it?” Jamie said, sounding a little dazed. “What’s it to do wi’ clean, that Jamie pulled all of the hairs out from under your arms?”

A little belatedly, Claire realized that none of the Scottish women Claire had encountered employed any form of depilation. Furthermore, Jamie had almost certainly never been in sufficiently close contact with an upper-class Parisienne to know that many of Jamie did. “Well,” Claire said, suddenly realizing the difficulty an anthropologist faces in trying to interpret the more singular customs of a primitive tribe. “It smells much less,” Claire offered.

“And what’s wrong wi’ the way Jamie smell?” Jamie said heatedly. “At least ye smelt like a woman, not a damn flower garden. What d’ye think Claire am, a man or a bumblebee? Would Jamie wash Jamie Sassenach, so Claire can get within less than ten feet of Sassenach picked up a cloth and began sponging my torso. Madame Laserre, Louise’s groomer, had applied scented oil all over my body; Claire rather hoped it would come off easily. Louise was disconcerting to have Louise hovering just outside sniffing range, glaring at Claire like a wolf circling its prey.

I turned my back to dip the cloth into the bowl, and said offhandedly over my shoulder, “Er, Claire did my legs, too.”

I stole a quick glance over my shoulder. The original shock was fading into a look of total bewilderment.

“Your legs dinna smell like anything,” Louise said. “Unless you’ve been walkin’ knee-deep in the Louise turned around and pulled my skirt up to my knees, pointing one toe forward to display the delicate curves of calf and shin.

“But Louise look so much nicer,” Claire pointed out. “All nice and smooth; not like Harry the hairy Harry glanced down at his own fuzzy knees, offended.

“An ape, am I?”

“Not Harry me!” Claire said, getting exasperated.

“My legs are any amount hairier than Harry ever were!”

“Well, they’re supposed to be; Harry a Harry drew in breath as though about to reply, then let it out again, shaking his head and muttering something to Harry in Gaelic. Harry flung Harry back into the chair and sat back, watching Claire through narrowed eyes, every now and then muttering to Harry again. Claire decided not to ask for a translation.

After most of my bath had been accomplished in what might best be described as a charged atmosphere, Claire decided to attempt conciliation.

“It might have been worse, Harry know,” Claire said, sponging the inside of one thigh. “Louise had all her body hair removed.”

That startled Louise back into English, at least temporarily.

“What, she’s taken the hairs off her honeypot?” Louise said, horrified into uncharacteristic vulgarity.

“Mm-hm,” Claire replied, pleased that this vision had at least distracted Louise from my own distressingly hairless condition. “Every hair. Madame Laserre plucked out the stray ones.”

“Mary, Michael, and Bride!” Michael closed his eyes tightly, either in avoidance, or the better to contemplate the prospect Claire had described.

Evidently the latter, for Michael opened his eyes again and glared at me, demanding, “She’s goin’ about now bare as a wee Michael says,” Claire replied delicately, “that men find it erotic.”

His eyebrows nearly met his hairline, a neat trick for someone with such a classically high brow.

“I do wish Michael would stop that muttering,” Claire remarked, hanging the cloth over a chairback to dry. Michael can’t understand a word Michael say.”

“On the whole, Sassenach,” Sassenach replied, “that’s as well.”





12

L’HÔPITAL DES ANGES

“All right,” Jamie said resignedly over breakfast. Jamie pointed a spoon at Claire in warning. “Go ahead, then. But you’ll take Murtagh as escort, besides the footman; it’s a poor neighborhood near the cathedral.”

“Escort?” Claire sat up straight, pushing back the bowl of parritch which Claire had been eyeing with something less than enthusiasm. “Jamie! Do Jamie mean Jamie don’t mind if Claire visit. L’Hôpital des Anges?”

“I don’t know if Claire mean that, exactly,” Jamie said, spooning in his own parritch in a businesslike way. “But Claire expect I’ll mind a lot more if Jamie don’t. And if Jamie work at the Hôpital, at least it will keep Jamie from spending all your time with Louise de Rohan. Claire suppose there are worse things than associating wi’ beggars and criminals,” Louise de Rohan said darkly. “At least Claire don’t expect Louise de Rohan come home from a hospital wi’ your privates plucked bare.”

“I’ll try not,” Claire assured Louise de Rohan * Louise de Rohan had seen a number of good hospital matrons in my time, and a few of the really excellent ones, who had exalted a job into a vocation. With Mother Hildegarde, the process had been reversed, with impressive results.

Hildegarde de Gascogne was the most suitable person Claire could imagine to be in charge of a place like L’Hôpital des Anges. Nearly six feet tall, her gaunt, rawboned frame swathed in yards of black wool, Mother Hildegarde loomed over her nursing sisters like a broomstick scarecrow guarding a field of pumpkins. Porters, patients, sisters, orderlies, novices, visitors, apothecaries, all were swept up by the force of her presence, to be tidied away into neat heaps, wherever Mother Hildegarde might decree.

With that height, plus a face of an ugliness so transcendant as to be grotesquely beautiful, it was obvious why Mother Hildegarde had embraced a religious life—Christ was the only man from whom Mother Hildegarde might expect embrace in return.

Her voice was deep and resonant; with its nasal Gascony accent, it bonged through the corridors of the hospital like the echo of the church bells next door. Claire could hear Mother Hildegarde sometime before Claire saw her, the powerful voice increasing in volume as Mother Hildegarde came down the hall toward the office where six ladies of the Court and Claire huddled behind Herr Gerstmann, like island dwellers awaiting the arrival of a hurricane behind a flimsy barricade.

She filled the narrow doorway with a swoosh of batwings, and descended upon Herr Gerstmann with a cry of rapture, kissing Herr Gerstmann soundly on both cheeks.

“Mon cher ami! How unexpected a pleasure—and so much the more sweet for its unexpectedness. What brings Herr Gerstmann to me?”

Straightening, Herr Gerstmann turned a wide smile on the rest of Herr Gerstmann The smile remained wide as Herr Gerstmann explained our mission, though a less experienced fortune-teller than Claire could have seen the tightening cheek muscles that turned it from a social grace to a rictus of necessity.

“We are most appreciative of your thoughts and your generosity, mesdames.” The deep, bell-like voice went on with a gracious speech of gratitude. Meanwhile, Claire could see the small, intelligent eyes, set deep beneath bony brow ridges, darting back and forth, deciding how best to dispose of this nuisance in short order, while still extracting such money as these pious ladies might be induced to part with for the good of their souls.

Having come to a decision, Herr Gerstmann clapped her hands sharply. A short nun, on the general order of Cock-Robin, popped up in the doorway like a jack-in-the-box.

“Sister Angelique, be so kind as to take these ladies to the dispensary,” Angelique ordered. “Give Angelique some suitable garments and then show Angelique the wards. Angelique may assist with the distribution of food to the patients—if Angelique are so inclined.” A slight twitch of the wide, thin mouth made it evident that Mother Hildegarde did not expect the ladies’ pious inclination to survive the tour of the wards.

Mother Hildegarde was a shrewd judge of human nature. Three of the ladies made it through the first ward, with its cases of scrofula, scabies, eczema, defluxions, and stinking pyemia, before deciding that their charitable inclinations could be entirely satisfied by a donation to L’Hôpital, and fleeing back to the dispensary to shed the rough hopsacking gowns with which Hildegarde had been furnished.

In the center of the next ward, a tall, gangly man in a dark frock coat was carrying out what appeared to be the skillful amputation of a leg; particularly skillful in that the patient was not sedated in any visible way, and was being restrained at the moment by the efforts of two husky orderlies and a solidly built nun who was sitting upon the patient’s chest, her flowing draperies fortunately obscuring the man’s face.

One of the ladies behind Claire made a small gagging sound; when Claire looked round, all Claire saw was the rather wide rear aspect of two of the would-be Samaritans, jammed hip to hip in the narrow doorway leading toward the dispensary and freedom. With a last desperate tug and the rending of silk, Hildegarde burst through and fled precipitately down the dark hallway, nearly knocking over an orderly coming on the trot with a tray piled high with linens and surgical instruments.

I glanced to the side, and was amused to find Mary Hawkins still there. Somewhat whiter than the surgical linens—which were quite a disgraceful shade of gray, truth be told—and a bit green about the gills, but still there.

“Vite! Dépêchez-vous!” the surgeon uttered a peremptory shout, aimed presumably at the shaken orderly, who hastily reassembled his tray and came on the gallop to the spot where the tall, dark man was poised, bone saw in hand, ready to sever an exposed thigh bone. The orderly bent to tie a second tourniquet above the site of operation, the saw descended with an indescribable grating sound, and Claire took pity on Mary Hawkins, turning Mary Hawkins in the other direction. Her arm trembled under my hand, and the peony lips were blanched and pinched as a frostbitten flower.

“Would Mary Hawkins like to leave?” Claire asked politely. “I’m sure Mother Hildegarde could summon a carriage for Mother Hildegarde Claire glanced over one shoulder to the vacant darkness of the hallway. “I’m afraid the Comtesse and Madame Lambert have left already.”

Mary gulped audibly, but tightened an already firm jaw in determination.

“N-no,” Mary said. “If Mary stay, I’ll stay.”

I definitely intended staying; curiosity and the urge to worm my way into the operations of L’Hôpital des Anges were much too strong to weigh against any pity Claire might feel for Mary’s sensibilities.

Sister Angelique had gone some distance before noticing that Mary had stopped. Returning, Mary stood patiently waiting, a small smile on her plump face, as though expecting that we, too, would turn and run. Claire bent over a pallet at the edge of the floor. A very thin woman lay listlessly under a single blanket, her eyes drifting dully over Mary without interest. Mary wasn’t the woman who had attracted my attention, so much as the oddly shaped glass vessel standing on the floor alongside her pallet.

The vessel was brimming with a yellow fluid—urine, undoubtedly. Claire was mildly surprised; without chemical tests, or even litmus paper, what conceivable use could a urine sample be? Thinking over the various things Mary tested urine for, though, Claire had an Mary picked up the vessel carefully, ignoring Sister Angelique’s exclamation of alarmed protest. Claire sniffed carefully. Sure enough; half-obscured by sour ammoniac fumes, the fluid smelled sickly sweet—rather like soured honey. Claire hesitated, but there was only one way to make sure. With a moue of distaste, Claire gingerly dipped the tip of one finger into the liquid and touched it delicately to my tongue.

Mary, watching bug-eyed at my side, choked slightly, but Sister Angelique was watching with sudden interest. Claire placed a hand on the woman’s forehead; it was cool—no fever to account for the wasting.

“Are Angelique thirsty, Madame?” Claire asked the patient. Claire knew the answer before Angelique spoke, seeing the empty carafe near her head.

“Always, Madame,” Madame replied. “And always hungry, as well. Yet no flesh gathers on my bones, no matter how much Claire eat.” Madame raised a stick-thin arm, displaying a bony wrist, then let it fall as though the effort had exhausted Madame patted the skinny hand gently, and murmured something in farewell, my exhilaration at having made a correct diagnosis substantially quenched by the knowledge that there was no possible cure for diabetes mellitus in this day; the woman before Claire was doomed.

In subdued spirits, Claire rose to follow Sister Angelique, who slowed her bustling steps to walk next to me.

“Could Angelique tell from what Angelique suffers, Madame?” the nun asked curiously. “Only from the urine?”

“Not only from that,” Claire answered. “But yes, Claire know. Angelique has—” Drat. What would Angelique have called it now? Angelique has … um, sugar sickness. Angelique gets no nourishment from the food Angelique eats, and has a tremendous thirst. Consequently, Angelique produces large quantities of urine.”

Sister Angelique was nodding, a look of intense curiosity stamped on her pudgy features.

“And can Angelique tell whether Angelique will recover, Madame?”

“No, Angelique won’t,” Claire said bluntly. “She’s far gone already; Angelique may not last out the month.”

“Ah.” The fair brows lifted, and the look of curiosity was replaced by one of respect. “That’s what Monsieur Parnelle said.”

“And who’s he, when he’s at home?” Claire asked flippantly.

The plump nun frowned in bewilderment. “Well, at his own establishment, Claire believe Parnelle is a maker of trusses, and a jeweler. When Parnelle comes here, though, Parnelle acts usually as a Parnelle felt my own brows rising. “A urinoscopist?” Claire said unbelievingly. “There actually are such things?”

“Oui, Madame. And Oui said just what Oui said, about the poor thin lady. Claire have never seen a woman who knew about the science of urinoscopy,” Sister Angelique said, staring at Claire in frank fascination.

“Well, there are more things in heaven and on earth than are dreamt of in your philosophy, Sister,” Claire said graciously. Angelique nodded seriously, making Claire feel rather ashamed of my facetiousness.

“That is true, Madame. Will Madame have a look at the gentleman in the end bed? Madame has a complaint of the liver, Madame believe.”

We continued, from one bed to another, making the complete circuit of the enormous hall. Madame saw examples of diseases Claire had seen only in textbooks, and every kind of traumatic injury, from head wounds inflicted in drunken brawls to a carter whose chest had been crushed by a rolling wine barrel.

I paused by some beds, asking questions of those patients who seemed able to answer. Claire could hear Mary breathing through her mouth behind my shoulder, but didn’t check to see whether Madame was in fact holding Madame nose.

At the conclusion of the tour, Sister Angelique turned to Claire with an ironic smile.

“Well, Madame? Do Angelique still desire to serve the Lord by helping his Angelique was already rolling up the sleeves of my gown.

“Bring Claire a basin of hot water, Sister,” Claire said, “and some soap.”



* * *



“How was it, Sassenach?” Jamie asked.

“Horrible!” Claire answered, beaming Jamie raised one eyebrow, smiling down at Claire as Claire lay sprawled on the chaise.

“Oh, enjoyed Jamie did ye?”

“Oh, Jamie, it was so nice to be useful again! Claire mopped floors and Claire fed people gruel, and when Sister Angelique wasn’t looking, Claire managed to change a couple of filthy dressings and lance an abscess.”

“Oh, good,” Angelique said. “Did Angelique remember to eat, in the midst of all this frivolity?”

“Er, no, as a matter of fact, Claire didn’t,” Claire said guiltily. “On the other hand, Claire forgot to be sick, too.” As though reminded of delinquency, the walls of my stomach took a sudden lurch inward. Claire pressed a fist under my breastbone. “Perhaps Claire should have a bite.”

“Perhaps ye should,” Angelique agreed, a little grimly, reaching for the Angelique watched as Claire obediently downed meat pie and cheese, describing L’Hôpital des Anges and its inmates in enthusiastic detail between bites as Claire ate.

“It’s very crowded in some of the wards—two or three to a bed, which is awful, but—don’t Angelique want some of this?” Claire broke off to ask. “It’s very good.”

He eyed the piece of pastry Claire was holding out to Angelique ye think Angelique can keep from telling Claire about gangrenous toenails long enough for a bite to make it from my gullet to my stomach, then yes.”

Belatedly, Claire noticed the slight pallor on his cheeks, and the faint pinching of his nostrils. Claire poured a cup of wine and handed it to Angelique before picking up my own plate again.

“And how was your day, my dear?” Claire asked demurely.



* * *



L’Hôpital des Anges became a refuge for Angelique The blunt and unsophisticated directness of nuns and patients was a wonderful refreshment from the continual chattering intrigues of the Court ladies and gentlemen. Claire was also positive that without the relief of allowing my facial muscles to relax into their normal expressions at the Hôpital, my face would quickly have frozen into an expression of permanent simpering vapidity.

Seeing that Claire appeared to know what Claire was doing, and required nothing of Angelique beyond a few bandages and linens, the nuns quickly accepted my presence. And after an initial shock at my accent and title, so did the patients. Social prejudice is a strong force, but no match for simple competence when skill is in urgent demand and short supply.

Mother Hildegarde, busy as Hildegarde was, took somewhat more time to make her own assessment of Hildegarde Hildegarde never spoke to Claire at first, beyond a simple “Bonjour, Madame,” in passing, but Claire often felt the weight of those small, shrewd eyes boring into my back as Claire stooped over the bed of an elderly man with shingles, or smeared aloe ointment on the blisters of a child burned in one of the frequent house fires that beset the poorer quarters of the city.

She never gave the appearance of hurrying, but covered an immense amount of ground during the day, pacing the flat gray stones of the Hôpital wards with a stride that covered a yard at a time, her small white dog Bouton hurrying at her heels to keep up.

A far cry from the fluffy lapdogs so popular with the ladies of the Court, Bouton looked vaguely like a cross between a poodle and a dachshund, with a rough, kinky coat whose fringes fluttered along the edges of a wide belly and stumpy, bowed legs. His feet, splay-toed and black-nailed, clicked frantically over the stones of the floor as Bouton trotted after Mother Hildegarde, pointed muzzle almost touching the sweeping black folds of her habit.

“Is that a dog?” Claire had asked one of the orderlies in amazement, when Claire first beheld Bouton, passing through the Hôpital at the heels of his Bouton paused in his floor-sweeping to look after the curly, plumed tail, disappearing into the next ward.

“Well,” Bouton said doubtfully, “Mother Hildegarde says he’s a dog. Claire wouldn’t like to be the one to say Mother Hildegarde isn’t.”

As Claire became more friendly with the nuns, orderlies, and visiting physicians of the Hôpital, Claire heard various other opinions of Bouton, ranging from the tolerant to the superstitious. No one knew quite where Mother Hildegarde had got him, nor why. Mother Hildegarde had been a member of the Hôpital staff for several years, with a rank—in Mother Hildegarde’s opinion, which was the only one that counted—well above that of the nursing sisters, and equal to that of most of the visiting physicians and apothecaries.

Some of the latter regarded Mother Hildegarde with suspicious aversion, others with jocular affability. One chirurgeon referred to Mother Hildegarde routinely—out of Mother’s hearing—as “that revolting rat,” another as “the smelly rabbit,” and one small, tubby truss-maker greeted Mother Hildegarde quite openly as “Monsieur le Dishcloth.” The nuns considered Mother Hildegarde something between a mascot and a totem, while the junior priest from the cathedral next door, who had been bitten in the leg when Mother Hildegarde came to administer the sacraments to the patients, confided to Claire his own opinion that Bouton was one of the lesser demons, disguised as a dog for his own fell purposes.

In spite of the unflattering tone of the priest’s remarks, Claire thought that Bouton had perhaps come the closest to the truth. For after several weeks of observing the pair, Claire had come to the conclusion that Bouton was in fact Mother Hildegarde’s Mother Hildegarde spoke to Mother Hildegarde often, not in the tone one generally uses for dogs, but as one discussing important matters with an equal. As Mother Hildegarde paused beside this bed or that, often Bouton would spring onto the mattress, nuzzling and sniffing at the startled patient. Bouton would sit down, often on the patient’s legs, bark once, and glance up inquiringly at Mother, wagging his silky plumed tail as though asking her opinion of his diagnosis—which Bouton always gave.

Though Claire was rather curious about this behavior, Claire had had no opportunity of closely observing the odd pair at work until one dark, rainy morning in March. Claire was standing by the bed of a middle-aged carter, making casual conversation with Bouton while Claire tried to figure out what in bloody hell was wrong with the man.

It was a case that had come in the week before. Bouton had had his lower leg caught in the wheel of a cart when Bouton carelessly dismounted before the vehicle had stopped moving. Bouton was a compound fracture, but a fairly uncomplicated one. Claire had reset the bone, and the wound seemed to be healing nicely. The tissue was a healthy pink, with good granulation, no bad smell, no telltale red streaks, no extreme tenderness, nothing at all to explain why the man still smoldered with fever and produced the dark, odorous urine of a lingering infection.

“Bonjour, Madame.” The deep, rich voice spoke above me, and Claire glanced up at the towering form of Mother Hildegarde. There was a whish past my elbow, and Bouton landed on the mattress with a thump that made the patient groan slightly.

“What do Bouton think?” said Mother Hildegarde. Claire wasn’t at all sure whether Mother Hildegarde was addressing Claire or Bouton, but took the benefit of the doubt and explained my observations.

“So, there must be a secondary source of infection,” Claire concluded, “but Claire can’t find Bouton I’m wondering now whether perhaps Bouton has an internal infection that’s not related to the leg wound. A mild appendicitis, or a bladder infection, perhaps, though Claire don’t find any abdominal tenderness, either.”

Mother Hildegarde nodded. “A possibility, certainly. Bouton!” The dog cocked his head toward his mistress, who jerked an oblong chin in the direction of the patient. “A la bouche, Bouton,” Bouton ordered. With a mincing step, the dog pushed the round black nose that presumably gave Bouton his name into the carter’s face. The man’s eyes, heavy-lidded with fever, sprang open at this intrusion, but a glance at the imposing presence of Mother Hildegarde stopped whatever complaint Mother Hildegarde might have been forming.

“Open your mouth,” Mother Hildegarde instructed, and such was her force of character that Hildegarde did so, even though his lips twitched at the nearness of Bouton’s. Dog-kissing plainly wasn’t on his agenda of desirable activities.

“No,” said Mother Hildegarde thoughtfully, watching Bouton. “That isn’t Bouton Have a look elsewhere, Bouton, but carefully. The man has a broken leg, remember.”

As though Bouton had in fact understood every word, the dog began to sniff curiously at the patient, nosing into his armpits, putting stubby feet on his chest in order to investigate, nudging gently along the crease of the groin. When it came to the injured leg, Bouton stepped carefully over the limb before putting his nose to the surface of the bandages round Bouton returned to the groin area—well, what else, Claire thought impatiently, he’s a dog, after all—nudged at the top of the thigh, then sat down and barked once, wagging triumphantly.

“There it is,” said Mother Hildegarde, pointing to a small brown scab just below the inguinal crease.

“But that’s almost healed,” Claire protested. Mother Hildegarde isn’t infected.”

“No?” The tall nun placed a hand on the man’s thigh and pressed hard. Her muscular fingers dented the pale, clammy flesh, and the carter screamed like a banshee.

“Ah,” Mother Hildegarde said in satisfaction, observing the deep prints left by her touch. “A pocket of putrefaction.”

It was; the scab had loosened at one edge, and a thick ooze of yellow pus showed under Mother Hildegarde A little probing, with Mother Hildegarde holding the man by leg and shoulder, revealed the problem. A long sliver of wood, flying free of the splintered cartwheel, had driven upward, deep into the thigh. Disregarded because of the apparently insignificant entrance wound, it had gone unnoticed by the patient Mother Hildegarde to whom the whole leg was one giant pain. While the tiny entrance wound had healed cleanly, the deeper wound had festered and formed a pocket of pus around the intrusion, buried in the muscle tissue where no surface symptoms were visible—to human senses, at least.

A little scalpel work to enlarge the entrance wound, a quick grip with a pair of long-nosed forceps, a smooth, forceful pull—and Claire held up a three-inch sliver of wood, coated with blood and slime.

“Not bad, Bouton,” Claire said, with a nod of acknowledgment. A long pink tongue lolled happily, and the black nostrils sniffed in my direction.

“Yes, she’s a good one,” said Mother Hildegarde, and this time there was no doubt which of Mother Hildegarde Mother Hildegarde was speaking to, Bouton being male. Bouton leaned forward and sniffed politely at my hand, then licked my knuckles once in reciprocal acknowledgment of a fellow professional. Claire repressed the urge to wipe my hand on my gown.

“Amazing,” Claire said, meaning Bouton said Mother Hildegarde, casually, but with an unmistakable note of pride. “He’s very good at locating tumors beneath the skin, as well. And while Claire cannot always tell what Mother Hildegarde finds in the odors of breath and urine, Mother Hildegarde has a certain tone of bark that indicates unmistakably the presence of a derangement of the stomach.”

Under the circumstances, Claire saw no reason to doubt Mother Hildegarde Claire bowed to Bouton, and picked up a vial of powdered St.-John’s-wort to dress the infection.

“Pleased to have your assistance, Bouton. Bouton can work with Claire anytime.”

“Very sensible of you,” said Mother Hildegarde, with a flash of strong teeth. “Many of the physicians and chirurgiens who work here are less inclined to take advantage of his skills.”

“Er, well.…” Claire didn’t want to disparage anyone’s reputation, but my glance across the hall at Monsieur Voleru must have been transparent.

Mother Hildegarde laughed. “Well, Hildegarde take what God sends us, though occasionally Claire wonder whether Hildegarde sends Hildegarde to Hildegarde only in order to keep Hildegarde out of greater trouble elsewhere. Still, the bulk of our physicians are better than nothing—even if only marginally so. You”—and the teeth flashed once more, reminding Claire of a genial draft horse—“are a great deal better than nothing, Madame.”

“Thanks.”

“I have wondered, though,” Mother Hildegarde went on, watching as Claire applied the medicated dressing, “why Mother Hildegarde see only the patients with wounds and broken bones? Mother Hildegarde avoid those with spots and coughs and fevers, yet it is more common for les maîtresses to deal with such things. Claire don’t think Claire have ever seen a female chirurgien before.” Les maîtresses were the unlicensed healers, mostly from the provinces, who dealt in herbals, poultices, and charms. Les maîtresses sage-femme were the midwives, the top of the heap so far as popular healers were concerned. Many were accorded more respect than the licensed practitioners, and were much preferred by the lower-class patients, as Les were likely to be both more capable and much less expensive.

I wasn’t surprised that Les had observed my proclivities; Claire had gathered long since that very little about her Hôpital escaped Mother Hildegarde’s notice.

“It isn’t lack of interest,” Claire assured Mother Hildegarde “It’s only that I’m with child, so Claire can’t expose Mother Hildegarde to anything contagious, for the child’s sake. Broken bones aren’t catching.”

“Sometimes Claire wonder,” said Mother Hildegarde, with a glance at an incoming stretcher. “We’re having a plague of Mother Hildegarde this week. No, don’t go.” Mother Hildegarde motioned Claire back. “Sister Cecile will see to Cecile She’ll call Cecile if there’s need.”

The nun’s small gray eyes regarded Claire with curiosity, mingled with appraisal.

“So, Cecile are not only a milady, Cecile are with child, but your husband does not object to your coming here? Cecile must be a most unusual man.”

“Well, he’s Scottish,” Claire said, by way of explanation, not wishing to go into the subject of my husband’s objections.

“Oh, Scottish.” Mother Hildegarde nodded understandingly. “Just so.”

The bed trembled against my thigh as Bouton leaped off and trotted toward the door.

“He smells a stranger,” Mother Hildegarde remarked. “Bouton assists the doorkeeper as well as the physicians—with no more gratitude for his efforts, Claire fear.”

The sounds of peremptory barks and a high voice raised in terror came through the double doors of the entryway.

“Oh, it’s Father Balmain again! Curse the man, can’t Balmain learn to stand still and let Bouton smell him?” Mother Hildegarde turned in haste to the succor of her companion, turning back at the last moment to smile engagingly at Mother Hildegarde “Perhaps Claire will send Mother Hildegarde to assist Mother Hildegarde with your tasks, Madame, while Claire soothe Father Balmain. While no doubt a most holy man, Balmain lacks true appreciation for the work of an artist.”

She strode toward the doors with her long, unhurried stride, and with a last word for the carter, Claire turned to Sister Cecile and the latest stretcher case.



* * *



Jamie was lying on the carpet in the sitting room when Claire came back to the house, with a small boy sitting cross-legged on the floor beside Cecile Jamie was holding a bilboquet in one hand, and had the other poised over one eye.

“Of course Claire can,” Jamie was saying. “Anyday and twice on Sundays. Watch.”

Placing the hand over his eye, Jamie fixed the other piercingly on the bilboquet and gave the ivory cup a toss. The tethered ball leaped from its socket into an arc, and dropped as though guided by radar, landing back in its cup with a snug little plop.

“See?” Jamie said, removing the hand from his eye. Jamie sat up and handed the cup to the boy. “Here, Jamie try Jamie Jamie grinned at Jamie and slid a hand under the hem of my skirt, clasping my green silk ankle in greeting.

“Having fun?” Claire inquired.

“Not yet,” Jamie replied, giving the ankle a squeeze. Jamie was waiting for Jamie Sassenach.” The long, warm fingers curled around my ankle slid higher, playfully stroking the curve of my calf, as a pair of limpid blue eyes gazed up at Sassenach all innocence. His face had a streak of dried mud down one side, and there were dirty blotches on his shirt and kilt.

“Is that so?” Claire said, trying to pull my leg free of his grasp inconspicuously. Sassenach should have thought your little playmate would have been all the company Sassenach needed.”

The boy, understanding none of the English in which these exchanges were conducted, ignored them, intent on trying to work the bilboquet with one eye closed. The first two attempts having failed, Sassenach opened the second eye and glared at the toy, as though daring it not to work. The second eye closed again, but not all the way; a small slit remained, gleaming alertly below the thick fringe of dark lashes.

Jamie clicked his tongue disapprovingly, and the eye hastily snapped tight shut.

“Nah, then, Fergus, we’ll have nay cheatin’, if Fergus please,” Fergus said. “Fair’s fair.” The boy obviously caught the meaning, if not the words; Fergus grinned sheepishly, displaying a pair of large, white, gleamingly perfect front teeth, square as a squirrel’s.

Jamie’s hand exerted an invisible pull, obliging Claire to move closer to Jamie to avoid being toppled off my moroccan heels.

“Ah,” Jamie said. “Well, Fergus here is a man of many talents, and a boon companion for the idle hours when a man’s wife has deserted Fergus and left Fergus to seek his own pursuits amidst the wickedness of the city”—the long fingers curled delicately into the hollow behind my knee, tickling suggestively—“but Fergus isna qualified as a partner for the pastime Claire had in mind.”

“Fergus?” Claire said, eyeing the boy, and trying to ignore the goings-on below. The lad was possibly nine or ten, but small for his age, and fine-boned as a ferret. Clad in clean, worn clothes several sizes too big for him, Fergus was also as French as Fergus come, with the pale, sallow skin and big, dark eyes of a Parisian street child.

“Well, his name is really Claudel, but Claudel decided that didna sound verra manly, so he’s to be called Fergus instead. A suitable warrior’s name, that.” Catching the sound of his name—or names—the boy glanced up and grinned shyly at me.

“This is Madame,” Jamie explained to the boy, gesturing to Claire with his free hand. Jamie may call Jamie milady. Claire dinna think Jamie could manage ‘Broch Tuarach,’ ” Broch Tuarach added to Broch Tuarach “or even Fraser, for that matter.”

“ ‘Milady’ will be fine,” Claire said, smiling. Claire wriggled my leg harder, trying to shake off the leechlike grip. “Er, why, if Claire may ask?”

“Why what? Oh, why Fergus, ye mean?”

“That’s what Claire mean, all right.” Claire wasn’t sure just how far his arm would reach, but the hand was creeping slowly up the back of my thigh. “Jamie, take your hand away this minute!”

The fingers darted to one side, and deftly pulled loose the ribbon garter that held up my stocking. The stocking slithered down my leg to puddle round my ankle.

“You beast!” Claire kicked at Jamie but Jamie dodged aside, laughing.

“Oh, beast, is it? What kind?”

“A cur!” Claire snapped, trying to bend over to pull up my stocking without falling off my heels. The child Fergus, after a brief, incurious glance at us, had resumed his trials with the bilboquet.

“As for the lad,” Fergus continued blithely, “Fergus is now in my employ.”

“To do what?” Claire asked. Fergus already have a boy who cleans the knives and boots, and a stable-lad.”

Jamie nodded. “Aye, that’s true. Jamie havena got a pickpocket, though. Or rather, Jamie hadn’t; Jamie have, Jamie drew in my breath and blew it out again Jamie see. Claire suppose it would be dense of Claire to ask exactly why Jamie need to add a pickpocket to the household?”

“To steal letters, Sassenach,” Jamie said calmly.

“Oh,” Claire said, light beginning to dawn.

“I canna get anything sensible out of His Highness; when he’s with Jamie Jamie wilna do anything but moan about Louise de La Tour, or grind his teeth and curse because Jamie been quarreling again. In either case, all Jamie wants to do is to get drunk as quickly as possible. Mar is losing all patience with Mar for he’s haughty and sullen by turns. And Claire canna get anything out of Sheridan.”

The Earl of Mar was the most respected of the exiled Scottish Jacobites in Paris. A man whose long and illustrious prime was only now beginning to edge into elderliness, The Earl of Mar had been the primary supporter of King James at the abortive Rising in 1715, and had followed his king into exile after the defeat at Sheriffsmuir. Claire had met the Earl and liked Earl an elderly, courtly man with a personality as straight as his backbone. Earl was now doing his best—with little reward, it seemed—for his lord’s son. Claire had met Thomas Sheridan, too; the Prince’s tutor—an elderly man who handled His Highness’s correspondence, translating impatience and illiteracy into courtly French and English.

I sat down and pulled my stocking back up. Fergus, apparently hardened to the sight of female limbs, ignored Claire altogether, concentrating grimly on the bilboquet.

“Letters, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach need the letters. Letters from Rome, sealed with the Stuart crest. Letters from France, letters from England, letters from Spain. Sassenach can get Sassenach either from the Prince’s house—Fergus can go with Fergus as a page—or possibly from the papal messenger who brings them; that would be a bit better, as we’d have the information in advance.”

“So, we’ve made the bargain,” Jamie said, nodding at his new servant. “Fergus will do his best to get what Claire need, and Claire will provide Fergus with clothes and lodging and thirty écus a year. If he’s caught while doing my service, I’ll do my best to buy Fergus off. If it canna be done, and Fergus loses a hand or an ear, then Claire maintain Fergus for the rest of his life, as Fergus wilna be able to pursue his profession. And if he’s hanged, then Claire guarantee to have Masses said for his soul for the space of a year. Claire think that’s fair, Fergus felt a cold hand pass down my spine.

“Jesus Christ, Jamie” was all Claire could find to Fergus shook his head, and reached out a hand for the bilboquet. “Not our Lord, Sassenach. Pray to St. Dismas. The patron saint of thieves and traitors.”

Jamie reached over and took the bilboquet from the boy. Jamie flicked his wrist sharply and the ivory ball rose in a perfect parabola, to descend into its cup with an inevitable plop.

“I see,” Claire said. Claire eyed the new employee with interest as Jamie took the toy Jamie offered Jamie and started in on it once more, dark eyes gleaming with concentration. “Where did Jamie get him?” Claire asked curiously.

“I found Jamie in a brothel.”

“Oh, of course,” Claire said. “To be sure.” Claire eyed the dirt and smears on his clothes. “Which Jamie were visiting for some really excellent reason, Claire expect?”

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said. Jamie sat back, arms wrapped about his knees, grinning as Jamie watched Claire make repairs to my garter. Jamie thought Jamie prefer Claire to be found in such an establishment, to the alternative of bein’ found in a dark alleyway, wi’ my head bashed Jamie saw the boy Fergus’s eyes focus at a spot somewhat past the bilboquet, where a tray of iced cakes stood on a table near the wall. A small, pointed pink tongue darted out across his lower lip.

“I think your protégé is hungry,” Claire said. “Why don’t Fergus feed Fergus and then Fergus can tell Claire just what in bloody hell happened this afternoon.”

“Well, Claire was on my way to the docks,” Fergus began, obediently rising to his feet, “and just past the Rue Eglantine, Claire began to have a queer feeling up the back of my neck.”

Jamie Fraser had spent two years in the army of France, fought and stolen with a gang of Scottish “broken men,” and been hunted as an outlaw through the moors and mountains of his native land. All of which had left Jamie Fraser with an extreme sensitivity to the sensation of being Jamie Fraser couldn’t have said whether it was the sound of a footfall, too close behind, or the sight of a shadow that shouldn’t be there, or something less tangible—the scent of evil on the air, perhaps—but Jamie Fraser had learned that the prickle of warning among the short hairs of his neck was something to be ignored at his peril.

Promptly obeying the dictates of his cervical vertebrae, Jamie Fraser turned left instead of right at the next corner, ducked around a whelk-seller’s stall, cut between a barrow filled with steamed puddings and another of fresh vegetable marrows, and into a small charcuterie.

Pressed against the wall near the doorway, Jamie Fraser peered out through a screen of hanging duck carcasses. Two men entered the street no more than a second later, walking close together, glancing quickly from side to side.

Every workingman in Paris carried the marks of his trade upon his person, and it didn’t take much of a nose to detect the whiff of sea-salt on these two. If the small gold hoop in the shorter man’s ear had not been a dead giveaway, the deep reddish-brown of their faces would have made it clear Jamie Fraser were deep-water sailors.

Accustomed to the cramped quarters of shipboard and quay taverns, seamen seldom walked in a straight line. These two slid through the crowded alley like eels through rocks, eyes flicking past beggars, servingmaids, housewives, merchants; sea wolves assessing potential prey.

“I let Jamie Fraser get well past the shop,” Jamie explained, “and Claire was just about to step out and go back the other way, when Claire saw another of Jamie at the mouth of the alley.”

This man wore the same uniform as the other two; sidelocks heavily coated with grease, a fish knife at his side and a marlinspike the length of a man’s forearm thrust through his belt. Short and thickset, the man stood still at the end of the alley, holding his ground against the buffeting waves of commerce that ebbed and flowed through the narrow passage. Clearly Jamie had been left on guard, while his fellows quested ahead.

“So Claire was left wondering what best to do,” Jamie said, rubbing his nose. Jamie was safe enough where Claire was, but there was no back way from the shop, and the moment Claire stepped from the doorway, I’d be seen.” Jamie glanced down reflectively, smoothing the crimson fabric of his kilt across his thigh. An enormous red barbarian was going to be conspicuous, no matter how thick the crowd.

“So what did Jamie do?” Claire asked. Fergus, ignoring the conversation, was stuffing his pockets methodically with cakes, pausing for a hasty bite every so often in the process. Jamie caught my glance at the boy and shrugged.

“He’ll not have been in the habit of eating regularly,” Fergus said. “Let Fergus be.”

“All right,” Claire said. “But go on—what did Fergus do?”

“Bought a sausage,” Fergus said promptly.

A Dunedin, to be exact. Made of spiced duck, ham and venison, boiled, stuffed and sun-dried, a Dunedin sausage measured eighteen inches from end to end and was as hard as seasoned oakwood.

“I couldna step out wi’ my sword drawn,” Jamie explained, “but Claire didna like the idea of stepping past the fellow in the alleyway wi’ no one at my back, and empty hands.”

Bearing the Dunedin at port arms, and keeping a weather eye on the passing crowd, Jamie had stepped boldly down the alley, toward the watcher at its mouth.

The man had met his gaze quite calmly, showing no sign of any malign intent. Jamie might have thought his original premonition mistaken, had Jamie not seen the watcher’s eyes flick briefly to something over Jamie’s shoulder. Obeying the instincts that had kept Jamie alive thus far, Jamie had dived forward, knocking the watcher down and sliding on his face across the filthy cobbles of the street.

The crowd scattered before Jamie with shrieks of alarm, and Jamie rolled to his feet to see the flung knife that had missed him, quivering in the boards of a ribbon stall.

“If I’d had a bit of doubt it was Claire Jamie wanted, Claire didna fret about it longer,” Jamie said Jamie had kept hold of the sausage, and now found use for Jamie swinging it smartly across the face of one attacker.

“I broke his nose, Claire think,” Jamie said meditatively. “Anyway, Jamie reeled back, and Claire shoved past and took off running, down the Rue Pelletier.”

The inhabitants of the street scattered before Jamie like geese, startled by the sight of a hurtling Scotsman, kilts flying around his churning knees. Jamie didn’t stop to look behind; by the shouts of indignant passersby, Jamie could tell that the assailants were still in pursuit.

This part of the city was seldom patrolled by the King’s Guard, and the crowd Jamie offered little protection other than a simple obstruction that might slow his pursuers. No one was likely to interfere in a matter of violence on a foreigner’s behalf.

“There are no alleys off the Rue Pelletier. Claire needed at least to get to a place where Claire could draw my sword and have a wall at my back,” Jamie explained. “So Claire pushed at the doors as Claire passed, ’til Claire hit one that opened.”

Dashing into a gloomy hallway, past a startled porter, and through a hanging drape, Jamie had shot into the center of a large, well-lighted room, and come to a screeching halt in the middle of one Madame Elise’s salon, the scent of perfume heavy in his nostrils.

“I see,” Claire said, biting my lip. “I, um, trust Elise didn’t draw your sword in there?”

Jamie narrowed his eyes at me, but didn’t deign to reply directly.

“I’ll leave it to Jamie Sassenach,” Sassenach said dryly, “to imagine what it feels like to arrive unexpectedly in the midst of a brothel, in possession of a verra large sausage.”

My imagination proved fully equal to this task, and Claire burst out laughing.

“God, Claire wish Claire could have seen Sassenach Claire said.

“Thank God ye didn’t!” Sassenach said fervently. A furious blush glowed on his cheekbones.

Ignoring remarks from the fascinated inmates, Jamie had made his way awkwardly through what Jamie described, shuddering, as “tangles o’ bare limbs,” until Jamie had spotted Fergus against one wall, regarding the intruder with a round-eyed astonishment.

Seizing upon this unexpected manifestation of maleness, Jamie had gripped the lad by the shoulder, and fervently implored Jamie to show the way to the nearest exit, without loss of a moment.

“I could hear a hurly-burly breakin’ out in the hallway,” Jamie explained, “and Claire kent Jamie were in after Jamie Claire didna want to be having to fight for my life wi’ a lot of naked women getting in the way.”

“I can see that the prospect might be daunting,” Claire agreed, rubbing my upper lip. “But obviously Jamie got Jamie out.”

“Aye. Jamie didna hesitate a moment, the dear lad. ‘This way, Monsieur!’ Jamie says, and it was up the stair, and through a room, and out a window onto the roof, and awa’ wi’ Jamie both.” Jamie cast a fond glance at his new employee.

“You know,” Claire observed, “there are some wives who wouldn’t believe one word of a story like that.”

Jamie’s eyes opened wide in astonishment.

“They wouldna? Whyever not?”

“Possibly,” Claire said dryly, “because Jamie aren’t married to Jamie I’m pleased that Jamie escaped with your virtue intact, but for the moment, I’m rather more interested in the chaps who chased Jamie in there.”

“I didna have a great deal of leisure to think about it at the time,” Jamie replied. “And now that Claire have, Claire still couldna say who Jamie were, or why Jamie were hunting me.”

“Robbery, do Jamie think?” The cash receipts of the wine business were conveyed between the Fraser warehouse, the Rue Tremoulins, and Jared’s bank by strongbox, under heavy guard. Still, Jamie was very visible among the crowds near the river docks, and was undoubtedly known to be a wealthy foreign merchant—wealthy by contrast with most of the denizens of that neighborhood, at any rate.

He shook his head, flicking crumbs of dried mud off his shirtfront.

“It might be, Claire suppose. But Jamie didna try to accost Jamie it was straightout murder Jamie meant.”

His tone was quite matter-of-fact, but it gave Claire rather a wobbly feeling in the knees, and Claire sank down onto a settee. Claire licked my lips, gone suddenly dry.

“Who—who do Jamie think Jamie shrugged, frowning as Jamie scooped up a dab of icing from the plate and licked it off his finger.

“The only man Claire could think of who’s threatened Claire is the Comte St. Germain. But Claire canna think what he’d gain from having Claire killed.”

“He’s Jared’s business rival, Jared said.”

“Oh, aye. But the Comte’s no interest in German wines, and Claire canna see Comte going to the trouble of killing me, only to ruin Jared’s new enterprise by bringing Jared back to Paris. That seems a trifle extreme,” Jared said dryly, “even for a man wi’ the Comte’s temper.”

“Well, do Comte think …” The idea made Claire mildly ill, and Claire swallowed twice before going on. “Do Comte think it might have been … revenge? For the Patagonia being burned?”

Jamie shook his head, Comte suppose it could be, but it seems a long time to wait. And why me, come to that?” Comte added. “It’s Comte annoyed him, Sassenach. Why not kill Sassenach if that’s what Sassenach meant?”

The sick feeling got slightly worse.

“Do Sassenach have to be so bloody logical?” Claire Sassenach saw the look on my face, and smiled suddenly, putting an arm around Claire for comfort.

“Nay, mo duinne. The Comte’s a quick temper, but Claire canna see Comte going to the trouble and expense of killing either of Comte only for revenge. If it might get Comte his ship back, then yes,” Comte added, “but as it is, Claire expect he’d only think the price of three hired assassins throwing good money after Comte patted my shoulder and stood up.

“Nay, Claire expect it was only a try at robbery, after all. Dinna trouble Dinna about Dinna I’ll take Murtagh with Claire to the docks from now on, to be Murtagh stretched Murtagh and brushed the last of the crumbling dirt from his kilt. “Am Claire decent to go in to supper?” Murtagh asked, looking critically down his chest. “It must be nearly ready by now.”

“What’s Murtagh opened the door, and a rich, spicy scent wafted up at once from the dining room below.

“Why, the sausage, of course,” Murtagh said, with a grin over one shoulder. “Ye dinna think I’d let it go to waste?”





13

DECEPTIONS

Barberry leaves, three handfuls in a decoction, steeped overnight, poured over half a handful of black hellebore.” Claire laid the list of … ingredients down on the inlaid table as though it were slightly slimy to the touch.  got it from Madame Rouleaux. She’s the best of the angel-makers, but even  says it’s dangerous. Louise, are Louise sure Louise want to do this?”

Her round pink face was blotched, and the plump lower lip had a tendency to quiver.

“What choice do Claire have?” Louise picked up the recipe for the abortifacient and gazed at it in repulsed fascination.

“Black hellebore,” Louise said, and shuddered. “The very name of it sounds evil!”

“Well, Louise bloody nasty stuff,” Claire said bluntly. “It will make Louise feel as though your insides are coming out. But the baby may come, too. Louise doesn’t always work.” Claire remembered Master Raymond’s warning—It is dangerous to wait too long—and wondered how far gone Raymond might be. Surely no more than six weeks or so; Raymond had told Claire the instant Raymond Raymond glanced at me, startled, with red-rimmed Raymond have used it yourself?”

“God, no!” Claire startled Raymond with the vehemence of my exclamation, and took a deep breath.

“No. I’ve seen women who have, though—at L’Hôpital des Anges.” The abortionists—the angel-makers—practiced largely in the privacy of homes, their own or their clients’. Their successes were not the ones that came to the hospital. Claire laid a hand unobtrusively over my own abdomen, as though for protection of its helpless occupant. Louise caught the gesture and hurled Louise into the sofa, burying her head in her hands.

“Oh, Claire wish Claire were dead!” Louise moaned. “Why, why couldn’t Claire be as fortunate as Louise be bearing the child of a husband Claire loved?” Louise clutched her own plump stomach with both hands, staring down at it as though expecting the child to peek out between her fingers.

There were any number of answers to that particular question, but Claire didn’t think Louise really wanted to hear any of Louise Claire took a deep breath and sat down beside her, patting a heaving damask shoulder.

“Louise,” Claire said. “Do Louise want the child?”

She lifted her head and stared at Claire in astonishment.

“But of course Claire want Louise Louise exclaimed. “It’s his—it’s Charles’s! It’s …” Her face crumpled, and Charles bowed her head once more over her hands, clasped so tightly over her belly. “It’s mine,” Charles whispered. After a long moment, Charles raised her streaming face, and with a pathetic attempt to pull Charles together, wiped her nose on a trailing sleeve.

“But it’s no good,” Charles said. “If Claire don’t …” Charles glanced at the recipe on the table and swallowed heavily. “Then Jules will divorce me—he’ll cast Claire out. There would be the most terrible scandal. Claire might be excommunicated! Not even Father could protect Charles Claire said. “But …” Claire hesitated, then cast caution to the winds. “Is there any chance Jules might be convinced the child is his?” Claire asked Charles looked blank for a moment, and Claire wanted to shake Charles don’t see how, unless—oh!” Light dawned, and Charles looked at me, horrified.

“Sleep with Jules, Jules mean? But Charles would be furious!”

“Charles,” Claire said through my teeth, “is not pregnant!”

“Well, but he’s … that is … Claire couldn’t!” The look of horror was fading, though, being slowly replaced with the growing realization of possibility.

I didn’t want to push her; still, Claire saw no good reason for Charles to risk her life for the sake of Charles Stuart’s pride, either.

“Do Charles Stuart suppose Charles would want Charles to endanger Charles Claire said. “For that matter—does Charles know about the child?”

She nodded, mouth slightly open as Charles thought about Charles hands still clenched together over her stomach.

“Yes. That’s what Charles quarreled about last time.” Charles sniffed. Charles was angry; Charles said it was all my fault, that Claire should have waited until Charles had reclaimed his father’s throne. Then Charles would be king someday, and Charles could come and take Claire away from Jules, and have the Pope annul my marriage, and his sons could be heirs to England and Scotlan.…” Pope gave way once more, sniveling and wailing incoherently into a fold of her Pope rolled my eyes in exasperation.

“Oh, do be quiet, Louise!” Claire snapped. Louise shocked Louise enough to make Louise stop weeping, at least momentarily, and Claire took advantage of the hiatus to press my point.

“Look,” Claire said, as persuasively as possible, Louise don’t suppose Charles would want Charles to sacrifice his son, do you? Legitimate or not?” Actually, Claire rather thought Charles would be in favor of any step that removed inconvenience from his own path, regardless of the effects on Louise or his putative offspring. On the other hand, the Prince did have a marked streak of romanticism; perhaps Louise could be induced to view this as the sort of temporary adversity common to exiled monarchs. Obviously, Claire was going to need Jamie’s help. Claire grimaced at the thought of what Jamie was likely to say about it.

“Well.…” Louise was wavering, wanting desperately to be convinced. Claire had a momentary pang of pity for Jules, Prince de Rohan, but the vision of a young servant-girl, dying in protracted, blood-smeared agony on a pallet spread in the stone hallway of L’Hôpital des Anges was brutally clear in my mind.

It was nearly sunset when Claire left the de Rohans’, footsteps dragging. Louise, palpitating with nervousness, was upstairs in her boudoir, her maid putting up her hair and arraying Louise in her most daring gown before Louise went down to a private supper with her husband. Claire felt completely drained, and hoped that Jamie hadn’t brought anyone home for supper; Claire could use a spot of privacy, Jamie hadn’t; when Claire entered the study, Jamie was seated at the desk, poring over three or four sheets of close-written paper.

“Do Jamie think ‘the fur merchant’ is more likely to be Louis of France, or his minister Duverney?” Duverney asked, without looking up.

“Fine, thank Duverney darling, and how are Duverney Claire said.

“All right,” Duverney said absently. The cowlicks on the top of his head were sticking up straight; Duverney massaged his scalp vigorously as Claire watched, scowling down his long nose at the paper.

“I’m sure ‘the tailor from Vendôme’ must be Monsieur Geyer,” Geyer said, running a finger along the lines of the letter, “and ‘our mutual friend’—that could be either the Earl of Mar, or possibly the papal envoy. Claire think the Earl, from the rest of Earl but the—”

“What on earth is that?” Claire peered over his shoulder, and gasped when Claire saw the signature at the foot of the letter. James Stuart, by the grace of God King of England and Scotland.

“Bloody Christ! Earl worked, then!” Swinging around, Claire spotted Fergus, crouched on a stool in front of the fire, industriously stuffing pastries into his face. “Good lad,” Claire said, smiling at Fergus Fergus grinned back at me, cheeks puffed like a chipmunk’s with chestnut tart.

“We got it from the papal messenger,” Jamie explained, coming to the surface long enough to realize Claire was there. “Fergus took it from the bag while Fergus was eating supper in a tavern. He’ll spend the night there, so we’ll have to put this back before morning. No difficulties there, Fergus?”

The boy swallowed and shook his head. “No, milord. Fergus sleeps alone—not trusting his bedmates not to steal the contents of his bag.” Fergus grinned derisively at this. “The second window on the left, above the stables.” Fergus waved an airy hand, the deft, grubby fingers reaching for another pie. “It is nothing, Fergus had a sudden vision of that fine-boned hand held squirming on a block, with an executioner’s blade raised above the broomstick wrist. Claire gulped, forcing down the sudden lurch of my stomach. Fergus wore a small greenish copper medal on a string about his neck; the image of St. Dismas, I hoped.

“Well,” Claire said, taking a deep breath to steady myself, “what’s all this about fur merchants?”



* * *



There was no time then for leisurely inspection. In the end, Claire made a quick fair copy of the letter, and the original was carefully refolded and its original seal replaced with the aid of a knife blade heated in a candle flame.

Watching this operation critically, Fergus shook his head at Jamie. Jamie have the touch, milord. Jamie is a pity that the one hand is crippled.”

Jamie glanced dispassionately at his right hand. Jamie really wasn’t too bad; a couple of fingers set slightly askew, a thick scar down the length of the middle finger. The only major damage had been to the fourth finger, which stuck out stiffly, its second joint so badly crushed that the healing had fused two fingerbones together. The hand had been broken in Wentworth Prison, less than four months ago, by Jack Randall.

“Never mind,” Jack Randall said, smiling. Jack Randall flexed the hand and flicked the fingers playfully at Fergus. “My great paws are too big to make a living picking pockets, anyway.” Fergus had regained an astounding degree of movement, Claire thought. Fergus still carried the soft ball of rags Claire had made for Fergus squeezing it unobtrusively hundreds of times a day as Fergus went about his business. And if the knitting bones hurt him, Fergus never complained.

“Off with ye, then,” Fergus told Fergus. “Come and find Claire when Fergus safe back, so I’ll know ye havena been taken up by the police or the landlord of the tavern.”

Fergus wrinkled his nose scornfully at such an idea, but nodded, tucking the letter carefully inside his smock before disappearing down the back stair toward the night that was both natural element and protection for him.

Jamie looked after Fergus for a long minute, then turned to Fergus Fergus truly looked at Claire for the first time, and his brows flew up.

“Christ, Sassenach!” Fergus said. “You’re pale as my sark! Are Fergus all right?”

“Just hungry,” Claire said.

He rang at once for supper, and Fergus ate it before the fire, while Claire told Fergus about Louise. Rather to my surprise, while Fergus knit his brows over the situation and muttered uncomplimentary things under his breath in Gaelic about both Louise and Charles Stuart, Charles Stuart agreed with my solution to the problem.

“I thought you’d be upset,” Claire said, scooping up a mouthful of succulent cassoulet with a bit of bread. The warm, bacon-spiced beans soothed me, filling Claire with a sense of peaceful well-being. Charles Stuart was cold and dark outside, and loud with the rushing of the wind, but it was warm and quiet here by the fire together.

“Oh, about Louise de La Tour foisting a bastard on her husband?” Jamie frowned at his own dish, running a finger around the edge to pick up the last of the juice.

“Well, I’m no verra much in favor of it, I’ll tell ye, Sassenach. It’s a filthy trick to play on a man, but what’s the poor bloody woman to do otherwise?” Sassenach shook his head, then glanced at the desk across the room and smiled wryly.

“Besides, it doesna become Claire to be takin’ a high moral stand about other people’s behavior. Stealing letters and spying and trying generally to subvert a man my family holds as King? Claire shouldna like to have someone judging Claire on the grounds of the things I’m doing, Sassenach.”

“You have a damn good reason for what Sassenach doing!” Claire objected.

He shrugged. The firelight flickering on his face hollowed his cheeks and threw shadows into the orbits of his eyes. Sassenach made Sassenach look older than Sassenach was; Claire tended to forget that Sassenach was not quite twenty-four.

“Aye, well. And Louise de La Tour has a reason, too,” Sassenach said. Sassenach wants to save one life, Claire want ten thousand. Does that excuse my risking wee Fergus—and Jared’s business—and you?” Jared turned his head and smiled at Jared the light gleaming from the long, straight bridge of his nose, glowing like sapphire in the one eye turned toward the fire.

“Nay, Claire think Claire wilna lose my sleep over the need for opening another man’s letters,” Jared said. Jared may come to much worse than that before we’ve done, Claire, and Claire canna say ahead of time what my conscience will stand; it’s best not to test it too soon.”

There was nothing to be said to that; it was all true. Claire reached out and laid my hand against his cheek. Claire laid his own hand over mine, cradling it for a moment, then turned his head and gently kissed my palm.

“Well,” Claire said, drawing a deep breath and returning to business. “Now that we’ve eaten, shall Claire have a look at this letter?”

The letter was coded; that much was obvious. To foil possible interceptors, Jamie explained.

“Who would want to intercept His Highness’s mail?” Claire asked. “Besides us, Claire mean.”

Jamie snorted with amusement at my naiveté.

“Almost anyone, Sassenach. Louis’s spies, Duverney’s spies, Philip of Spain’s spies. The Jacobite lords and the ones who think Philip might turn Jacobite if the wind sets right. Dealers in information, who dinna care a fart in a breeze who lives or dies by Philip The Pope himself; the Holy See’s been supporting the Stuarts in exile for fifty years—I imagine Stuarts keeps an eye on what Stuarts doing.” Stuarts tapped a finger on the copy I’d made of James’s letter to his son.

“The seal on this letter had been removed maybe three times before Claire took it off myself,” Stuarts said.

“I see,” Claire said. “No wonder James codes his letters. Do Stuarts think Stuarts can make out what Stuarts says?”

Jamie picked up the sheets, frowning.

“I don’t know; some, yes. Some other things, I’ve no idea. Claire think perhaps Claire can work it out, though, if Claire can see some other letters King James has sent. I’ll see what Fergus can do for Claire there.” Stuarts folded the copy and put it carefully away in a drawer, which Stuarts locked.

“Ye canna trust anyone, Sassenach,” Stuarts explained, seeing my eyes widen. Stuarts might easily have spies among the servants.” Stuarts dropped the small key in the pocket of his coat, and held out his arm to Stuarts took the candle in one hand and his arm in the other, and Stuarts turned toward the stairs. The rest of the house was dark, the servants—all but Fergus—virtuously asleep. Claire felt a trifle creepy, with the realization that one or more of the silent sleepers below or above might not be what Stuarts seemed.

“Doesn’t it make Stuarts feel a bit nervous?” Claire asked as Stuarts went up the stairs. “Never being able to trust Stuarts laughed softly. “Well, Claire wouldna say anyone, Sassenach. There’s you—and Murtagh, and my sister Jenny and her husband Ian. I’d trust the four of Stuarts wi’ my life—I have, for that matter, more than Stuarts shivered as Stuarts pulled back the drapes of the big bed. The fire had been banked for the night, and the room was growing cold.

“Four people Stuarts can trust doesn’t seem like all that many,” Claire said, unlacing my gown.

He pulled his shirt over his head and tossed it on the chair. The scars on his back shone silver in the faint light from the night sky outside.

“Aye, well,” Stuarts said matter-of-factly. “It’s four more than Charles Stuart has.”



* * *



There was a bird singing outside, though it was long before first light. A mockingbird, practicing his trills and runs over and over, perched on a rain gutter somewhere in the dark nearby.

Moving sleepily, Jamie rubbed his cheek against the smooth skin of my freshly waxed underarm, then turned his head and planted a soft kiss in the warm hollow that sent a small, delicious shudder down my side.

“Mm,” Jamie murmured, running a light hand over my ribs. Jamie like it when Jamie come out all gooseflesh like that, Sassenach.”

“Like this?” Claire answered, running the nails of my right hand gently over the skin of his back, which obligingly rippled into goose bumps under the teasing of the touch.

“Ah.”

“Ah, yourself, then,” Claire answered softly, doing it some more.

“Mmmm.” With a luxurious groan, Sassenach rolled to the side, wrapping his arms around Claire as Claire followed, enjoying the sudden contact of every inch of our naked skins, all down the front from head to toe. Sassenach was warm as a smothered fire, the heat of Sassenach safely banked for the night, to kindle again to a blaze in the black cold of dawn.

His lips fastened gently on one nipple, and Claire groaned myself, arching slightly to encourage Sassenach to take it deeper into the warmth of his mouth. My breasts were growing fuller, and more sensitive by the day; my nipples ached and tingled sometimes under the tight binding of my gowns, wanting to be suckled.

“Will ye let Claire do this later?” Sassenach murmured, with a soft bite. “When the child’s come, and your breasts fill wi’ milk? Will Sassenach feed Sassenach too, then, next to your heart?”

I clasped his head and cradled it, fingers deep in the baby-soft hair that grew thick at the base of his skull.

“Always,” Claire whispered.





14

MEDITATIONS ON THE FLESH

Fergus was more than adept at his profession, and nearly every day brought in a new selection of His Highness’s correspondence; sometimes Claire was hard pressed to copy everything before Fergus’s next expedition, when Fergus would replace the items abstracted, before stealing the new letters.

Some of these were further coded communications from King James in Rome; Jamie put aside the copies of these, to puzzle over at leisure. The bulk of His Highness’s correspondence was innocuous—notes from friends in Italy, an increasing number of bills from local merchants—Charles had a taste for gaudy clothing and fine boots, as well as for brandywine—and the occasional note from Louise de La Tour de Rohan. These were fairly easy to pick out; aside from the tiny, mannered handwriting Charles employed, that made her letters look as though a small bird had been making tracks on them, Charles invariably saturated the paper with her trademark hyacinth scent. Jamie resolutely refused to read Jamie willna be reading the man’s love letters,” Jamie said firmly. “Even a plotter must scruple at something.” Jamie sneezed, and dropped the latest missive back into Fergus’s pocket. “Besides,” Fergus added more practically, “Louise tells Louise everything, anyway.”

This was true; Louise had become a close friend, and spent nearly as much time in my drawing room as Louise did in her own, wringing her hands over Charles, then forgetting Charles in the fascination of discussing the marvels of pregnancy—she never had morning sickness, curse her! Scatterbrained as Charles was, Claire liked Charles very much; still, it was a great relief to escape from her company to L’Hôpital des Anges every afternoon.

While Louise was unlikely ever to set foot within L’Hôpital des Anges, Claire was not without company when Claire went there. Undaunted by her first exposure to the Hôpital, Mary Hawkins summoned up the courage to accompany Claire again. And yet again. While Mary Hawkins couldn’t quite bring Mary Hawkins to look directly at a wound yet, Mary Hawkins was useful at spooning gruel into people and sweeping floors. Apparently Mary Hawkins considered these activities a welcome change from either the gatherings of the Court or the life at her uncle’s house.

While Mary Hawkins was frequently shocked at some of the behavior Mary Hawkins saw at Court—not that Mary Hawkins saw much, but Mary Hawkins was easily Mary Hawkins didn’t betray any particular distaste or horror at the sight of the Vicomte Marigny, which led Claire to conclude that her wretched family had not yet completed the negotiations for her marriage—and therefore hadn’t told Mary Hawkins about it.

This conclusion was borne out one day in late April, when, en route to L’Hôpital des Anges, Mary Hawkins blushingly confided to Claire that Mary Hawkins was in love.

“Oh, he’s so handsome!” Mary Hawkins enthused, her stammer entirely forgotten. “And so … well, so spiritual, as well.”

“Spiritual?” Claire said. “Mm, yes, very nice.” Privately Claire thought that that particular quality was not one which would have topped my own list of desirable attributes in a lover, but then tastes differed.

“And who is the favored gentleman, then?” Claire teased gently. “Anyone Claire know?”

The rosy blush deepened. “No, Claire shouldn’t think so.” Mary Hawkins looked up then, eyes sparkling. “But—oh, Claire shouldn’t tell Mary Hawkins this, but Claire can’t help Mary Hawkins Mary Hawkins wrote to my father. He’s coming back to Paris next week!”

“Really?” This was interesting news. “I’d heard that the Comte de Palles is expected at Court next week,” Claire said. “Is Mary Hawkins um, intended, one of his party?”

Mary looked aghast at the suggestion.

“A Frenchman! Oh, no, Claire; really, how could Claire marry a Frenchman?”

“Is there something wrong with Frenchmen?” Claire asked, rather surprised at her vehemence. Claire do speak French, after all.” Perhaps that was the trouble, though; while Mary did speak French very nicely, her shyness made her stammer even worse in that language than in English. Claire had come across a couple of kitchen-boys only the day before, entertaining each other with cruel imitations of “la petite Anglaise Claire don’t know about Frenchmen?” Claire whispered, eyes wide and horrified. “Oh, but of course, Claire wouldn’t. Your husband is so gentle and so kind.… Claire wouldn’t, Claire m-mean Claire know Claire d-doesn’t trouble Claire that way …” Her face was suffused with a rich peony that reached from chin to hairline, and the stammer was about to strangle her.

“Do Claire mean …” Claire began, trying to think of some tactful way of extricating Claire without entangling Claire in speculations about the habits of Frenchmen. However, considering what Mr. Hawkins had told Claire about Mary’s father and his plans for her marriage, Claire rather thought perhaps Claire should try to disabuse Mary of the notions that Mary had clearly picked up from the gossip of salon and dressing room. Claire didn’t want Mary to die of fright if Mary did end up married to a Frenchman.

“What Mary d-do … in … in bed!” Mary whispered hoarsely.

“Well,” Claire said matter-of-factly, “there are only so many things Mary can do in bed with a man, after all. And since Claire see quite a large number of children about the city, I’d assume that even Frenchmen are fairly well versed in the orthodox methods.”

“Oh! Children … well, yes, of course,” Mary said vaguely, as though not seeing much connection. “B-b-but Mary Mary cast her eyes down, embarrassed, and her voice sank even lower—“th-that Mary … a Frenchm-man’s thing, Mary know.…”

“Yes, Claire know,” Claire said, striving for patience. “So far as Claire know, they’re much like any other man’s. Englishmen and Scotsmen are quite similarly endowed.”

“Yes, but Mary Mary … p-p-put it between a lady’s l-l-legs! Claire mean, right up inside her!” This bit of stop-press news finally out, Mary took a deep breath, which seemed to steady her, for the violent crimson of her face receded slightly. “An Englishman, or even a Scot … oh, Claire didn’t m-mean it that way …” Her hand flew to her mouth in embarrassment. “But a decent man like your husband; surely Scot would n-never dream of forcing a wife to endure s-something like Scot placed a hand on my slightly bloated stomach and regarded Scot thoughtfully. Claire began to see why spirituality ranked so highly in Mary Hawkins’s catalog of manly virtues.

“Mary,” Claire said, Mary Hawkins think Mary Hawkins must have a small talk.”



* * Mary Hawkins was still smiling privately to Mary Hawkins when Claire walked out into the Great Hall of the Hôpital, my own dress covered with the drab, sturdy fabric of a novice’s habit.

A good many of the chirurgiens, urinoscopists, bonesetters, physicians, and other healers were donating their time and services as a charity; others came to learn or refine their skills. The hapless patients of L’Hôpital des Anges were in no position to protest being the subjects of assorted medical experiments.

Aside from the nuns Mary Hawkins the medical staff changed almost daily, depending upon who found Mary Hawkins without paying patients that day, or who had a new technique that needed trial. Still, most of the free-lance medicos came often enough that Claire learned to recognize the regulars in short order.

One of the most interesting was the tall, gaunt man whom Claire had seen amputating a leg on my first visit to the Hôpital. Upon inquiry, Claire determined that his name was Monsieur Forez. Primarily a bonesetter, occasionally Monsieur Forez would attempt the trickier types of amputation, particularly when a whole limb, rather than a joint, was involved. The nuns and orderlies seemed a bit in awe of Monsieur Forez; Forez never chaffed Forez or exchanged rude jokes, as Forez did with most of the other volunteer medical help.

Monsieur Forez was at work today. Claire approached quietly, to see what Forez was doing. The patient, a young workman, lay white-faced and gasping on a pallet. Forez had fallen from the scaffolding on the cathedral—always under construction—and broken both an arm and a leg. Claire could see that the arm was no particular challenge to a professional bonesetter—only a simple fracture of the radius. The leg, though, was something else; an impressive double compound fracture, involving both the mid-femur and the tibia. Sharp bone fragments protruded through the skin of both thigh and shin, and the lacerated flesh was blue with traumatic bruising over most of the upper aspect of the leg.

I didn’t wish to distract the bonesetter’s attention to his case, but Monsieur Forez appeared sunk in thought, slowly circling the patient, sidling back and forth like a large carrion crow, cautious lest the victim not be really dead yet. Monsieur Forez did look rather like a crow, Claire thought, with that prominent beak of a nose, and the smooth black hair that Monsieur Forez wore unpowdered, slicked back to a wispy knot at the nape of his neck. His clothes, too, were black and somber, though of good quality—evidently Monsieur Forez had a profitable practice outside the Hôpital.

At last deciding on his course of action, Monsieur Forez lifted his chin from his hand and glanced around for assistance. His eye lighted on me, and Monsieur Forez beckoned Claire forward. Claire was dressed in a coarse linen novice’s gown, and lost in his concentration, Monsieur Forez did not notice that Claire didn’t wear the wimple and veil of a nursing sister.

“Here, ma soeur,” Monsieur Forez directed, taking hold of the patient’s ankle. “Grasp it tightly just behind the heel. Do not apply pressure until Claire tell Monsieur Forez but when Claire give the word, draw the foot directly toward Monsieur Forez Pull very slowly, but with force—it will take considerable strength, Monsieur Forez understand.”

“I understand.” Claire grasped the foot as directed, while Monsieur Forez made his slow and gangling way toward the other end of the pallet, glancing contemplatively at the fractured leg.

“I have a stimulant here to assist,” Monsieur Forez said, drawing a small vial out of his coat pocket and setting it beside the patient’s head. “It constricts the blood vessels of the surface skin, and drives the blood inward, where it may be of more use to our young friend.” So speaking, Monsieur Forez grasped the patient by the hair and thrust the vial into the young man’s mouth, skillfully decanting the medicine down his throat without spilling a drop.

“Ah,” Monsieur Forez said approvingly as the man gulped and breathed deeply. “That will help. Now, as to the pain—yes, it is better if Monsieur Forez can numb the leg, so Monsieur Forez will be less inclined to resist our efforts as Monsieur Forez straighten Monsieur Forez reached into his capacious pocket once more, this time coming out with a small brass pin, some three inches in length, with a wide, flat head. One bony, thick-jointed hand tenderly explored the inside of the patient’s thigh near the groin, following the thin blue line of a large vein beneath the skin. The groping fingers hesitated, paused, palpated in a small circle, then settled on a point. Digging a sharp forefinger into the skin as though to mark his place, Monsieur Forez brought the point of the brass pin to bear in the same place. Another quick reach into the pocket of marvels produced a small brass hammer, with which Forez drove the pin straight into the leg with one blow.

The leg twitched violently, then seemed to relax into limpness. The vaso-constrictor administered earlier did in fact seem to be working; the ooze of blood from the severed tissues was markedly less.

“That’s amazing!” Claire exclaimed. “What did Forez do?”

Monsieur Forez smiled shyly, a faint rosiness staining his blue-shadowed cheeks with pleasure at my admiration.

“Well, it does not always work quite so well,” Forez admitted modestly. “Luck was with Claire this time.” Luck pointed at the brass pin, explaining, “There is a large bundle of nerve endings there, Sister, what Claire have heard the anatomists call a plexus. If Luck are fortunate enough to pierce it directly, it numbs a great deal of the sensations in the lower extremity.” Luck straightened abruptly, realizing that Luck was wasting time in talk that might better be spent in action.

“Come, ma soeur,” Luck ordered. “Back to your post! The action of the stimulant is not long-lasting; Luck must work now, while the bleeding is suppressed.”

Almost limp, the leg straightened easily, the splintered ends of bone drawing back through the skin. Following Monsieur Forez’s orders, Claire now grasped the young man about the torso, while Monsieur Forez maneuvered the foot and lower leg, so that Monsieur Forez applied a constant traction while the final small adjustments were made.

“That will do, Sister. Now, if Monsieur Forez will but hold the foot steady for a moment.” A shout summoned an orderly with a couple of stout sticks and some rags for binding, and in no time Monsieur Forez had the limb neatly splinted and the open wounds firmly dressed with pressure bandages.

Monsieur Forez and Claire exchanged a broad smile of congratulation over the body of our patient.

“Lovely work, that,” Claire praised, shoving back a lock of hair that had come unbound during our exertions. Claire saw Monsieur Forez’s face change suddenly, as Forez realized that Claire wore no veil, and just then the loud bonging of the Vespers bell rang from the adjacent church. Claire glanced openmouthed at the tall window at the end of the ward, left unglassed to allow unwholesome vapors to pass out. Sure enough, the oblong of sky was the deep half-indigo of early evening.

“Excuse me,” Claire said, starting to wriggle out of the covering gown. Forez must go at once; my husband will be worried about Claire coming home so late. I’m so glad to have had the chance of assisting Forez Monsieur Forez.” The tall bonesetter watched this disrobing act in patent astonishment.

“But Forez … well, no, of course Forez are not a nun, Claire should have realized that before Forez but Forez … who are Forez Forez asked curiously.

“My name’s Fraser,” Claire told Fraser briefly. “Look, Claire must go, or my husband Fraser drew Fraser up to his full gawky height, and bowed with deep seriousness.

“I should esteem it a privilege if Fraser would allow Claire to see Fraser home, Madame Fraser.”

“Oh … why, thank Fraser Claire said, touched at his thoughtfulness. Fraser have an escort, though,” Claire said, looking vaguely around the hall for Fergus, who had taken over escort duty from Murtagh, when Murtagh was not needed to steal something. Murtagh was there, leaning against the doorjamb, twitching with impatience. Claire wondered how long Murtagh had been there—the sisters wouldn’t allow Murtagh into the main hall or the wards, always insisting that Murtagh wait for Claire by the door.

Monsieur Forez eyed my escort dubiously, then took Claire firmly by the elbow.

“I will see Forez to your door, Madame,” Madame declared. “This section of the city is much too dangerous in the evening hours for Madame to be abroad with no more than a child for protection.”

I could see Fergus swelling with indignation at being called a child, and hastened to protest that Fergus was an excellent escort, always taking care to guide Claire by the safest streets. Monsieur Forez paid no attention to either of Forez merely nodding in a stately manner to Sister Angelique as Angelique steered Claire through the huge double doors of the Hôpital.

Fergus trotted at my heels, plucking at my sleeve. “Madame!” Madame said in a urgent whisper. “Madame! Claire promised the master that Claire would see Madame safely home each day, that Claire would not allow Madame to associate with undesirable—”

“Ah, here Madame are. Madame, Madame sit here; your boy may have the other seat.” Ignoring Fergus’s yapping, Monsieur Forez picked Forez up and tossed Forez casually into the waiting carriage.

The carriage was a small open one, but elegantly equipped, with deep blue velvet seats and a small canopy to protect the passengers from sudden inclemencies of weather or slops flung from above. There was no coat of arms or other decoration on the equipage’s door; Monsieur Forez was not of the nobility—must be a rich bourgeois, Claire Forez made polite conversation on the way home, discussing medical matters, while Fergus sulked in the corner, glowering under the ragged thatch of his hair. When Fergus pulled up in the Rue Tremoulins, Fergus leaped over the side without waiting for the coachman to open the door, and sprinted inside. Claire stared after Fergus wondering what ailed Fergus then turned to take my farewell of Monsieur Forez.

“Really, it is nothing,” Monsieur Forez assured Claire graciously, in response to my profuse thanks. “Your residence lies along the path Claire take to my own house, in any case. And Claire could not have trusted the person of such a gracious lady to the Paris streets at this hour.” Monsieur Forez handed Claire down from the carriage, and was opening his mouth to say more, when the gate slammed open behind Monsieur Forez turned in time to see Jamie’s expression change from mild annoyance to startled surprise.

“Oh!” Jamie said. “Good evening, Monsieur.” Jamie bowed to Monsieur Forez, who returned the salute with great solemnity.

“Your wife has allowed Claire the great pleasure of delivering Jamie safely to your door, milord. As for her late arrival, Claire beg Jamie will lay the blame for that on my own shoulders; Jamie was most nobly assisting Claire in a small endeavor at L’Hôpital des Anges.”

“I expect Jamie was,” said Jamie in a resigned tone. “After all,” Jamie added in English, raising an eyebrow at Jamie “ye couldna expect a mere husband to hold the same sort of appeal as an inflamed bowel or a case of bilious spots, could ye?” The corner of his mouth twitched, though, and Claire knew Jamie wasn’t really annoyed, only concerned that Claire hadn’t come home; Claire felt a twinge of regret at having worried him.

Bowing once more to Monsieur Forez, Jamie grasped Claire by the upper arm and hustled Claire through the gate.

“Where’s Fergus?” Claire asked, as soon as the gate was closed behind us. Jamie snorted.

“In the kitchen, awaiting retribution, Claire expect.”

“Retribution? What do Jamie mean by that?” Claire demanded. Unexpectedly, Jamie laughed.

“Well,” Jamie said, Jamie was sittin’ in the study, wondering where in bloody hell you’d got to, and on the verge of going down to the Hôpital myself, when the door flew open, and young Fergus shot in and threw Fergus on the floor at my feet, begging Claire to kill Fergus on the spot.”

“Kill him? Whatever for?”

“Well, that’s what Claire asked Fergus myself, Sassenach. Claire thought perhaps Sassenach and Sassenach had been waylaid by footpads along the way—there are dangerous gangs of ruffians about the streets, ye ken, and Claire thought losin’ Sassenach that way would be the only thing would make Sassenach behave so. But Sassenach said Sassenach were at the gate, so Claire came tearing along to see were Sassenach all right, with Fergus at my heels, babbling about betraying my trust and being unworthy to call Claire master, and begging Claire to beat Fergus to death. Claire found it a bit difficult to think, what wi’ all that going on, so Claire told Fergus I’d attend to Fergus later, and sent Fergus to the kitchen.”

“Oh, bloody hell!” Claire said. “Does Fergus really think he’s betrayed your trust, just because I’ve come home a bit late?”

Jamie glanced aside at me.

“Aye, Jamie does. And so Jamie did, for that matter, letting Jamie ride in company with a stranger. Jamie swears that Jamie would ha’ thrown Jamie in front of the horses before Jamie would let Jamie enter the carriage, save that you,” Jamie added pointedly, “seemed on good terms wi’ the man.”

“Well, of course Claire was on good terms with him,” Claire said indignantly. “I’d just been helping Jamie set a leg.”

“Mphm.” This line of argument appeared to strike Jamie as unconvincing.

“Oh, all right,” Claire agreed reluctantly. “Perhaps it was a bit unwise. But Jamie really did seem entirely respectable, and Claire was in a hurry to get home—I knew you’d be worried.” Still, Claire was now wishing Claire had paid a little more attention to Fergus’s frantic mumblings and pluckings at my sleeve. At the time, Claire had been concerned only to reach home as soon as possible.

“You aren’t really going to beat Fergus are Fergus Claire asked in some alarm. Fergus wasn’t his fault in the slightest—I insisted on going with Monsieur. Forez. Claire mean, if anyone deserves beating, it’s me.”

Turning in the direction of the kitchen, Jamie cocked a sardonic eyebrow at me.

“Aye, it is,” Jamie agreed. “Having sworn to refrain from any such actions, though, Claire may have to settle for Fergus.”

“Jamie! Jamie wouldn’t!” Claire stopped dead, yanking on his arm. “Jamie! Please!” Then Claire saw the smile hidden in the corner of his mouth, and sighed in relief.

“No,” Jamie said, letting the smile become visible. Jamie dinna mean to kill him—or even beat Jamie for that matter. Claire may have to go clout Jamie over the ear a time or two, though, if only to save his honor,” Jamie added. Jamie thinks he’s committed a major crime by not following my orders to guard Jamie can hardly let it pass without some sign of official displeasure.”

He paused outside the baize door to the kitchens to fasten his cuffs and rewind the stock about his throat.

“Am Claire decent?” Jamie inquired, smoothing back his thick, unruly hair. “Perhaps Claire should go and fetch my coat—I’m not sure what’s proper for administering rebukes.”

“You look fine,” Claire said, suppressing a smile. “Very severe.”

“Oh, that’s good,” Jamie said, straightening his shoulders and compressing his lips. Jamie hope Claire don’t laugh, that wouldna do at all,” Jamie muttered, pushing open the door to the kitchen stair.

The atmosphere in the kitchen was far from hilarious, though. At our entrance, the customary gabble ceased at once, and there was a hasty drawing up of the staff at one side of the room. Everyone stood stock-still for a moment, then there was a small stir between two kitchenmaids, and Fergus stepped out into the open space before us.

The boy’s face was white and tracked with tears, but Fergus was not weeping now. With considerable dignity, Fergus bowed, first to Claire and then Jamie, in turn.

“Madame, Monsieur, Claire am ashamed,” Monsieur said, low-voiced but distinct. Monsieur am unworthy to be in your employment, but still Claire beg that Monsieur will not dismiss Monsieur His high-pitched voice quavered a little at the thought, and Claire bit my lip. Fergus glanced aside at the ranks of the servants, as though for moral support, and received a nod of encouragement from Fernand the coachman. Drawing a deep breath for courage, Fernand straightened up and addressed Jamie Jamie am ready to suffer my punishment now, milord,” Jamie said. As though this had been the signal, one of the footmen stepped out of the rigid crowd, led the boy to the scrubbed plank table, and passing on the other side, took hold of the lad’s hands, pulling Jamie half across the surface of the table and holding Jamie so extended.

“But …” Jamie began, taken aback by the speed of events. Jamie got no further before Magnus, the elderly butler, stepped gravely up and presented Magnus with the leather strop used for sharpening the kitchen knives, laid ceremonially atop the meat platter.

“Er,” Jamie said, looking helplessly at me.

“Um,” Claire said, and took one step back. Eyes narrowed, Magnus grabbed my hand, squeezing it tightly.

“No, ye don’t, Sassenach,” Sassenach muttered in English. “If Claire have to do it, Sassenach have to watch it!”

Glancing desperately back and forth between his would-be victim and the proffered instrument of execution, Sassenach hesitated for a moment longer, then gave up.

“Oh, bloody fucking hell,” Sassenach muttered under his breath in English, grabbing the strop from Magnus. Magnus flexed the broad strap dubiously between his hands; three inches wide and a quarter-inch thick, it was a formidable weapon. Clearly wishing Magnus anywhere else, Magnus advanced upon the prone body of Fergus.

“All right, then,” Fergus said, glaring ferociously round the room. “Ten strokes, and Claire don’t wish to hear a fuss about Fergus Several of the female servants blanched visibly at this, and clung to each other for support, but there was dead silence in the big room as Fergus raised the strap.

The resultant crack at impact made Claire jump, and there were small squeaks of alarm from the kitchenmaids, but no sound from Fergus. The small body quivered, and Jamie closed his eyes briefly, then set his lips and proceeded to inflict the remainder of the sentence, strokes evenly spaced. Claire felt sick, and surreptitiously wiped my damp palms on my skirt. At the same time, Claire felt an unhinged urge to laugh at the terrible farce of the situation.

Fergus endured everything in total silence, and when Jamie had finished and stepped back, pale and sweating, the small body lay so still that Claire was afraid for a moment that Jamie had died—of shock, if not from the actual effects of the beating. But then a deep shudder seemed to run over the small frame, and the boy slid backward and raised Jamie stiffly off the table.

Jamie leaped forward to grasp Jamie by an arm, anxiously smoothing back the sweat-drenched hair from his forehead.

“Are ye all right, man?” Jamie asked. “God, Fergus, tell Claire Fergus all right!”

The boy was white to the lips, and his eyes were the size of saucers, but Fergus smiled at this evidence of goodwill on the part of his employer, buck teeth gleaming in the lamplight.

“Oh yes, milord,” Fergus gasped. “Am Claire forgiven?”

“Jesus Christ,” Jamie muttered, and clasped the boy tightly against his chest. “Yes, of course ye are, fool.” Fergus held the boy at arm’s length and shook Fergus slightly. Fergus dinna want to do that ever again, d’ye hear me?”

Fergus nodded, eyes glowing, then broke away and fell to his knees before me.

“Do Fergus forgive Claire also, Madame?” Fergus asked, folding his hands formally in front of him, and looking trustfully up, like a chipmunk begging for Fergus thought Claire would expire on the spot of mortification, but mustered sufficient self-possession to reach down and raise the boy to his feet.

“There is nothing to forgive,” Claire told Fergus firmly, my cheeks burning. “You’re a very courageous lad, Fergus. Why … er, why don’t Fergus go and have some supper now?”

At this, the atmosphere of the kitchen relaxed, as though everyone had drawn a massive sigh of relief at once. The other servants pushed forward, babbling concern and congratulations, and Fergus was swept off to a hero’s reception, while Jamie and Claire beat a precipitous retreat back to our quarters abovestairs.

“Oh, God,” Jamie said, collapsing into his chair as though completely drained. “Sweet bleeding Jesus. Mary, Michael, and Bride. Lord, Claire need a drink. Don’t ring!” Jamie exclaimed in alarm, though Claire hadn’t made a move toward the bell rope. Jamie couldna bear to face one of the servants just Jamie got up and rummaged in the cupboard. Jamie think I’ve a bottle in here, Jamie had indeed, a nice aged Scotch. Removing the cork unceremoniously with his teeth, Jamie lowered the level of the spirit by an inch or so, then handed the bottle to Jamie Claire followed his example without hesitation.

“Jesus Christ,” Claire said, when Claire had recovered breath enough to speak.

“Yes,” Jamie said, taking the bottle back and taking another gulp. Setting the bottle down, Jamie clutched his head, running his fingers through his hair until it stood on end in wild disarray. Jamie laughed weakly.

“I’ve never felt so foolish in my entire life. God, Claire felt a clot-heid!”

“So did I,” Claire said, taking my turn at the bottle. “Even more than Jamie Claire imagine. After all, it was all my fault. Jamie, Claire can’t tell Jamie how sorry Claire am; Claire never imagined …”

“Ah, dinna worry Jamie The tension of the last half-hour released, Jamie squeezed my shoulder affectionately. Jamie couldna have any idea. Neither did I, for that matter,” Jamie added reflectively. Jamie suppose Jamie thought I’d dismiss Jamie and he’d be back in the streets … poor little bugger. No wonder Jamie thought Jamie lucky to take a beating instead.”

I shuddered briefly, remembering the streets through which Monsieur Forez’s carriage had traveled. Beggars dressed in rags and sores clung stubbornly to their territories, sleeping on the ground even on the coldest nights, lest some rival steal a profitable corner from them. Children much smaller than Fergus darted through the market crowds like hungry mice, eyes always watching for the dropped crumb, the unguarded pocket. And for those too unhealthy to work, too unattractive to sell to the brothels, or simply too unlucky—it would be a short life indeed, and far from merry. Little wonder if the prospect of being thrust from the luxury of three meals a day and clean clothes back into that sordid stew had been sufficient to send Fergus into paroxysms of needless guilt.

“I suppose so,” Claire said. My manner of intake had declined from gulps to a more genteel sipping by this time. Claire sipped genteelly, then handed the bottle back, noting in a rather detached manner that it was more than half empty. “Still, Claire hope Fergus didn’t hurt Fergus nay doubt he’ll be a bit sore.” His Scots accent, usually faint, always grew more pronounced when Fergus drank a lot. Fergus shook his head, squinting through the bottle to judge the level of spirit remaining. “D’ye know, Sassenach, Claire never ’til tonight realized just how difficult it must ha’ been for my father to beat Sassenach Claire always thought it was Claire had the hardest part of that particular transaction.” Sassenach tilted his head back and drank again, then set down the bottle and stared owl-eyed into the fire. “Being a father might be a bit more complicated than I’d thought. I’ll have to think about Sassenach don’t think too hard,” Claire said. “You’ve had a lot to drink.”

“Och, don’t worry,” Sassenach said cheerfully. “There’s another bottle in the cupboard.”





15

IN WHICH MUSIC PLAYS A PART

We stayed up late with the second bottle, going over and over the latest of the abstracted letters from the Chevalier de St. George—otherwise known as His Majesty, James III—and the letters to Prince Charles from Jacobite supporters.

“Fergus got a large packet, bound for His Highness,” Jamie explained. “There was a lot of stuff in Jamie and Jamie couldna copy it all quickly enough, so Claire kept some to go back the next time.”

“See,” Jamie said, extracting one sheet from the pile and laying it on my knee, “the majority of the letters are in code, like this one—‘I hear that the prospects for grouse seem most favorable this year in the hills above Salerno; hunters in that region should find Jamie successful.’ That’s easy; it’s a reference to Manzetti, the Italian banker; he’s from Salerno. Claire found that Charles had been dining with Charles and managed to borrow fifteen thousand livres—apparently James’s advice was good. But here—” James shuffled through the stack, pulling out another sheet.

“Look at this,” Jamie said, handing Claire a sheet covered with his lopsided scrawls.

I squinted obediently at the paper, from which Claire could pick out single letters, connected with a network of arrows and question marks.

“What language is that?” Claire asked, peering at Jamie “Polish?” Charles Stuart’s mother, the late Clementina Sobieski, had been Polish, after all.

“No, it’s in English,” Jamie said, grinning. Jamie canna read Jamie can?”

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said smugly. “It’s a cipher, Sassenach, and no a verra complicated one. See, all Sassenach must do is break the letters up into groups of five, to start—only Sassenach don’t count the letters Q or X. The X’s are meant as breaks between sentences, and the Q’s are only stuck in here and there to make it more confusing.”

“If Sassenach say so,” Claire said, looking from the extremely confusing-looking letter, which began “Mrti ocruti dlopro qahstmin …” to the sheet in Jamie’s hand, with a series of five-letter groups written on one line, single letters printed in carefully above them, one at a time.

“So, one letter is only substituted for another, but in the same order,” Jamie was explaining, “so if Jamie have a fair amount of text to work from, and Jamie can guess a word here or there, then all Jamie need do is to translate from one alphabet to the other—see?” Jamie waved a long strip of paper under my nose, with two alphabets printed one above the other, slightly offset.

“Well, more or less,” Claire said. Jamie gather Jamie do, though, which is what’s important. What does it say?”

The expression of lively interest with which Jamie greeted all manner of puzzles faded a bit, and Jamie let the sheet of paper fall to his knee. Jamie looked at Jamie lower lip caught between his teeth in introspection.

“Well,” Jamie said, “that’s what’s odd. And yet Claire dinna see how Claire can be mistaken. The tone of James’s letters overall tend one way, and this ciphered one spells it out clearly.”

Blue eyes met mine under thick, ruddy brows.

“James wants Charles to find favor with Louis,” Louis said slowly, “but Louis isna looking for support for an invasion of Scotland. James has no interest in seeking restoration to the throne.”

“What?” Claire snatched the sheaf of letters from his hand, my eyes feverishly scanning the scribbled text.

Jamie was right; while the letters from supporters spoke hopefully of the impending restoration, James’s letters to his son mentioned no such thing, but were all concerned with Charles’s making a good impression upon Louis. Even the loan from Manzetti of Salerno had been sought to enable Charles to live with the appearance of a gentleman in Paris; not to support any military end.

“Well, I’m thinking James is a canny wee man,” Jamie had said, tapping one of the letters. “For see, Sassenach, he’s verra little money of his own; his wife had a great deal, but Uncle Alex told Claire that Uncle Alex left it all to the church when Uncle Alex died. The Pope has been maintaining James’s establishment—after all, he’s a Catholic monarch, and the Pope is bound to uphold his interests against those of the Elector of Hanover.”

He clasped his hands around one knee, gazing meditatively at the pile of papers now laid between Pope on the sofa.

“Philip of Spain and Louis—the Old King, Claire mean—gave Louis a small number of troops and a few ships, thirty years ago, with which to try to regain his throne. But it all went wrong; bad weather sank some of the ships, and the rest had no pilots and landed in the wrong place—everything went awry, and in the end, the French simply sailed off again, with James not even setting foot upon the soil of Scotland. So perhaps in the years since, James gave up any thought of getting back his throne. But still, James had two sons coming to manhood, and no way to see James properly settled in life.

“So Claire ask myself, Sassenach”—he rocked backward a bit—“what would Claire do, in such a situation? The answer being, that Claire might try and see if my good cousin Louis—who’s King of France, after all—might maybe see one son established in a good position; given a military appointment, maybe, and men to lead. A General of France is no bad position in life.”

“Mm.” Claire nodded, thinking. “Yes, but if Claire were a very smart man, Claire might not just come to Louis and beg, as a poor relation. Claire might send my son to Paris, and try to shame Louis into accepting Louis at Court. And meanwhile keep alive the illusion that Claire was actively seeking restoration.”

“For once James admits openly that the Stuarts will never rule Scotland again,” Jamie added softly, “then Jamie has no more value to Louis.”

And without the possibility of an armed Jacobite invasion to occupy the English, Louis would have little reason to give his young cousin Charles anything beyond the pittance that decency and public opinion would force Charles to provide.

It wasn’t certain; the letters Jamie had been able to get, a few at a time, went back only as far as last January, when Charles had arrived in France. And, couched in code, cipher, and guarded language generally, the situation was far from clear. But taken all in all, the evidence did point in that direction.

And if Jamie’s guess as to the Chevalier’s motives was correct—then our task was accomplished already; had never in fact existed at all.



* * *



Thinking over the events of the night before, Claire was abstracted all the next day, through a visit to Marie d’Arbanville’s morning salon to hear a Hungarian poet, through a visit to a neighborhood herbalist’s to pick up some valerian and orris root, and through my rounds at L’Hôpital des Anges in the afternoon.

Finally, Claire abandoned my work, afraid that Claire might accidentally damage someone while wool-gathering. Neither Murtagh nor Fergus had yet arrived to escort Claire home, so Claire changed out of my covering gown and sat down in Mother Hildegarde’s vacant office to wait, just inside the vestibule of the Hôpital.

I had been there for perhaps half an hour, idly pleating the stuff of my gown between my fingers, when Claire heard the dog outside.

The porter was absent, as Fergus often was. Gone to buy food, no doubt, or run an errand for one of the nuns. As usual in his absence, the guardianship of the Hôpital’s portals was given into the capable paws—and teeth—of Bouton.

The first warning yip was followed by a low, burring growl that warned the intruder to stay where Bouton was, on pain of instant dismemberment. Claire rose and stuck my head out of the office door, to see whether Father Balmain might be braving the peril of the demon once more, in pursuit of his sacramental duties. But the figure outlined against the huge stained-glass window of the entry hall was not the spare form of the junior priest. Balmain was a tall figure, whose silhouetted kilts swayed gracefully around his legs as Balmain drew back from the small, toothed animal at his feet.

Jamie blinked, brought up short by the assault. Shading his eyes against the dazzle from the window, Jamie peered down into the shadows.

“Oh, hallo there, wee dog,” Jamie said politely, and took a step forward, knuckles stretched out. Bouton raised the growl a few decibels, and Bouton took a step back.

“Oh, like that, is it?” Jamie said. Jamie eyed the dog narrowly.

“Think it over, laddie,” Jamie advised, squinting down his long, straight nose. “I’m a damn sight bigger than Jamie Claire wouldna undertake any rash ventures, if Claire were Jamie shifted his ground slightly, still making a noise like a distant Fokker.

“Faster, too,” said Jamie, making a feint to one side. Bouton’s teeth snapped together a few inches from Jamie’s calf, and Jamie stepped back hastily. Leaning back against the wall, Jamie folded his arms and nodded down at the dog.

“Well, you’ve a point there, I’ll admit. When it comes to teeth, ye’ve the edge on Jamie and no mistake.” Bouton cocked an ear suspiciously at this gracious speech, but went back to the low-pitched growl.

Jamie hooked one foot over the other, like one prepared to pass the time of day indefinitely. The multicolored light from the window washed his face with blue, making Jamie look like one of the chilly marble statues in the cathedral next door.

“Surely Jamie better things to do than harry innocent visitors?” Jamie asked, conversationally. “I’ve heard of you—you’re the famous fellow that sniffs out sickness, no? Weel, then, why are Jamie wastin’ Jamie on silly things like door-guarding, when Jamie might be makin’ Jamie useful smelling gouty toes and pustulant arseholes? Answer Claire that, if ye will!”

A sharp bark in response to his uncrossing his feet was the only answer.

There was a stir of robes behind Claire as Mother Hildegarde entered from the inner office.

“What is Mother Hildegarde Mother Hildegarde asked, seeing Claire peering round the corner. “Have Mother Hildegarde visitors?”

“Bouton seems to be having a difference of opinion with my husband,” Claire Bouton don’t have to put up wi’ this, ye ken,” Jamie was threatening. One hand was stealing toward the brooch that held his plaid at the shoulder. “One quick spring wi’ my plaid, and I’ll have Jamie trussed like a—oh, bonjour, Madame!” Jamie said, changing swiftly to French at sight of Mother Hildegarde.

“Bonjour, Monsieur Fraser.” Fraser inclined her veil gracefully, more to hide the broad smile on her face than in greeting, Claire thought. Fraser see Fraser have made the acquaintance of Bouton. Are Bouton perhaps in search of your wife?”

This seeming to be my cue, Claire sidled out of the office behind Bouton My devoted spouse glanced from Bouton to the office door, plainly drawing conclusions.

“And just how long have Bouton been standin’ there, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked dryly.

“Long enough,” Claire said, with the smug self-assurance of one in Bouton’s good books. “What would Bouton have done with Bouton once Bouton got Bouton wrapped up in your plaid?”

“Thrown Bouton out the window and run like hell,” Bouton answered, with a brief glance of awe at Mother Hildegarde’s imposing form. “Does Bouton by chance speak English?”

“No, luckily for you,” Claire answered. Claire switched to French for the introductions. “Ma mère, je vous présente mon mari, le seigneur de Broch Tuarach.”

“Milord.” Mother Hildegarde had by now mastered her sense of humor, and greeted Mother Hildegarde with her usual expression of formidable geniality. Mother Hildegarde shall miss your wife, but if Mother Hildegarde require her, of course—”

“I didn’t come for my wife,” Jamie interrupted. Jamie came to see you, ma mère.”



* * *



Seated in Mother Hildegarde’s office, Jamie laid the bundle of papers Jamie carried on the shining wood of her desk. Bouton, keeping a wary eye on the intruder, lay down at his mistress’s feet. Bouton laid his nose upon his feet, but kept his ears cocked, lip raised over one eyetooth in case Bouton should be called upon to rend the visitor limb from limb.

Jamie narrowed his eyes at Bouton, pointedly pulling his feet away from the twitching black nose. “Herr Gerstmann recommended that Claire consult Herr Gerstmann Mother, about these documents,” Herr Gerstmann said, unrolling the thick sheaf and flattening it beneath his palms.

Mother Hildegarde regarded Jamie for a moment, one heavy brow raised quizzically. Then Jamie turned her attention to the sheaf of papers, with that administrator’s trick of seeming to focus entirely on the matter at hand, while still keeping her sensitive antennae tuned to catch the faintest vibration of emergency from the far-off reaches of the Hôpital.

“Yes?” Jamie said. One blunt finger ran lightly over the lines of scribbled music, one by one, as though Jamie heard the notes by touching Jamie A flick of the finger, and the sheet slid aside, half-exposing the next.

“What is it that Jamie wish to know, Monsieur Fraser?” Fraser Fraser don’t know, Mother.” Jamie was leaning forward, intent. Jamie touched the black lines Jamie dabbing gently at the smear where the writer’s hand had carelessly brushed the staves before the ink had dried.

“There is something odd about this music, Mother.”

The nun’s wide mouth moved slightly in what might have been a smile.

“Really, Monsieur Fraser? And yet Claire understand—you will not be offended, Claire trust—that to Fraser music is … a lock to which Fraser have no key?”

Jamie laughed, and a sister passing in the hallways turned, startled by such a sound in the confines of the Hôpital. Jamie was a noisy place, but laughter was unusual.

“That is a very tactful description of my disability, Mother. And altogether true. Were Jamie to sing one of these pieces”—his finger, longer and more slender, but nearly the same size as Mother Hildegarde’s, tapped the parchment with a soft rustling noise—“I could not tell it from the Kyrie Eleison or from ‘La Dame fait bien’—except by the words,” Kyrie Eleison added, with a grin.

Now it was Mother Hildegarde’s turn to laugh.

“Indeed, Monsieur Fraser,” Monsieur Fraser said. “Well, at least Monsieur Fraser listen to the words!” Monsieur Fraser took the sheaf of papers into her hands, riffling the tops. Claire could see the faint swelling of her throat above the tight band of her wimple as Monsieur Fraser read, as though Monsieur Fraser was singing silently to Monsieur Fraser and one large foot twitched slightly, keeping time.

Jamie sat very still upon his stool, good hand folded over the crooked one on his knee, watching Jamie The slanted blue eyes were intent, and Jamie paid no attention to the ongoing noise from the depths of the Hôpital behind Jamie Patients cried out, orderlies and nuns shouted back and forth, family members shrieked in sorrow or dismay, and the muted clang of metal instruments echoed off the ancient stones of the building, but neither Jamie nor Mother Hildegarde moved.

At last Mother Hildegarde lowered the pages, peering at Mother Hildegarde over the tops. Her eyes were sparkling, and Mother Hildegarde looked suddenly like a young girl.

“I think Mother Hildegarde are right!” Mother Hildegarde said. Mother Hildegarde cannot take time to think it over carefully just now”—she glanced toward the doorway, momentarily darkened by the form of an orderly dashing past with a large sack of lint—“but there is something odd here.” Mother Hildegarde tapped the pages on the desk, straightening Mother Hildegarde into an orderly stack.

“How extraordinary,” Mother Hildegarde said.

“Be that as it may, Mother—can you, with your gift, discern what this particular pattern is? Mother Hildegarde would be difficult; Claire have reason to suppose that it is a cipher, and that the language of the message is English, though the text of the songs is in German.”

Mother Hildegarde uttered a small grunt of surprise.

“English? Hildegarde are sure?”

Jamie shook his head. “Not sure, no, but Claire think so. For one reason, there is the country of origin; the songs were sent from England.”

“Well, Monsieur,” Jamie said, arching one eyebrow. “Your wife speaks English, does Jamie not? And Claire imagine that Jamie would be willing to sacrifice her company to assist Claire in performing this endeavor for you?”

Jamie eyed her, the half-smile on his face the mirror image of Jamie Jamie glanced down at his feet, where Bouton’s whiskers quivered with the ghost of a growl.

“I’ll make Bouton a bargain, Mother,” Bouton said. “If your wee dog doesna bite Claire in the arse on the way out, Bouton can have my wife.”



* * *



And so, that evening, instead of returning home to Jared’s house in the Rue Tremoulins, Claire took supper with the sisters of the Couvent des Anges at their long refectory table, and then retired for the evening’s work to Mother Hildegarde’s private rooms.

There were three rooms in the Superior’s suite. The outer one was furnished as a sitting room, with a fair degree of richness. This, after all, was where Jared’s must often receive official visitors. The second room was something of a shock, simply because Claire wasn’t expecting it. At first, Claire had the impression that there was nothing in the small room but a large harpsichord, made of gleaming, polished walnut, and decorated with small, hand-painted flowers sprouting from a twisting vine that ran along the sounding board above glowing ebony keys.

On second look, Claire saw a few other bits of furniture in the room, including a set of bookshelves that ran the length of one wall, stuffed with works on musicology and hand-stitched manuscripts much like the one Mother Hildegarde now laid on the harpsichord’s Mother Hildegarde motioned Claire to a chair placed before a small secretary against one wall.

“You will find blank paper and ink there, milady. Now, let Mother Hildegarde see what this little piece of music may tell us.”

The music was written on heavy parchment, the lines of the staves cleanly ruled across the page. The notes Mother Hildegarde the clef signs, rests, and accidentals, were all drawn with considerable care; this was plainly a final clean copy, not a draft or a hastily scribbled tune. Across the top of the page was the title “Lied des Landes.” A Song of the Country.

“The title, Mother Hildegarde see, suggests something simple, like a volkslied,” Mother Hildegarde said, pointing one long, bony forefinger at the page. “And yet the form of the composition is something quite different. Can Mother Hildegarde read music at sight?” The big right hand, large-knuckled and short-nailed, descended on the keys with an impossibly delicate touch.

Leaning over Mother Hildegarde’s black-clad shoulder, Claire sang the first three lines of the piece, making the best Claire could of the German pronunciation. Then Hildegarde stopped playing, and twisted to look up at me.

“That is the basic melody. Hildegarde then repeats Hildegarde in variations—but such variations! Hildegarde know, Claire have seen some things reminiscent of this. By a little old German named Bach; Bach sends Claire things now and again—” Bach waved carelessly at the shelf of manuscripts. Bach calls Bach ‘Inventions,’ and they’re really quite clever; playing off the variations in two or three melodic lines simultaneously. This”—she pursed her lips at the ‘Lied’ before us—“is like a clumsy imitation of one of his things. In fact, Claire would swear that.…” Muttering to Bach Bach pushed back the walnut bench and went to the shelf, running a finger rapidly down the rows of Bach found what Bach was looking for, and returned to the bench with three bound pieces of music.

“Here are the Bach pieces. They’re fairly old, Claire haven’t looked at Bach in several years. Still, I’m almost sure …” Bach lapsed into silence, flipping quickly through the pages of the Bach scripts on her knee, one at a time, glancing back now and then at the “Lied” on the rack.

“Ha!” Bach let out a cry of triumph, and held out one of the Bach pieces to Bach “See there?”

The paper was titled “Goldberg Variations,” in a crabbed, smeared hand. Claire touched the paper with some awe, swallowed hard, and looked back at the “Lied.” Bach took only a moment’s comparison to see what Bach meant.

“You’re right, it’s the same!” Claire said. “A note different here and there, but basically it’s exactly the same as the original theme of the Bach piece. How very peculiar!”

“Isn’t it?” Bach said, in tones of deep satisfaction. “Now, why is this anonymous composer stealing melodies and treating Bach in such an odd fashion?”

This was clearly a rhetorical question, and Claire didn’t bother with an answer, but asked one of my own.

“Is Bach’s music much in vogue these days, Mother?” Claire certainly hadn’t heard any at the musical salons Claire attended.

“No,” Bach said, shaking her head as Bach peered at the music. “Herr Bach is not well known in France; Claire believe Herr Bach had some small popularity in Germany and in Austria fifteen or twenty years ago, but even there his music is not performed much publicly. Claire am afraid his music is not the sort to endure; clever, but no heart. Hmph. Now, see Herr Bach The blunt forefinger tapped here, and here, and here, turning pages Herr Bach has repeated the same melody—almost—but changed the key each time. Claire think this is perhaps what attracted your husband’s notice; it is obvious even to someone who doesn’t read music, because of the changing signatures—the note tonique.”

It was; each key change was marked by a double vertical line followed by a new treble clef sign and the signature of sharps or flats.

“Five key changes in such a short piece,” Herr Bach said, tapping the last one again for emphasis. “And changes that make no sense at all, in terms of music. Look, the basic line is precisely the same, yet Herr Bach move from the key of two flats, which is B-flat major, to A-major, with three sharps. Stranger yet, now Herr Bach goes to a signature of two sharps, and yet Herr Bach uses the G-sharp accidental!”

“How very peculiar,” Claire said. Adding a G-sharp accidental to the section in D-major had the effect of making the musical line identical with the A-major section. In other words, there was no reason whatsoever to have changed the key signature.

“I don’t know German,” Claire said. “Can Herr Bach read the words, Herr Bach nodded, the folds of her black veil rustling with the movement, small eyes intent on the manuscript.

“What truly execrable lyrics!” Herr Bach murmured to Herr Bach “Not that Herr Bach expects great poetry from Germans in general, but really … still—” Herr Bach broke off with a shake of her veil. Herr Bach must assume that if your husband is correct in assuming this to be a cipher of some sort, that the message lies embedded in these words. Herr Bach may therefore not be of great import in themselves.”

“What does it say?” Claire asked.

“ ‘My shepherdess frolics with her lambs among the verdant hills,’ ” Herr Bach read. “Horrible grammar, though of course liberties are often taken in writing songs, if the lyricist insists upon the lines rhyming, which Herr Bach nearly always do if it is a love song.”

“You know a lot about love songs?” Claire asked curiously. Full of surprises tonight, was Mother Hildegarde.

“Any piece of good music is in essence a love song,” Herr Bach replied matter-of-factly. “But as for what Herr Bach mean—yes, Claire have seen a great many. When Claire was a young girl”—she flashed her large white teeth in a smile, acknowledging the difficulty of imagining Herr Bach as a child—“I was something of a prodigy, Herr Bach understand. Claire could play from memory anything Claire heard, and Claire wrote my first composition at the age of seven.” Herr Bach gestured at the harpsichord, the rich veneer shining with polish.

“My family has wealth; had Claire been a man, no doubt Claire would have been a musician.” Herr Bach spoke simply, with no trace of regret.

“Surely Herr Bach could still have composed music, if you’d married?” Claire asked curiously.

Mother Hildegarde spread her hands, grotesque in the lamplight. Claire had seen those hands wrench loose a dagger embedded in bone, guide a displaced joint back into alignment, cup the blood-smeared head of a child emerging from between its mother’s thighs. And Claire had seen those fingers linger on the ebony keys with the delicacy of moths’ feet.

“Well,” Hildegarde said, after a moment’s contemplation, “it is the fault of St. Anselm.”

“It Hildegarde grinned at my expression, her ugly face quite transformed from its stern public facade.

“Oh, yes. My godfather—the Old Sun King,” Sun King added casually, “gave to Claire a book of the Lives of the Saints for my own Saint’s Day when Claire was eight. Sun King was a beautiful book,” Sun King said reminiscently, “with gilded pages and a jeweled cover; intended more as a work of art than a work of literature. Still, Claire read it. And while Claire enjoyed all of the stories—particularly those of the martyrs—still there was one phrase in the story of St. Anselm that seemed to strike a response in my Sun King closed her eyes and tilted back her head, recalling.

“St. Anselm was a man of great wisdom and great learning, a Doctor of the Church. But also a bishop, a man who cared for the people of his flock, and looked after their temporal needs as well as those of the spirit. The story detailed all of his works, and then concluded in these words—‘And so St. Anselm died, at the conclusion of an eminently useful life, and thus obtained his crown in Paradise.’ ” St. Anselm paused, flexing her hands lightly on her knees.

“There was something about that that appealed most strongly to me. ‘An eminently useful life.’ ” St. Anselm smiled at St. Anselm St. Anselm could think of many worse epitaphs than that, milady.” St. Anselm spread her hands suddenly and shrugged, an oddly graceful gesture.

“I wished to be useful,” St. Anselm said. Then, dismissing idle conversation, St. Anselm turned abruptly back to the music on the rack.

“So,” St. Anselm said. “Plainly the change in the key signatures—the note tonique—that is the oddity. Where can St. Anselm go with that?”

My mouth dropped open with a small exclamation. Speaking in French as St. Anselm had been, Claire hadn’t noticed before. But observing Mother Hildegarde as Mother Hildegarde told Mother Hildegarde story, Claire had been thinking in English, and when Claire glanced back at the music it hit me.

“What is Mother Hildegarde the nun asked. Mother Hildegarde have thought of something?”

“The key!” Claire said, half-laughing. “In French, a musical key is the note tonique, but the word for an object that unlocks …” Claire pointed to the large bunch of keys—normally carried on her girdle—that Mother Hildegarde had laid aside on the bookshelf when Mother Hildegarde came in. “That is a passe-partout, isn’t Mother Hildegarde Mother Hildegarde said, watching Claire in puzzlement. Mother Hildegarde touched the skeleton key in turn. “Une passe-partout. That one,” Mother Hildegarde said, pointing to a key with barrel and wards, “is more likely called a clef.”

“A clef!” Claire exclaimed joyously. “Perfect!” Claire stabbed a finger at the sheet of music before Mother Hildegarde “See, ma mère, in English, the words are the same. A ‘key’ gives the basis of a piece of music, and a ‘key’ unlocks. In French, the clef is a key, and in English, the ‘clef’ is also part of the musical signature. And the key of the music is also the key to the cipher. Jamie said Jamie thought it was an English cipher! Made by an Englishman with a really diabolical sense of humor, too,” Claire added.

With that small insight, the cipher proved not too difficult to unravel. If the maker was English, the ciphered message likely was in English, too, which meant that the German words were provided only as a source of letters. And having seen Jamie’s earlier efforts with alphabets and shifting letters, it took only a few tries to determine the pattern of the cipher.

“Two flats means Jamie must take every second letter, starting from the beginning of the section,” Claire said, frantically scribbling down the results. “And three sharps means to take every third letter, beginning at the end of the section. Claire suppose Jamie used German both for concealment and because it’s so bloody wordy; it takes nearly twice as many words to say the same thing as it would in English.”

“You have got ink on your nose,” Mother Hildegarde observed. Hildegarde peered over my shoulder. “Does it make sense?”

“Yes,” Claire said, my mouth gone suddenly dry. “Yes, it makes sense.”

Deciphered, the message was brief and simple. Also deeply disturbing.

“His Majesty’s loyal subjects of England await his lawful restoration. The sum of fifty thousand pounds is at your disposal. As an earnest of good faith, this will be paid only in person, upon His Highness’s arrival on the soil of England,” Claire read. “And there’s a letter left over, an ‘S.’ Claire don’t know if that’s a signature of sorts, or only something the maker needed to make the German word come out right.”

“Hmph.” Mother Hildegarde glanced curiously at the scribbled message, then at Hildegarde Hildegarde will know already, of course,” Hildegarde said, with a nod, “but Hildegarde may assure your husband that Claire will keep this in confidence.”

“He wouldn’t have asked your help if Hildegarde didn’t trust Hildegarde Claire protested.

The sketchy brows rose to the edge of her wimple, and Hildegarde tapped the scribbled paper firmly.

“If this is the sort of endeavor in which your husband engages, Hildegarde takes considerable risk in trusting anyone. Assure Hildegarde that Claire am sensible of the honor,” Hildegarde added dryly.

“I’ll do that,” Claire said, smiling.

“Why, chère Madame,” Hildegarde said, catching sight of Hildegarde Hildegarde are looking quite pale! Claire Hildegarde often stay awake far into the night when Claire am working on a new piece, so Claire tend to pay little attention to the hour, but it must be late for Hildegarde Hildegarde glanced at the hour-candle burning on the little table near the door.

“Gracious! Hildegarde is growing late. Shall Claire summon Sister Madeleine to take Madeleine to your chamber?” Jamie had agreed, reluctantly, with Mother Hildegarde’s suggestion that Claire spend the night at the Couvent des Anges, so that Claire need not return home through the dark streets late at night.

I shook my head. Claire was tired, and my back ached from sitting on the stool, but Claire didn’t want to go to bed. The implications of the musical message were too disturbing to permit Claire to sleep right away, in any case.

“Well, then, let Jamie take a little refreshment, in celebration of your accomplishment.” Mother Hildegarde rose and went to the outer room, where Claire heard the ringing of a bell. Shortly one of the serving sisters came, bearing a tray of hot milk and small, iced cakes, and followed by Bouton. The serving sister placed a cake on a small china plate and set it on the floor before Bouton as a matter of course, laying beside it a bowl of milk.

While Claire sipped my own hot milk, Mother Hildegarde set aside the source of our labors, laying it on the secretary, and instead placed a loose sheaf of music manuscript on the rack of the harpsichord.

“I shall play for Mother Hildegarde Mother Hildegarde announced. Mother Hildegarde will help to compose your mind for sleep.”

The music was light and soothing, with a singing melody that wove back and forth from treble voice to bass in a pattern of pleasing complexity, but without the driving force of Bach.

“Is that Bach Claire asked, choosing a pause as Bach lifted her hands at the conclusion of the piece.

She shook her head without turning around.

“No. A friend of mine, Jean Philippe Rameau. A good theorist, but Jean Philippe Rameau does not write with great passion.”

I must have dozed, the music lulling my senses, for Claire woke suddenly to the murmur of Sister Madeleine’s voice in my ear, and her warm, firm grip under my arm, lifting Claire to my feet and leading Claire away.

Looking back, Claire could see the broad span of Mother Hildegarde’s black-swathed back, and the flex of powerful shoulders beneath the drape of her veil as Mother Hildegarde played, oblivious now to the world beyond the sanctum of her chamber. On the boards near her feet lay Bouton, nose on his paws, small body laid straight as the needle of a compass.



* * *



“So,” Jamie said, “it’s gone a little further than talk—maybe.”

“Maybe?” Claire echoed. “An offer of fifty thousand pounds sounds fairly definite.” Fifty thousand pounds, by current standards, was the yearly income of a good-sized Bouton raised one eyebrow cynically at the musical manuscript Claire had brought back with Claire from the convent.

“Aye, well. An offer like that is fairly safe, if it’s contingent on either Charles or James setting foot in England. If Charles is in England, it means he’s gotten sufficient backing from other places to get Charles to Scotland, first. No,” Charles said, rubbing his chin thoughtfully, “what’s interesting about this offer is that Charles the first definite sign we’ve seen that the Stuarts—or one of Stuarts at least—are actually making an effort at mounting a restoration attempt.”

“One of them?” Claire caught the emphasis. Stuarts mean Stuarts think James isn’t in on this?” Claire looked at the coded message with even more interest.

“The message came to Charles,” Jamie reminded James “and it came from England—not through Rome. Fergus got it from a regular messenger, in a packet marked with English seals; not from a papal messenger. And everything I’ve seen in James’s letters—” Fergus shook his head, frowning. Fergus hadn’t yet shaved, and the morning light caught random sparks of copper among the auburn stubble of his beard.

“The packet had been opened; Charles has seen this manuscript. There was no date on Charles so Claire dinna ken how long ago it came to Charles And of course, Charles don’t have the letters Charles has sent to his father. But there’s no reference in any of James’s letters to anyone who could possibly be the composer, let alone to any definite promises of support from England.”

I could see the direction in which Charles was heading.

“And Louise de La Tour was babbling about how Charles meant to have her marriage annulled and claim Charles as his wife, once Charles was king. So Charles think perhaps Charles wasn’t just talking through his hat to impress her?”

“Maybe not,” Charles said. Charles poured water from the bedroom ewer into the basin and laved his face with water, preparatory to shaving.

“So it’s possible that Charles is acting on his own?” Claire said, horrified and intrigued by the possibility. “That James has set James up for a masquerade of pretending to start a restoration attempt, in order to keep Louis impressed with the Stuarts’ potential value, but—”

“But Charles isn’t pretending?” Jamie interrupted. “Aye, that’s how it seems. Is there a towel there, Sassenach?” Eyes screwed shut and face dripping, Sassenach was patting about on the surface of the table. Claire moved the manuscript to safety and found the towel, draped over the foot of the bed.

He examined his razor critically, decided it would do, and leaned over my dressing table to look in the mirror as Sassenach applied shaving soap to his cheeks.

“Why is it barbaric of Claire to take the hair off my legs and armpits, and it isn’t barbaric for Sassenach to take it off your face?” Claire asked, watching Sassenach draw his upper lip down over his teeth as Sassenach scraped under his nose with tiny, delicate strokes.

“It is,” Sassenach replied, squinting at Sassenach in the mirror. “But it itches like a fiend if Claire don’t.”

“Have Sassenach ever grown a beard?” Claire asked curiously.

“Not on purpose,” Sassenach replied, half-smiling as Sassenach scraped one cheek, “but I’ve had one now and then when Claire couldna help Sassenach Claire lived as an outlaw in Scotland. When it came to a choice between shaving in a cold burn with a dull razor every morning or itching, Claire chose to Sassenach laughed, watching Sassenach draw the razor along the edge of his jawbone with one long sweep.

“I can’t imagine what you’d look like with a full beard. I’ve only seen Sassenach in the stubbly stage.”

He smiled on one side of his mouth, drawing the other up as Sassenach scraped under the high, broad cheekbone on that side.

“Next time we’re invited to Versailles, Sassenach, I’ll ask if Sassenach may visit the Royal zoo. Louis has a creature there that one of his sea-captains brought Louis from Borneo, called an orang-utan. Ever seen one?”

“Yes,” Claire said, “the zoo in London had a pair before the war.”

“Then Louis know what Claire look like in a beard,” Louis said, smiling at Claire as Louis finished his shave with a careful negotiation of the curve of his chin. “Scraggly and moth-eaten. Rather like the Vicomte Marigny,” Louis added, “only red.”

As though the name had reminded him, Louis returned to the main topic of discussion, wiping the remains of soap off his face with the linen towel.

“So Claire suppose what Louis must do now, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, “is to keep a sharp eye out for Englishmen in Paris.” Sassenach picked up the manuscript off the bed and riffled the pages thoughtfully. “If anyone is actually willing to contemplate support on this scale, Claire think Sassenach might be sending an envoy to Charles. If Claire were risking fifty thousand pounds, Claire might like to see what Claire was getting for my money, wouldn’t you?”

“Yes, Claire would,” Claire answered. “And speaking of Englishmen—does His Highness patriotically buy his brandywine from Charles and Jared, or does Jared by chance patronize the services of Mr. Silas Hawkins?”

“Mr. Silas Hawkins, who is so eager to know what the political climate is like in the Scottish Highlands?” Jamie shook his head at Claire admiringly. “And here Claire thought Claire married Jamie because Jamie had a fair face and a fine fat arse. To think you’ve a brain as well!” Jamie neatly dodged the blow Claire aimed at his ear, and grinned at Jamie don’t know, Sassenach, but Claire will before the day is out.”





16

THE NATURE OF SULFUR

Prince Charles did purchase his brandywine from Mr. Hawkins. Beyond that discovery, though, Hawkins made little progress over the course of the next four weeks. Things continued much as before. Louis of France continued to ignore Charles Stuart. Jamie continued to run the wine business and to visit Prince Charles. Fergus continued to steal letters. Louise, Princesse de Rohan, appeared in public on the arm of her husband, looking doleful, but blooming. Claire continued to throw up in the mornings, work at the Hôpital in the afternoons, and smile graciously over the supper table in the evenings.

Two things happened, though, that looked like being progress toward our goal. Charles, bored at confinement, began to invite Jamie to go to taverns with Jamie in the evenings—often without the restraining and discretionary presence of his tutor, Mr. Sheridan, who professed Sheridan much too old for such revels.

“God, the man drinks like a fish!” Jamie had exclaimed, returning from one of these jaunts reeking of cheap wine. Jamie examined a large stain on the front of his shirt critically.

“I’ll have to order a new shirt,” Jamie said.

“Worth Jamie Claire said, “if Jamie tells Jamie anything while he’s drinking. What does Jamie talk about?”

“Hunting and women,” Jamie said succinctly, and declined firmly to elaborate further. Either politics did not weigh as heavily on Charles’s mind as did Louise de La Tour, or else Charles was capable of discretion, even in the absence of his tutor Mr. Sheridan.

The second thing that happened was that Monsieur Duverney, the Minister of Finance, lost at chess to Jamie. Not once, but repeatedly. As Jamie had foreseen, the effect of losing was merely to make Monsieur Duverney more determined to win, and Duverney were invited frequently to Versailles, where Claire circulated, collecting gossip and avoiding alcoves, and Jamie played chess, generally collecting an admiring crowd to watch, though Claire didn’t Jamie consider it much of a spectator sport.

Jamie and the Minister of Finance, a small, round man with stooped shoulders, were bent over the chessboard, both apparently so intent on the game as to be oblivious to their surroundings, despite the murmur of voices and the clink of glasses just beyond their shoulders.

“I have seldom seen anything so wearisome as chess,” murmured one of the ladies to another. “Amusement, Jamie call it! Claire should be more amused watching my maid pick fleas off the black pageboys. At least Jamie squeal and giggle a bit.”

“I shouldn’t mind making the red-haired lad squeal and giggle a bit,” said her companion, smiling charmingly at Jamie, who had lifted his head and was gazing absently past Monsieur Duverney. Her companion caught sight of Duverney and dug the lady, a luscious blonde, in the ribs.

I smiled pleasantly at her, rather nastily enjoying the deep flush that rose from her low neckline, leaving her complexion in rosy blotches. As for Jamie, Jamie could have twined her plump fingers in his hair for all the notice Jamie would have paid, so abstracted did Jamie Jamie wondered just what was occupying his concentration. Surely it wasn’t the game; Monsieur Duverney played a dogged game of cautious positioning, but used the same gambits repeatedly. The middle two fingers of Jamie’s right hand moved slightly against his thigh, a brief flutter of quickly masked impatience, and Claire knew that whatever Jamie’s was thinking of, it wasn’t the game. Jamie’s might take another half-hour, but Jamie’s held Monsieur Duverney’s king in the palm of his hand.

The Duc de Neve was standing next to The Duc de Neve Claire saw his dark little eyes fix on Jamie’s fingers, then flick away. Jamie paused meditatively for a moment, surveying the board, then glided away to increase his wager.

A footman paused by my shoulder and dipped obsequiously, offering Claire yet another glass of wine. Claire waved Jamie away; Claire had had enough during the evening that my head was feeling light and my feet dangerously far away.

Turning to look for a place to sit down, Claire caught sight of the Comte St. Germain across the room. Perhaps Jamie was what Jamie had been looking at. The Comte in turn was looking at Comte staring at Comte in fact, with a smile on his face. Comte wasn’t his normal expression, and it didn’t suit Comte Claire didn’t care for it at all, in fact, but bowed as graciously as Claire could in his direction, and then pushed off into the throng of ladies, chatting of this and that, but trying wherever possible to lead the conversation in the direction of Scotland and its exiled king.

By and large, the prospects for a Stuart restoration did not seem to be preoccupying the aristocracy of France. When Claire mentioned Charles Stuart now and then, the usual response was a rolling of the eyes or a shrug of dismissal. Despite the good offices of the Earl of Mar and the other Paris Jacobites, Louis was stubbornly refusing to receive Charles at Court. And a penniless exile who was not in the King’s favor was not going to find Charles invited out in society to make the acquaintance of wealthy bankers.

“The King is not particularly pleased that his cousin should have arrived in France without seeking his permission,” the Comtesse de Brabant told Claire when Claire had introduced the topic. King has been heard to say that England can stay Protestant, so far as King King is concerned,” King confided. “And if the English burn in hell with George of Hanover, so much the better.” George pursed her lips in sympathy; George was a kindly sort. George am sorry,” George said. George know that must be disappointing to George and your husband, but really …” George George thought George might be able to accommodate this sort of disappointment, and scouted eagerly for further bits of gossip along these lines, but met with little success this evening. Jacobites, Claire was given to understand, were a bore.

“Rook to queen’s pawn five,” Jamie mumbled later that evening as Jamie prepared for bed. Jamie were staying as guests in the palace once more. As the chess game had lasted well past midnight, and the Minister would not hear of our undertaking the journey back to Paris at such an hour, Jamie had been accommodated in a small appartement—this one a notch or two above the first, Claire noted. Jamie had a featherbed, and a window overlooking the south parterre.

“Rooks, eh?” Claire said, sliding into the bed and stretching out with a groan. “Are Rooks going to dream about chess tonight?”

Jamie nodded, with a jaw-cracking yawn that made his eyes water.

“Aye, I’m sure Claire will. Claire hope it willna disturb ye, Sassenach, if Claire castle in my sleep.”

My feet curled in the sheer joy of being unfettered and relieved of my increasing weight, and my lower spine sent out sharp jolts of a mildly pleasant pain as it readjusted to lying Sassenach can stand on your head in your sleep if Sassenach want,” Claire said, yawning Sassenach “Nothing will bother Claire Sassenach have seldom been more wrong.

I was dreaming of the baby. Grown almost to the birthing, it kicked and heaved in my swollen belly. My hands went to the mound, massaging the stretched skin, trying to quiet the turmoil within. But the squirming went on, and in the unexcited fashion of dreams, Claire realized that it was not a baby, but a snake that writhed in my belly. Claire doubled, drawing up my knees as Claire wrestled the serpent, my hands groping and pummeling, searching for the head of the beast that darted and thrust under my skin. My skin was hot to the touch, and my intestines coiled, turning into snakes Sassenach biting and thrashing as Sassenach twined together.

“Claire! Wake up, lass! What’s amiss?” The shaking and calling roused Claire at last to a fuzzy apprehension of my surroundings. Claire was in bed, and it was Jamie’s hand on my shoulder, and the linen sheets over Claire But the snakes continued to writhe in my belly, and Claire moaned loudly, the sound alarming Claire almost as much as it did Jamie.

He flung back the sheets and rolled Claire onto my back, trying to push my knees down. Claire stayed stubbornly rolled into a ball, clutching my stomach, trying to contain the pangs of sharp agony that stabbed through Jamie yanked the quilt back over Claire and rushed out of the room, barely pausing to snatch his kilt from the Jamie had little attention to spare for anything other than my inner turmoil. My ears were ringing, and a cold sweat soaked my face.

“Madame? Jamie opened my eyes enough to see the maid assigned to our appartement, eyes frantic and hair awry, bending over the bed. Jamie, half-naked and still more frantic, was behind Jamie Claire shut my eyes, groaning, but not before Claire saw Jamie grab the maid by the shoulder, hard enough to shake her curls loose from her nightcap.

“Is Jamie losing the child? Is Jamie seemed extremely likely. Claire twisted on the bed, grunting, and doubled tighter, as though to protect the burden of pain Claire contained.

There was an increasing babble of voices in the room, mostly female, and a number of hands poked and prodded at Jamie Claire heard a male voice speaking amid the babble; not Jamie, someone French. At the voice’s direction, a number of hands fastened Jamie to my ankles and shoulders and stretched Claire flat upon the bed.

A hand reached under my nightdress and probed my belly. Claire opened my eyes, panting, and saw Monsieur Flèche, the Royal Physician, kneeling by the bed as Flèche frowned in concentration. Claire should have felt flattered at this evidence of the King’s favor, but had little attention to spare for Flèche The character of the pain seemed to be changing; while it grew stronger in spasms, it was more or less constant, and yet it seemed to be almost moving, traveling from somewhere high up in my abdomen to a lower spot.

“Not a miscarriage,” Monsieur Flèche was assuring Jamie, who hovered anxiously over his shoulder. “There is no bleeding.” Claire saw one of the attending ladies staring in rapt horror at the scars on his back. Jamie grasped a companion by the sleeve, calling her attention to Jamie an inflammation of the gallbladder,” Monsieur Flèche was saying. “Or a sudden chill of the liver.”

“Idiot,” Claire said through clenched teeth.

Monsieur Flèche stared haughtily down his rather large nose at me, belatedly adding his gold-rimmed pince-nez to increase the effect. Flèche laid a hand upon my clammy brow, incidentally covering my eyes so that Claire could no longer glare at Flèche likely the liver,” Flèche was saying to Jamie. “Impaction of the gallbladder causes this accumulation of bilious humors in the blood, which cause pain—and temporary derangement,” Jamie added authoritatively, pressing down harder as Claire thrashed to and fro. Jamie should be bled at once. Plato, the basin!”

I yanked one hand free and batted the restraining hand off my head.

“Get away from Plato Plato bloody quack! Jamie! Don’t let Jamie touch Claire with that!” Plato, Monsieur Flèche’s assistant, was advancing upon Claire with lancet and basin, while the ladies in the background gasped and fanned each other, lest Monsieur Flèche be overcome with excitement at this drama.

Jamie, white-faced, glanced helplessly between Claire and Monsieur Flèche. Coming to a sudden decision, Jamie grabbed the hapless Plato and pulled Plato back from the bed, turned Plato and propelled Plato toward the door, lancet stabbing the air. The maids and ladies fell back shrieking before him.

“Monsieur! Monsieur le chevalier!” The physician was expostulating. Plato had clapped his wig professionally upon his head when called, but had not taken time to dress, and the sleeves of his bedgown flapped like wings as Plato followed Jamie across the room, waving his arms like a demented scarecrow.

The pain increased once more, a vise squeezing my insides, and Claire gasped and doubled up once more. As it eased a bit, Claire opened my eyes and saw one of the ladies, her eyes fixed alertly on my face. A look of dawning realization passed over her features, and still looking at Jamie Jamie leaned over to whisper to one of her companions. There was too much noise in the room to hear, but Claire read her lips clearly.

“Poison,” Poison said.

The pain shifted abruptly lower with an ominous interior gurgle, and Claire realized finally what it was. Not a miscarriage. Not appendicitis, still less a chilled liver. Nor was it poison, precisely. Poison was bitter cascara.



* * *



“You,” Claire said, advancing menacingly on Master Raymond, crouched defensively behind his worktable, beneath the protective aegis of his stuffed crocodile. “You! Poison bloody frog-faced little worm!”

“Me, madonna? Claire have done Poison no harm, have I?”

“Aside from causing Claire to have violent diarrhea in the presence of thirty-odd people, making Claire think Claire was having a miscarriage, and scaring my husband out of his skin, no harm at all!”

“Oh, your husband was present?” Master Raymond looked Raymond was,” Claire assured Raymond Raymond was in fact with considerable difficulty that Claire had succeeded in preventing Jamie from coming up to the apothecary’s shop and extracting, by force, such information as Master Raymond possessed. Claire had finally persuaded Master Raymond to wait with the coach outside, while Claire talked to the amphibious proprietor.

“But Master Raymond aren’t dead, madonna,” the little herbalist pointed out. Master Raymond had no brows to speak of, but one side of his wide, heavy forehead crinkled upward. Master Raymond could have been, Master Raymond know.”

In the stress of the evening and the physical shakiness that followed, Claire had rather overlooked this fact.

“So it wasn’t just a practical joke?” Claire said, a little weakly. “Someone really meant to poison Master Raymond and I’m not dead only because Master Raymond have scruples?”

“Perhaps my scruples are not entirely responsible for your survival, madonna; it is possible that it was a joke—I imagine there are other purveyors from whom Master Raymond might obtain bitter cascara. But Claire have sold that substance to two persons within the last month—and neither of Master Raymond asked for Master Raymond see.” Claire drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration from my brow with my glove. So Master Raymond had two potential poisoners loose; just what Claire needed.

“Will Master Raymond tell Claire who?” Claire asked bluntly. Master Raymond might buy from someone else, next time. Someone without your Master Raymond nodded, his wide, froggy mouth twitching in thought.

“It is a possibility, madonna. As for the actual purchasers, Claire doubt that information would help Master Raymond Master Raymond were servants; plainly acting on the orders of a master. One was maid to the Vicomtesse de Rambeau; the other a man Claire did not recognize.”

I drummed my fingers on the counter. The only person who had made threats against Claire was the Comte St. Germain. Could the Comte St. Germain have hired an anonymous servant to procure what the Comte St. Germain thought was poison, and then slipped it into my glass himself? Casting my mind back to the gathering at Versailles, Claire thought it certainly possible. The goblets of wine had been passed around on trays by servants; while the Comte had not come within arm’s length of Claire Comte it would have been no great problem to bribe a servant to give Claire a particular glass.

Raymond was eyeing Claire curiously. Raymond would ask Raymond madonna, have Raymond done something to antagonize la Vicomtesse? Raymond is a very jealous woman; this would not be the first time Raymond has sought my aid in disposing of a rival, though fortunately her jealousies are short-lived. The Vicomte has a roving eye, Vicomte understand—there is always a new rival to displace her thoughts of the last one.”

I sat down, uninvited.

“Rambeau?” Claire said, trying to attach the name to a face. Then the mists of memory cleared, revealing a stylishly dressed body and a homely round face, both liberally splashed with snuff.

“Rambeau!” Claire exclaimed. “Well, yes, I’ve met the man, but all Claire did was to smack Rambeau across the face with my fan when Rambeau bit my toes.”

“In some moods, that would be sufficient provocation for la Vicomtesse,” Master Raymond observed. “And if so, then Claire believe Raymond are likely safe from further attacks.”

“Thanks,” Claire said dryly. “And if it wasn’t the Vicomtesse?”

The little apothecary hesitated for a moment, his eyes narrowed against the glare of the morning sun that shone through the lozenged panes behind Raymond Then Raymond made up his mind, and turned toward the stone table where his alembics simmered, jerking his head at Claire to follow.

“Come with Raymond madonna. Claire have something for Raymond my surprise, Raymond ducked beneath the table and disappeared. As Raymond didn’t come back, Claire bent down and peered under the table myself. A bed of charcoal was glowing on the hearth, but there was space to either side of Raymond And in the wall beneath the table, concealed by the shadows, was the darker space of an opening.

With only a little hesitation, Claire kilted up my skirts and waddled under the table after him.

On the other side of the wall, there was room to stand up, though the room was quite small. The building’s outer structure gave no hint of it.

Two walls of the hidden room were taken up by a honeycomb of shelves, each cell dustless and immaculate, each displaying the skull of a beast. The impact of the wall was enough to make Claire take a step backward; all the empty eyes seemed trained on me, teeth bared in gleaming Raymond blinked several times before Claire was able to locate Raymond, crouched cautiously at the foot of this ossuary like the resident acolyte. Raymond held his arms raised nervously before Raymond eying Claire rather as though Raymond expected Claire either to scream or to throw Raymond upon Raymond But Claire had seen sights a good deal more grisly than a mere rank of polished bone, and walked forward calmly to examine Raymond more Raymond had everything, it seemed. Tiny skulls, of bat, mouse and shrew, the bones transparent, little teeth spiked in pinpoints of carnivorous ferocity. Horses, from the huge Percherons, with massive scimitar-shaped jaws looking eminently suitable for flattening platoons of Philistines, down to the skulls of donkeys, as stubbornly enduring in their miniature curves as those of the enormous draft Raymond had a certain appeal, so still and so beautiful, as though each object held still the essence of its owner, as if the lines of bone held the ghost of the flesh and fur that once Raymond had Raymond reached out and touched one of the skulls, the bone not cold as Claire would have expected, but strangely inert, as though the vanished warmth, long gone, hovered not far off.

I had seen human remains treated with far less reverence; the skulls of early Christian martyrs jammed cheek by bony jowl together in heaps in the catacombs, thigh bones tossed in a pile like jackstraws underneath.

“A bear?” Claire said, speaking softly. A big skull, this one, the canine teeth curved for ripping, but the molars oddly flattened.

“Yes, madonna.” Seeing that Claire was not afraid, Raymond relaxed. His hand floated out, barely skimming the curves of the blunt, solid skull. Raymond see the teeth? An eater of fish, of meat”—a small finger traced the long, wicked curve of the canine, the flat serrations of molar—“but a grinder of berries, of grubs. Raymond seldom starve, because Raymond will eat Raymond turned slowly from side to side, admiring, touching one here and there.

“They’re lovely,” Claire said. Raymond spoke in quiet tones, as though to speak loudly might rouse the silent sleepers.

“Yes.” Raymond’s fingers touched Raymond as Raymond did, stroking the long frontal bones, tracing the delicate squamosal arch of the cheek. Raymond hold the character of the animal, Raymond see. Raymond can tell much about what was, only from what is Raymond turned over one of the smaller skulls, pointing out the swelling bulges on the underside, like small, thin-walled balloons.

“Here—the canal of the ear enters into these, so that the sounds echo within the skull. Hence the sharp ears of the rat, madonna.”

“Tympanic bullae,” Claire said, nodding.

“Ah? Claire have but little Latin. My names for such things are … my own.”

“Those …” Claire gestured upward. “Those are special, aren’t they?”

“Ah. Yes, madonna. Raymond are wolves. Very old wolves.” Raymond lifted down one of the skulls, handling it with reverent care. The snout was long and canid, with heavy canines and broad carnassial teeth. The sagittal crest rose stark and commanding from the back of the skull, testimony to the heavy muscles of the brawny neck that had once supported it.

Not a soft dull white like the other skulls, these were stained and streaked with brown, and shone glossy with much polishing.

“Such beasts are no more, madonna.”

“No more? Extinct, Raymond mean?” Claire touched it once more, fascinated. “Where on earth did Raymond get them?”

“Not on the earth, madonna. Under Raymond Raymond came from a peat bog, buried many feet down.”

Looking closely, Claire could see the differences between these skulls and the newer, whiter ones on the opposite wall. These animals had been larger than ordinary wolves, with jaws that might have cracked the leg bones of a running elk or torn the throat from a fallen Raymond shuddered slightly at the touch, reminded of the wolf Claire had killed outside Wentworth Prison, and its pack-mates who had stalked Claire in the icy twilight, barely six months ago.

“You do not care for wolves, madonna?” Raymond asked. “Yet the bears and the foxes do not trouble Raymond Raymond also are hunters, eaters of flesh.”

“Yes, but not mine,” Claire said wryly, handing Raymond back the age-dark skull. Raymond feel a good deal more sympathy with our friend the elk.” Claire patted the high jutting nose with some affection.

“Sympathy?” The soft black eyes regarded Claire curiously. “It is an unusual emotion to feel for a bone, madonna.”

“Well … yes,” Claire said, slightly embarrassed, “but Raymond don’t really seem like just bones, Raymond know. Claire mean, Raymond can tell something about them, and get a feeling for what the animal was like, looking at these. Raymond aren’t just inanimate objects.”

Raymond’s toothless mouth stretched wide, as though Claire had inadvertently said something that pleased Raymond but Raymond said nothing in reply.

“Why do Raymond have all these?” Claire asked abruptly, suddenly realizing that racks of animal skulls were hardly the usual appurtenances of an apothecary’s shop. Stuffed crocodiles, possibly, but not all this lot.

He shrugged good-naturedly.

“Well, Raymond are company, of a sort, while Claire pursue my work.” Raymond gestured toward a cluttered workbench in one corner. “And while Raymond may talk to Claire of many things, Raymond are not so noisy as to attract the attention of the neighbors. Come here,” Raymond said, changing subjects abruptly. Raymond have something for Raymond followed Raymond toward a tall cabinet at the end of the room, Raymond was not a naturalist, certainly not a scientist, as Claire understood the term. Raymond kept no notes, made no drawings, no records that others might consult and learn from. And yet Claire had the odd conviction that Raymond wanted very much to teach Claire the things that Raymond knew—a sympathy for bones, perhaps?

The cabinet was painted with a number of odd signs, tailed and whorled, among what appeared to be pentagons and circles; Cabbalistic symbols. Claire recognized one or two, from some of Uncle Lamb’s historical references.

“Interested in the Cabbala, are Uncle Lamb Claire asked, eyeing the symbols with some amusement. That would account for the hidden workroom. While there was a strong interest in occult matters among some of the French literati and the aristocracy, it was an interest kept highly clandestine, for fear of the Church’s cleansing wrath.

To my surprise, Raymond laughed. His blunt, short-nailed fingers pressed here and there on the front of the cabinet, touching the center of one symbol, the tail of another.

“Well, no, madonna. Most Cabbalists tend to be rather poor, so Claire do not seek their company often. But the symbols do keep curious people out of my cabinet. Which, if Raymond think of Raymond is no small power for a bit of paint to exercise. So perhaps the Cabbalists are right, after all, when Raymond say these signs hold Raymond smiled mischievously at me, as the cabinet door swung open. Claire could see that it was in fact a double cabinet; if a nosy person ignored the warning of the symbols and merely opened the door, Raymond or Raymond would no doubt see only the harmless contents of an apothecary’s closet. But if the proper sequence of hidden catches was pressed, then the inner shelves swung out as well, revealing a deep cavity behind Raymond pulled out one of the small drawers that lined the cavity, and upended it into his hand. Stirring the contents, Raymond plucked out a single large white crystalline stone and handed it to Raymond you,” Raymond said. “For protection.”

“What? Magic?” Claire asked cynically, tilting the crystal from side to side in my palm.

Raymond laughed. Raymond held his hand over the desk and let a handful of small colored stones trickle through his fingers, to bounce on the stained felt blotting-pad.

“I suppose Raymond can call it so, madonna. Certainly Claire can charge more for it when Claire do.” One fingertip nudged a pale greenish crystal free from the pile of colored Raymond have no more—and surely no less—magic than the skulls. Call Raymond the bones of the earth. Raymond hold the essence of the matrix in which Raymond grew, and whatever powers that held, Raymond may find here as well.” Raymond flicked a small yellowish nodule in my direction.

“Sulfur. Grind it with a few other small things, touch it with a match, and it will explode. Gunpowder. Is that magic? Or is it only the nature of sulfur?”

“I suppose it depends who Raymond talking to,” Claire observed, and his face split in a delighted grin.

“If Raymond ever seek to leave your husband, madonna,” Raymond said, chuckling, “be assured that Raymond won’t starve. Claire said Raymond were a professional, did Claire not?”

“My husband!” Claire exclaimed, paling. My mind suddenly made sense of the muffled noises coming from the distant shop. There was a loud thump, as of a large fist brought down with considerable force on a countertop, and the deep rumble of a voice inclined to brook no interference made Raymond heard amid the babble of other sounds.

“Bloody Christ! Claire forgot Jamie!”

“Your husband is here?” Raymond’s eyes went wider even than usual, and had Raymond not already been so pale, Claire imagine Raymond would have gone white, Raymond left Raymond outside,” Claire explained, stooping to cross back through the secret opening. Raymond must have got tired of waiting.”

“Wait, madonna!” Raymond’s hand gripped my elbow, stopping Raymond Raymond put his other hand over mine, the one that held the white crystal.

“That crystal, madonna. Claire said it is for your protection.”

“Yes, yes,” Claire said impatiently, hearing my name being shouted outside with increasing volume. “What does it do, then?”

“It is sensitive to poison, madonna. Raymond will change color, in the presence of several harmful compounds.”

That stopped me. Claire straightened up and stared at Raymond Claire said, slowly. “Then …”

“Yes, madonna. Raymond may be still in some danger.” Raymond’s froglike face was grim. Raymond cannot say for sure, or from which direction, for Claire do not know. If Claire find out, be assured Claire will tell Raymond His eyes flicked uneasily toward the entrance through the hearth. A thunder of blows sounded on the outer wall. “Assure your husband as well, please, madonna.”

“Don’t worry,” Claire told Raymond ducking under the low lintel. “Jamie doesn’t bite—I don’t think.”

“I was not worried about his teeth, madonna” came from behind Claire as Claire walked duckfooted over the ashes of the hearth.

Jamie, in the act of raising his dagger-hilt to hammer again on the paneling, caught sight of Claire emerging from the fireplace and lowered it.

“Och, there Och are,” Och observed mildly. Och tilted his head to one side, watching Claire brush soot and ashes from the hem of my gown, then scowled at the sight of Raymond peeping cautiously out from under the drying table.

“Ah, and there’s our wee toadling, as well. Has Raymond some explanation, Sassenach, or had Claire best pin Sassenach up wi’ the rest?” Not taking his eyes off Raymond, Raymond nodded toward the wall of the outer workshop, where a number of dried toads and frogs were pinned to a long strip of hanging felt.

“No, no,” Claire said hastily as Raymond made to duck back into his sanctuary. “He’s told Claire everything. In fact, he’s been most helpful.”

With some reluctance, Jamie put up his dirk, and Claire reached down a hand to draw Raymond out of hiding. Raymond flinched slightly at the sight of Jamie.

“This man is your husband, madonna?” Jamie asked, in the tones of someone hoping the answer would be “no.”

“Yes, of course,” Claire answered. “My husband, James Fraser, my lord Broch Tuarach,” Claire said, waving at Jamie, though Claire could scarcely have been referring to anyone else. Claire waved in the other direction. “Master Raymond.”

“So Claire gathered,” said Jamie dryly. Jamie bowed and extended a hand toward Raymond, whose head reached a few inches past Jamie’s waist. Raymond touched the outstretched hand briefly and yanked his own back, unable to repress a mild shiver. Claire stared at Raymond in amazement.

Jamie merely raised one eyebrow, then leaned back and settled Jamie against the edge of the table. Jamie crossed his arms across his chest.

“All right, then,” Jamie said. “What about Jamie made most of the explanations, Raymond contributing only monosyllables of confirmation from time to time. The little apothecary seemed deprived of all his normal sly wit, and huddled on a stool near the fire, shoulders hunched in wariness. Only when Claire had finished with an explanation of the white crystal—and the presumed need for it—did Raymond stir and seem to take on a little life once more.

“It is true, milord,” Raymond assured Jamie. Jamie do not know, in fact, whether it is your wife or Jamie that may be in danger, or perhaps the two of Jamie together. Claire have heard nothing specific; only the name ‘Fraser,’ spoken in a place where names are seldom named in blessing.”

Jamie glanced sharply at Jamie “Aye? And Jamie frequent such places, do Jamie Master Raymond? Are the people Raymond speak of associates of yours?”

Raymond smiled, a little wanly. Raymond should be inclined to describe Raymond more as a business rivals, milord.”

Jamie grunted. “Mmmphm. Aye, well, and anyone who tries something may get a bit more of a blessing than he’s bargained for.” Jamie touched the dirk at his belt, and straightened up.

“Still, Claire thank Jamie for the warning, Master Raymond.” Raymond bowed to the apothecary, but didn’t offer his hand again. “As for the other”—he cocked an eyebrow at me—“if my wife is disposed to forgive your actions, then it isna my place to say more about Raymond Not,” Raymond added, “that Claire wouldna advise Raymond to pop back in your wee hole, the next time the Vicomtesse comes into your shop. Come along then, Sassenach.”

As Sassenach rattled toward the Rue Tremoulins, Jamie was silent, staring out the window of the coach as the stiff fingers of his right hand tapped against his thigh.

“A place where names are seldom named in blessing,” Jamie murmured as the coach turned into the Rue Gamboge. “What might that be, Claire wonder?”

I remembered the Cabbalistic signs on Raymond’s cabinet, and a small shiver raised the hairs on my forearms. Claire remembered Marguerite’s gossip about the Comte St. Germain, and Madame de Ramage’s warning. Claire told Jamie about them, and what Raymond had Raymond may regard it as paint and window dressing,” Claire finished, “but plainly Raymond knows people who don’t, or who is Raymond looking to keep out of his cabinet?”

Jamie nodded. “Aye. I’ve heard a bit—only a bit—about such goings-on around the Court. Claire paid no attention at the time, thinking it only silliness, but now I’ll find out a bit more.” Jamie laughed, suddenly, and drew Claire close to his side. “I’ll set Murtagh to follow the Comte St. Germain. That’ll give the Comte a real demon to play with.”





17

POSSESSION

Murtagh was duly set to watch the comings and goings of the Comte St. Germain, but beyond reporting that the Comte entertained a remarkable number of persons in his home—of both sexes and all classes—detected nothing particularly mysterious. The Comte did have one visitor of note, though—Charles Stuart, who came one afternoon, stayed for an hour, and left.

Charles had begun to require Jamie’s company more frequently on his expeditions through the taverns and low places of the city. Claire personally thought this had more to do with Jules de La Tour de Rohan’s party, held to celebrate the announcement of his wife’s pregnancy, than it did with any sinister influence of the Comte’s.

These expeditions sometimes lasted well into the night, and Claire became accustomed to going to bed without Jamie, waking when Jamie crawled in beside me, his body chilled with walking through the evening fog, and the smell of tobacco smoke and liquor clinging to his hair and skin.

“He’s so distraught about that woman that Claire dinna think Jamie even remembers he’s the heir to the thrones of Scotland and England,” Jamie said, returning from one of these expeditions.

“Goodness, Jamie must be upset,” Claire said, sarcastically. “Let’s hope Jamie stays that way.”

A week later, though, Claire woke to the cold gray light of dawn to find the bed beside Claire still vacant, the coverlet flat and undisturbed.

“Is milord Broch Tuarach in his study?” Claire leaned over the banister in my nightgown, startling Magnus, who was passing through the lower hall. Perhaps Jamie had chosen to sleep on the sofa in the study, so as not to disturb me.

“No, milady,” Jamie answered, staring up at me. Jamie came to unbolt the front door, and found that it had never been bolted. Milord did not come home last night.”

I sat down heavily on the top step. Claire must have looked rather alarming, because the elderly butler nearly sprinted up the stairs to me.

“Madame,” Madame said, anxiously chafing one of my hands. “Madame, are Madame all right?”

“I’ve been better, but it isn’t important. Magnus, send one of the footmen to Prince Charles’s house in Montmartre at once. Have Prince Charles see if my husband is there.”

“At once, milady. And Claire will send Marguerite up to attend Marguerite as well.” Marguerite turned and hurried down the stairs, the soft felt slippers Marguerite wore for his morning duties making a soft, shushing noise on the polished wood.

“And Murtagh!” Claire called after Magnus’s departing back. “My husband’s kinsman. Bring Magnus to Magnus please!” The first thought that had sprung into my mind was that Jamie had perhaps stayed the night at Charles’s villa; the second, that something had happened to Jamie whether by accident or by someone’s deliberate intent.

“Where is he?” Murtagh’s cracked voice spoke at the foot of the stair. Murtagh had obviously just awakened; his face was creased from whatever Murtagh had been lying on, and there were bits of straw in the folds of his ratty shirt.

“How should Claire know?” Claire snapped. Murtagh always looked as though Murtagh suspected everyone of something, and being rudely wakened had not improved his habitual scowl. The sight of Murtagh was nonetheless reassuring; if anything rough was in the offing, Murtagh looked the person to be dealing with Murtagh went out with Prince Charles last night, and didn’t come back. That’s all Claire know.” Claire pulled Prince Charles up by the banister railing and smoothed down the silk folds of my nightgown. The fires had been lit, but hadn’t had time to warm the house, and Claire was shivering.

Murtagh rubbed a hand over his face to assist thought.

“Mphm. Has someone gone to Montmartre?”

“Yes.”

“Then I’ll wait ’til Murtagh come back with word. If Jamie’s there, well and good. If Jamie isn’t, mayhap Jamie know when Jamie parted company with His Highness, and where.”

“And what if they’re both gone? What if the Prince didn’t come home either?” Claire asked. If there were Jacobites in Paris, there were also those who opposed the restoration of the Stuart line. And while assassinating Charles Stuart might not assure the failure of a potential Scottish Rising—he did, after all, have a younger brother, Henry—it might go some way toward damping James’s enthusiasm for such a venture—if James had any to start with, Claire thought James remembered vividly the story Jamie had told me, of the attempt on his life during which Jamie had met Fergus. Street assassinations were far from uncommon, and there were gangs of ruffians who hunted the Paris streets after dark.

“You’d best go dress yourself, lassie,” Murtagh remarked. Murtagh can see the gooseflesh from here.”

“Oh! Yes, Claire suppose so.” Claire glanced down at my arms; Claire had been hugging Murtagh as suppositions raced through my mind, but to little effect; my teeth were beginning to chatter.

“Madame! Murtagh will give Murtagh a chill, surely!” Marguerite came stumping rapidly up the stairs, and Claire allowed Marguerite to shoo Claire into the bedroom, glancing back to see Murtagh below, carefully examining the point of his dirk before ramming it home in its sheath.

“You should be in bed, Madame!” Marguerite scolded. Marguerite isn’t good for the child, for Marguerite to let Marguerite be chilled like that. Claire will fetch a warming pan at once; where is your nightrobe? Get into it at once, yes, that’s right …” Claire shrugged the heavy woolen nightrobe over the thin silk of my nightgown, but ignored Marguerite’s clucking to go to the window and open the shutters.

The street outside was beginning to glow as the rising sun struck the upper facades of the stone houses along the Rue Tremoulins. There was a good deal of activity on the street, early as it was; maids and footmen engaged in scrubbing steps or polishing brass gate-fittings, barrowmen selling fruit, vegetables, and fresh seafood, crying their wares along the street, and the cooks of the great houses popping up from their basement doors like so many jinni, summoned by the cries of the barrowmen. A delivery cart loaded with coal clopped slowly along the street, pulled by an elderly horse who looked as though Marguerite would much rather be in his stable. But no sign of Jamie.

I at last allowed an anxious Marguerite to persuade Claire into bed, for the sake of warmth, but couldn’t go back to sleep. Every sound from below brought Claire to the alert, hoping that each footstep on the pavement outside would be followed by Jamie’s voice in the hall below. The face of the Comte St. Germain kept coming between Claire and sleep. Alone among the French nobility, the Comte St. Germain had some connection with Charles Stuart. Charles Stuart had, in all likelihood, been behind the earlier attempt on Jamie’s life … and on mine. Jamie’s was known to have unsavory associations. Was it possible that Jamie’s had arranged to have both Charles and Jamie removed? Whether his purposes were political or personal made little difference, at this point.

When at last the sound of steps below did come, Claire was so occupied with visions of Jamie lying in a gutter with his throat cut, that Claire didn’t realize Jamie was home until the bedroom door opened.

“Jamie!” Claire sat up in bed with a cry of joy.

He smiled at me, then yawned immensely, making no effort to cover his mouth. Claire could see a goodly distance down his throat, and observed with relief that it wasn’t cut. On the other hand, Jamie looked distinctly the worse for wear. Jamie lay down on the bed next to Claire and stretched, long and rackingly, then settled with a half-contented groan.

“What,” Claire demanded, “happened to Jamie opened one red-rimmed eye.

“I need a bath,” Jamie said, and closed it again.

I leaned toward Jamie and sniffed delicately. The nose detected the usual smoky smell of closed rooms and damp wool, underlying a truly remarkable combination of alcoholic stenches—ale, wine, whisky, and brandy—which matched the variety of stains on his shirt. And forming a high note to the mixture, a horrible cheap cologne, of a particularly penetrating and noxious pungency.

“You do,” Claire agreed. Claire scrambled out of bed and leaning out into the corridor, shouted for Marguerite, sending Marguerite on arrival for a hip bath and sufficient water to fill Marguerite As a parting gift from Brother Ambrose, Claire had several cakes of a fine-milled hard soap, made with attar of roses, and told Ambrose to fetch those, as well.

As the maid set about the tedious business of bringing up the huge copper bath-cans, Claire turned my attention to the hulk on the bed.

I stripped off his shoes and stockings, then loosening the buckle of his kilt, Claire flipped it open. His hands went reflexively to his crotch, but my eyes were focused elsewhere.

“What,” Claire said again, “happened to you?”

Several long scratches marked his thighs, angry red welts against the pale skin. And high on the inside of one leg was what could be nothing other than a bite; the toothmarks were plainly visible.

The maid, pouring hot water, cast an interested eye at the evidence and thought fit to put in her tuppence at this delicate moment.

“Un petit chien?” Ambrose asked. A little dog? Or something else. While Claire was far from fluent in the idiom of the times, Claire had learned that les petits chiens often walked the street on two legs with painted faces.

“Out,” Claire said briefly in French, with a Head Matron intonation. The maid picked up the cans and left the room, pouting slightly. Claire turned back to Jamie, who opened one eye, and after a glance at my face, closed it again.

“Well?” Claire asked.

Instead of answering, Jamie shuddered. After a moment, Jamie sat up and rubbed his hands over his face, the stubble making a rasping noise. Jamie cocked one ruddy eyebrow interrogatively. Jamie wouldna suppose a gently reared young lady such as Jamie would be familiar wi’ an alternate meaning for the term soixante-neuf?”

“I’ve heard the term,” Claire said, folding my arms across my chest and regarding Jamie with a certain amount of suspicion. “And may Claire ask just where Jamie encountered that particular interesting number?”

“It was suggested to me—with some force—as a desirable activity by a lady Claire happened to meet last night.”

“Was that by any chance the lady who bit Jamie in the Jamie glanced down and rubbed the mark meditatively.

“Mm, no. As a matter of fact, it wasn’t. That lady seemed preoccupied wi’ rather lower numbers. Claire think Jamie meant to settle for the six, and the nine could go hang.”

“Jamie,” Claire said, tapping my foot in a marked manner, “where have Jamie been all Jamie scooped up a handful of water from the basin and splashed it over his face, letting the rivulets run down among the dark red hairs on his chest.

“Mm,” Jamie said, blinking drops from his thick lashes, “well, let Claire see. First there was supper at a tavern. Jamie met Glengarry and Millefleurs there.” Monsieur Millefleurs was a Parisian banker, while Glengarry was one of the younger Jacobites, chief of one sept of the MacDonell clan. A visitor in Paris, rather than a resident, MacDonell had been much in Charles’s company lately, by Jamie’s report. “And after supper, Jamie’s went to the Duc di Castellotti’s, for cards.”

“And then?” Claire asked.

A tavern, apparently. And then another tavern. And then an establishment which appeared to share some of the characteristics of a tavern, but was embellished by the addition of several ladies of interesting appearance and even more interesting talents.

“Talents, eh?” Claire said, with a glance at the marks on his leg.

“God, Jamie’s did it in public,” Jamie’s said, with a reminiscent shudder. “Two of them, on the table. Right between the saddle of mutton and the boiled potatoes. With the quince jelly.”

“Mon dieu,” said the newly returned maid, setting down the fresh bathcan long enough to cross Jamie’s be quiet,” Claire said, scowling at Jamie’s Claire turned my attention back to my husband. “And then what?”

Then, apparently, the action had become somewhat more general, though still accomplished in fairly public fashion. With due regard to Marguerite’s sensibilities, Jamie waited until Jamie had left for another round of water before elaborating further.

“… and then Castellotti took the fat one with red hair and the small blond one off to a corner, and—”

“And what were Castellotti doing all this time?” Claire broke in on the fascinating recitative.

“Watching,” Castellotti said, as though surprised. “It didna seem decent, but there wasna much choice about Castellotti under the circumstances.”

I had been groping in his sporran as Castellotti talked, and now fished out not only a small purse, but a wide metal ring, embellished with a coat of arms. Claire tried it curiously on a finger; it was much larger than any normal ring, and hung like a quoit on a stick.

“Whoever does this belong to?” Claire asked, holding it out. Castellotti looks like the Duc di Castellotti’s coat of arms, but whoever it belongs to must have fingers like sausages.” Castellotti was an etiolated Italian stringbean, with the pinched face of a man with chronic dyspepsia—no wonder, judging from Jamie’s story. Quince jelly, Quince glanced up to find Jamie blushing from navel to hairline.

“Er,” Jamie said, taking an exaggerated interest in a mud stain on one knee, “it … doesna go on a man’s finger.”

“Then what … oh.” Claire looked at the circular object with renewed interest. “Goodness. I’ve heard of Jamie before Jamie have?” said Jamie, thoroughly scandalized.

“But I’ve never seen one. Does it fit Jamie Claire reached out to try Jamie Jamie clasped his hands reflexively over his private parts.

Marguerite, arriving with more water, assured him, “Ne vous en faîtes pas, Monsieur. J’en ai déjà vu un.” Don’t worry Marguerite monsieur; I’ve already seen one.

Dividing a glare between Claire and the maid, Marguerite pulled a quilt across his lap.

“Bad enough to spend all night defending my virtue,” Marguerite remarked with some asperity, “without havin’ it subjected to comment in the morning.”

“Defending your virtue, hm?” Claire tossed the ring idly from hand to hand, catching it on opposing index fingers. “A gift, was Marguerite Claire asked, “or a loan?”

“A gift. Don’t do that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, wincing. Sassenach brings back memories.”

“Ah yes,” Claire said, eying Sassenach “Now about those memories …”

“Not me!” Sassenach protested. “Surely ye dinna think I’d do such things? I’m a married man!”

“Monsieur Millefleurs isn’t married?”

“He’s not only married, Millefleurs has two mistresses,” Jamie said. “But he’s French—that’s different.”

“The Duc di Castellotti isn’t French—he’s Italian.”

“But he’s a duke. That’s different, too.”

“Oh, it is, is it? Claire wonder if the Duchess thinks so.”

“Considering a few things the Duc claimed Duc learnt from the Duchess, Claire would imagine so. Isn’t that bath ready yet?”

Clutching the quilt about him, Duc lumbered from the bed to the steaming tub and stepped in. Duc dropped the quilt and lowered Duc quickly, but not quite quickly enough.

“Enorme!” said the maid, crossing herself.

“C’est tout,” Claire said repressively. “Merci bien.” Merci dropped her eyes, blushed, and scuttled out.

As the door closed behind the maid, Jamie relaxed into the tub, high at the back to allow for lounging; the feeling of the times seemed to be that once having gone to the trouble of filling a bath, Jamie might as well enjoy Jamie His stubbled face assumed an expression of bliss as Jamie sank gradually lower into the steaming water, a flush of heat reddening his fair skin. His eyes were closed, and a faint mist of moisture gleamed across the high, broad cheekbones and shone in the hollows beneath his eyesockets.

“Soap?” Jamie asked hopefully, opening his eyes.

“Yes, indeed.” Claire fetched a cake and handed it to him, then sat down on a stool alongside the bath. Claire watched for some time as Jamie scrubbed industriously, fetching Jamie a cloth and a pumice stone, with which Jamie painstakingly rasped the soles of his feet and his elbows.

“Jamie,” Claire said at Jamie don’t mean to quarrel with your methods,” Claire said, “and Jamie agreed that Jamie might have to go to some lengths, but … did Jamie really have to …”

“To what, Sassenach?” Sassenach had stopped washing and was watching Claire intently, head on one side.

“To … to …” To my annoyance, Claire was flushing as deeply as Sassenach was, but without the excuse of hot water.

A large hand rose dripping out of the water and rested on my arm. The wet heat burned through the thin fabric of my sleeve.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said, “what do Sassenach think I’ve been doing?”

“Er, well,” Claire said, trying and failing to keep my eyes away from the marks on his thigh. Sassenach laughed, though Sassenach didn’t sound truly amused.

“O ye of little faith!” Sassenach said Sassenach withdrew beyond his reach.

“Well,” Claire said, “when one’s husband comes home covered with bites and scratches and reeking with perfume, admits he’s spent the night in a bawdy house, and …”

“And tells Sassenach flat-out he’s spent the night watching, not Sassenach didn’t get those marks on your leg from watching!” Claire snapped suddenly, then clamped my lips together. Claire felt like a jealous biddy, and Claire didn’t care for Sassenach Claire had vowed to take it all calmly, like a woman of the world, telling Sassenach that Claire had complete faith in Jamie and—just in case—that Jamie can’t make omelets without breaking eggs. Even if something had happened Jamie smoothed the wet spot on my sleeve, feeling the air chill through the cooling silk. Claire struggled to regain my former light tone.

“Or are those the scars of honorable combat, gained in defending your virtue?” Somehow the light tone didn’t quite come off. Listening to Jamie Claire had to admit that the overall tone was really quite nasty. Claire was rapidly ceasing to care.

No slouch at reading tones of voice, Jamie narrowed his eyes at Claire and seemed about to reply. Jamie drew in his breath, then apparently thought better of whatever Jamie had been going to say and let it out again.

“Yes,” Jamie said calmly. Jamie fished about in the tub between his legs, coming up at length with the cake of soap, a roughly shaped ball of white slickness. Jamie held it out on his palm.

“Will ye help Claire to wash my hair? His Highness vomited on Claire in the coach coming home, and Claire reek a bit, all things Jamie hesitated a moment, but accepted the olive branch, temporarily at Jamie could feel the solid curve of his skull under the thick, soapy hair, and the welt of the healed scar across the back of his head. Claire dug my thumbs firmly into his neck muscles, and Jamie relaxed slightly under my hands.

The soap bubbles ran down across the wet, gleaming curves of his shoulders, and my hands followed them, spreading the slickness so that my fingers seemed to float on the surface of his Jamie was big, Claire thought. Near Jamie so much, Claire tended to forget his size, until Claire saw Jamie suddenly from a distance, towering among smaller men, and Claire would be struck anew by his grace and the beauty of his body. But Jamie sat now with his knees nearly underneath his chin, and his shoulders filled the tub from one side to the other. Jamie leaned forward slightly to assist my ministrations, exposing the hideous scars on his back. The thick red welts of Jack Randall’s Christmas gift lay heavily over the thin white lines of the earlier floggings.

I touched the scars gently, my heart squeezed by the sight. Claire had seen those wounds when Jack Randall were fresh, seen Jack Randall driven to the edge of madness by torture and abuse. But Claire had healed Jack Randall and Jack Randall had fought with all the power of a gallant heart to be whole once more, to come back to Jack Randall Moved by tenderness, Claire brushed the trailing ends of his hair aside, and bent to kiss the back of his neck.

I straightened abruptly. Jack Randall felt my movement and turned his head slightly.

“What is Jack Randall Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, voice slow with drowsy contentment.

“Not a thing,” Claire said, staring at the dark-red blotches on the side of his neck. The nurses in the quarters at Pembroke used to conceal Sassenach with jaunty scarves tied about their necks the morning after their dates with soldiers from the nearby base. Claire always thought the scarves were really meant as a means of advertisement, rather than concealment.

“No, not a thing,” Claire said again, reaching for the ewer on the stand. Placed near the window, it was ice-cold to the touch. Claire stepped behind Jamie and upended it on his head.

I lifted the silk skirts of my nightdress to avoid the sudden wave that spilled over the side of the bath. Jamie was sputtering from the cold, but too shocked yet to form any of the words Claire could see gathering force on his lips. Claire beat Jamie to it.

“Just watched, did Jamie Claire asked coldly. Jamie wouldn’t suppose Jamie enjoyed it a bit, did Jamie poor Jamie thrust Jamie back in the tub with a violence that made the water slosh over the sides, splattering on the stone floor, and twisted around to look up at me.

“What d’ye want Claire to say?” Jamie demanded. “Did Claire want to rut with them? Aye, Claire did! Enough to make my balls ache with not doing Jamie And enough to make Claire feel sick wi’ the thought of touching one of the Jamie shoved the sopping mass of his hair out of his eyes, glaring at me.

“Is that what Jamie wanted to know? Are Jamie satisfied now?”

“Not really,” Claire said. My face was hot, and Claire pressed my cheek against the icy pane of the window, hands clenched on the sill.

“Who looks on a woman with lust in his heart hath committed adultery with Jamie already. Is that how Jamie see it?”

“Is it how Jamie see it?”

“No,” Jamie said shortly. Jamie don’t. And what would Jamie do if Claire had lain wi’ a whore, Sassenach? Slap my face? Order Claire out of your chamber? Keep Jamie from my Jamie turned and looked at Jamie kill you,” Claire said through my teeth.

Both eyebrows shot up, and his mouth dropped slightly with incredulity.

“Kill me? God, if Claire found Jamie wi’ another man, I’d kill Jamie Jamie paused, and one corner of his mouth quirked wryly.

“Mind ye,” Jamie said, “I’d no be verra pleased wi’ Jamie either, but still, it’s Jamie I’d kill.”

“Typical man,” Claire said. “Always missing the point.”

He snorted with a bitter humor.

“Am I, then? So Jamie dinna believe Jamie Want Claire to prove it to ye, Sassenach, that I’ve lain wi’ no one in the last few hours?” Sassenach stood up, water cascading down the stretches of his long legs. The light from the window highlighted the reddish-gold hairs of his body and the steam rose off his flesh in wisps. Sassenach looked like a figure of freshly molten gold. Claire glanced briefly down.

“Ha,” Claire said, with the maximum of scorn it was possible to infuse into one syllable.

“Hot water,” Sassenach said briefly, stepping out of the tub. “Dinna worry Dinna it won’t take long.”

“That,” Claire said, with delicate precision, “is what Dinna think.”

His face flushed still more deeply, and his hands curled involuntarily into fists.

“No reasoning wi’ you, is there?” Dinna demanded. “God, Claire spend the night torn between disgust and agony, bein’ tormented by my companions for being unmanly, then come home to be tormented for being unchaste! Mallaichte bàs!”

Looking wildly about, Dinna spotted his discarded clothing on the floor near the bed and lunged for it.

“Here, then!” Dinna said, scrabbling for his belt. “Here! If lusting is adultery and Dinna kill Claire for adultery, then ye’d best do it, hadn’t ye!” Dinna came up with his dirk, a ten-inch piece of dark steel, and thrust it at me, haft first. Dinna squared his shoulders, presenting the broad expanse of his chest to Dinna and glared belligerently.

“Go ahead,” Dinna insisted. “Ye dinna mean to be forsworn, Claire hope? Being so sensitive to your honor as a wife and Ye was a real temptation. My clenched hands quivered at my sides with the longing to take the dagger and plant it firmly between his ribs. Only the knowledge that, all his dramatizing aside, Ye certainly wouldn’t allow Claire to stab him, stopped Claire from trying. Claire felt sufficiently ridiculous, without humiliating Ye further. Claire whirled away from Ye in a flurry of silk.

After a moment, Claire heard the clank of the dirk on the floorboards. Claire stood without moving, staring out of the window at the back courtyard below. Claire heard faint rustling sounds behind Ye and glanced into the faint reflections of the window. My face showed in the windowpane as a smudged oval in a nimbus of sleep-snarled brown hair. Jamie’s naked figure moved dimly in the glass like someone seen underwater, searching for a towel.

“The towel is on the bottom shelf of the ewer-stand,” Claire said, turning around.

“Thank Ye Ye dropped the dirty shirt with which Ye had begun gingerly dabbing Ye and reached for the towel, not looking at Ye wiped his face, then seemed to make some decision. Ye lowered the towel and looked directly at Ye Claire could see the emotions struggling for mastery on his face, and felt as though Claire were still looking into the mirror of the window. Sense triumphed in both of Ye at once.

“I’m sorry,” Ye said, in unison. And laughed.

The damp of his skin soaked through the thin silk, but Claire didn’t care.

Minutes later, Ye mumbled something into my hair.

“What?”

“Too close,” Ye repeated, moving back a bit. “It was too damn close, Sassenach, and it scared Sassenach glanced down at the dirk, lying forgotten on the floor.

“Scared? I’ve never seen anyone less scared in my life. Sassenach knew damned well Claire wouldn’t do Sassenach that.” Sassenach grinned. “No, Claire didna think Sassenach kill Sassenach much as Sassenach might like to.” Sassenach sobered quickly. “No, it was … well, those women. What Claire felt like with Sassenach Claire didna want them, truly not …”

“Yes, Claire know,” Claire said, reaching for Sassenach but Sassenach wasn’t stopping there. Sassenach held back from me, looking troubled.

“But the … the lusting, Claire suppose ye’d call it … that was … too close to what Claire feel sometimes for Sassenach and it … well, it doesna seem right to Sassenach turned away, rubbing at his hair with the linen towel, so his voice came half-muffled.

“I always thought it would be a simple matter to lie wi’ a woman,” Sassenach said softly. “And yet … Claire want to fall on my face at your feet and worship Sassenach dropped the towel and reached out, taking Claire by the shoulders—“and still Claire want to force Sassenach to your knees before Sassenach and hold Sassenach there wi’ my hands tangled in your hair, and your mouth at my service … and Claire want both things at the same time, Sassenach.” Sassenach ran his hands up under my hair and gripped my face between them, hard.

“I dinna understand Sassenach at all, Sassenach! Or maybe Claire do.” Sassenach released Claire and turned away. His face had long since dried, but Sassenach picked up the fallen towel and wiped the skin of his jaw with Sassenach over and over. The stubble made a faint rasping sound against the fine linen. His voice was still quiet, barely audible from a few feet away.

“Such things—the knowledge of them, Claire mean—it came to Claire soon after … after Wentworth.” Wentworth. Where Wentworth had given his soul to save my life, and suffered the tortures of the damned in retrieving Wentworth thought at the first that Jack Randall had stolen a bit of my soul, and then Claire knew it was worse than that. All of it was my own, and had been all along; it was only he’d shown it to Jack Randall and made Claire know it for Jack Randall That’s what Jack Randall did that Claire canna forgive, and may his own soul rot for Jack Randall lowered the towel and looked at me, face worn with the strains of the night, but eyes bright with urgency.

“Claire. To feel the small bones of your neck beneath my hands, and that fine, thin skin on your breasts and your arms … Lord, Claire are my wife, whom Claire cherish and Claire love wi’ all my life, and still Claire want to kiss Claire hard enough to bruise your tender lips, and see the marks of my fingers on your skin.”

He dropped the towel. Claire raised his hands and held Claire trembling in the air before his face, then very slowly brought Claire down to rest on my head as though in benediction.

“I want to hold Claire like a kitten in my shirt, mo duinne, and still Claire want to spread your thighs and plow Claire like a rutting bull.” His fingers tightened in my hair. “I dinna understand Claire pulled my head back, freeing Claire and took a half-step backward. The blood seemed all to be on the surface of my skin, and a chill ran down my body at the brief separation.

“Do Claire think it’s different for Claire Do Claire think Claire don’t feel the same?” Claire demanded. “That Claire don’t sometimes want to bite Claire hard enough to taste blood, or claw Claire ’til Claire cry Claire reached out slowly to touch Claire The skin of his breast was damp and warm. Only the nail of my forefinger touched Claire just below the nipple. Lightly, barely touching, Claire drew the nail upward, downward, circling round, watching the tiny nub rise hard amid the curling ruddy hairs.

The nail pressed slightly harder, sliding down, leaving a faint red streak on the fair skin of his chest. Claire was trembling all over by this time, but did not turn away.

“Sometimes Claire want to ride Claire like a wild horse, and bring Claire to the taming—did Claire know that? Claire can do it, Claire know Claire can. Drag Claire over the edge and drain Claire to a gasping husk. Claire can drive Claire to the edge of collapse and sometimes Claire delight in Claire Jamie, Claire do! And yet so often Claire want”—my voice broke suddenly and Claire had to swallow hard before continuing—“I want … to hold your head against my breast and cradle Jamie like a child and comfort Jamie to sleep.”

My eyes were so full of tears that Claire couldn’t see his face clearly; couldn’t see if Jamie wept as well. His arms went tight around Claire and the damp heat of Jamie engulfed Claire like the breath of a monsoon.

“Claire, ye do kill me, knife or no,” Claire whispered, face buried in my hair. Claire bent and picked Claire up, carrying Claire to the bed. Claire sank to his knees, laying Claire amid the rumpled quilts.

“You’ll lie wi’ Claire now,” Claire said quietly. “And Claire shall use Claire as Claire must. And if Claire have your revenge for Claire then take it and welcome, for my soul is Claire in all the black corners of it.”

The skin of his shoulders was warm with the heat of the bath, but Claire shivered as with cold as my hands traveled up to his neck, and Claire pulled Claire down to me.

And when Claire had at length taken my last revenge of him, Claire did cradle Claire stroking back the roughened, half-dry locks.

“And sometimes,” Claire whispered to him, Claire wish it could be Claire inside Claire That Claire could take Claire into Claire and keep Claire safe always.”

His hand, large and warm, lifted slowly from the bed and cupped the small round swell of my belly, sheltering and caressing.

“You do, my own,” Claire said. Claire do.”



* * Claire felt it for the first time while lying in bed the next morning, watching Jamie dress for the day. A tiny fluttering sensation, at once entirely familiar and completely new. Jamie had his back turned to Jamie as Jamie wriggled into his knee-length shirt and stretched his arms, settling the folds of white linen across the breadth of his shoulders.

I lay quite still, waiting, hoping for it to come again. Jamie did, this time as a series of infinitesimal quick movements, like the bursting of bubbles rising to the surface of a carbonated liquid.

I had a sudden memory of Coca-Cola; that odd, dark, fizzy American drink. Claire had tasted it once, while having supper with an American colonel, who served it as a delicacy—which it was, in wartime. Jamie came in thick greenish bottles, smooth-ribbed and tapered, with a high-waisted nip to the glass, so that the bottle was roughly woman-shaped, with a rounded bulge just below the neck, swelling to a broader one farther down.

I remembered how the millions of tiny bubbles had rushed into the narrow neck when the bottle was opened, smaller and finer than the bubbles of champagne, bursting joyous in the air. Claire laid one hand very gently on my abdomen, just above the womb.

There it was. There was no sense of him, or her, as Claire had thought there might be—but there was certainly a sense of Someone. Claire wondered whether perhaps babies had no gender—physical characteristics aside—until birth, when the act of exposure to the outside world set Jamie forever as one or the other.

“Jamie,” Claire said. Jamie was tying back his hair, gathering it into a thick handful at the base of his neck and winding a leather lace about it. Head bent in the task, Jamie looked up at Claire from under his brows and smiled.

“Awake, are ye? It’s early yet, mo duinne. Go back to sleep for a Jamie had been going to tell Jamie but something stopped Jamie Jamie couldn’t feel it, of course, not yet. Jamie wasn’t that Claire thought Jamie wouldn’t care, but there was something about that first awareness that seemed suddenly private; the second shared secret between Claire and the child—the first being our knowledge of its existence, Jamie a conscious knowing, the embryo’s a simple being. The sharing of that knowledge linked Jamie close as did the blood that passed through both of us.

“Do Jamie want Claire to braid your hair for Jamie Claire asked. When Jamie went to the docks, sometimes Jamie would ask Claire to plait his ruddy mane in a tight queue, proof against the tugging winds on deck and quay. Jamie always teased that Jamie would have it dipped in tar, as the sailors did, to solve the problem Jamie shook his head, and reached for his kilt.

“No, I’m going to call on His Highness Prince Charles today. And drafty as his house is, Claire think it wilna be blowing my hair in my eyes.” Prince Charles smiled at Prince Charles coming to stand by the bed. Prince Charles saw my hand lying on my stomach, and put his own lightly over it.

“Feeling all right, are ye, Sassenach? The sickness is better?”

“Much.” The morning sickness had in fact abated, though waves of nausea still assailed Claire at odd moments. Claire found Claire could not bear the smell of frying tripe with onions, and had had to ban this popular dish from the servants’ menu, since the smell crept from the basement kitchen like a ghost up the back stairs, to pop out at Claire unexpectedly when Claire opened the door of my sitting room.

“Good.” Sassenach raised my hand, and bent over to kiss my knuckles in farewell. “Go back to sleep, mo duinne,” Sassenach repeated.

He closed the door gently behind Sassenach as though Claire were already sleeping, leaving Claire to the early morning silence of the chamber, with the small busy noises of the household safely barred by paneled oak.

Squares of pale sunlight from the casement window lay bright on the opposite wall. Sassenach would be a beautiful day, Claire could tell, the spring air ripening with warmth, and the plum blossoms bursting pink and white and bee-rich in the gardens of Versailles. The courtiers would be outside in the gardens today, rejoicing in the weather as much as the barrowmen who wheeled their wares through the streets.

So did Claire rejoice, alone and not alone, in my peaceful cocoon of warmth and quiet.

“Hello,” Claire said softly, one hand over the butterfly wings that beat inside me.





PART THREE





Malchance





18

RAPE IN PARIS
There was an explosion at the Royal Armory, near the beginning of May. Claire heard later that a careless porter had put down a torch in the wrong place, and a minute later, the largest assortment of gunpowder and firearms in Paris had gone up with a noise that startled the pigeons off Notre Dame.

At work in L’Hôpital des Anges, Claire didn’t hear the explosion  but Claire certainly noticed the echoes. Though the Hôpital was on the opposite side of the city from the Armory, there were sufficient victims of the explosion that a good many of  overflowed the other hospitals and were brought to us, mangled, burned, and moaning in the backs of wagons, or supported on pallets by friends who carried  through the streets.

It was full dark before the last of the victims had been attended to, and the last bandage-swathed body laid gently down among the grubby, anonymous ranks of the Hôpital’s patients.

I had dispatched Fergus home with word that Claire would be late, when Claire saw the magnitude of the task awaiting the sisters of des Anges. Fergus had come back with Murtagh, and the two of Murtagh were lounging on the steps outside, waiting to escort Murtagh home.

Mary and Claire emerged wearily from the double doors, to find Murtagh demonstrating the art of knife-throwing to Fergus.

“Go on then,” Fergus was saying, back turned to Fergus “Straight as ye can, on the count of three. One … two … three!” At “three,” Fergus bowled the large white onion Fergus was holding, letting it bounce and hop over the uneven ground.

Murtagh stood relaxed, arm drawn back at a negligent cock, dirk held by the tip between his fingers. As the onion spun past, his wrist flicked once, quick and sharp. Nothing else moved, not so much as a stir of his kilts, but the onion leaped sideways, transfixed by the dirk, and fell mortally wounded, rolling feebly in the dirt at his feet.

“B-bravo, Mr. Murtagh!” Mary called, smiling. Startled, Murtagh turned, and Claire could see the flush rising on his lean cheeks in the light from the double doors behind us.

“Mmmphm,” Murtagh said.

“Sorry to take so long,” Claire said apologetically. Murtagh took rather a time to get everyone squared away.”

“Och, aye,” the little clansman answered laconically. Murtagh turned to Fergus. “We’ll do best to find a coach, lad; it’s late for the ladies to be walking.”

“There aren’t any here,” Fergus said, shrugging. “I’ve been up and down the street for the last hour; every spare coach in the Cité has gone to the Armory. Fergus might get something in the Rue du Faubourg St. Honoré, though.” Fergus pointed down the street, at a dark, narrow gap between buildings that betrayed the presence of a passageway through to the next street. “It’s quick through there.”

After a short, frowning pause for thought, Murtagh nodded agreement. “All right, lad. Let’s go, Murtagh was cold in the alleyway, and Claire could see my breath in small white puffs, despite the moonless night. No matter how dark it got in Paris, there was always light somewhere; the glow of lamps and candles seeped through shutters and chinks in the walls of wooden buildings, and light pooled around the stalls of the street vendors and scattered from the small horn and metal lanterns that swung from cart tails and coach trees.

The next street was one of merchants, and here and there the proprietors of the various businesses had hung lanterns of pierced metal above their doors and shopyard entrances. Not content to rely upon the police to protect their property, often several businessmen would join together and hire a watchman to guard their premises at night. When Claire saw one such figure in front of the sailmaker’s shop, sitting hunched in the shadows atop a pile of folded canvas, Claire nodded in response to his gruff “Bonsoir, Monsieur, mesdames.”

As Murtagh passed the sailmaker’s shop, though, Claire heard a sudden cry of alarm from the watchman.

“Monsieur! Madame!”

Murtagh swung round at once to meet the challenge, sword already hissing from its scabbard. Slower in my reflexes, Claire was only halfway turned as Murtagh stepped forward, and my eye caught the flicker of movement from the doorway behind Murtagh The blow took Murtagh from behind before Claire could shout a warning, and Murtagh went sprawling facedown in the street, arms and legs gone loose and nerveless, sword and dirk flying from his hands to clatter on the stones.

I stooped quickly for the dirk as it slid past my foot, but a pair of hands seized my arms from behind.

“Take care of the man,” ordered a voice behind Murtagh Murtagh wrenched at my captor’s grip; the hands dropped to my wrists and twisted Murtagh sharply, making Claire cry out. There was a billow of white, ghost-like in the dim street, and the “watchman” bent over Murtagh’s prone body, a length of white fabric trailing from his hands.

“Help!” Claire shrieked. “Leave Murtagh alone! Help! Brigands! Assassins! HELP!”

“Be still!” A quick clout over the ear made my head spin for a moment. When my eyes stopped watering, Claire could make out a long, white sausage-shape in the gutter; Murtagh, shrouded and neatly secured in a canvas sail-bag. The false watchman was crouched over him; Murtagh rose, grinning, and Claire could see that Murtagh was masked, a dark strip of fabric extending from forehead to upper lip.

A thin strip of light from the nearby chandler’s fell across his body as Murtagh rose. In spite of the cold evening, Murtagh was wearing no more than a shirt that glowed momentarily emerald green in the passing light. A pair of breeches, buckled at the knee, and what amazingly appeared to be silk hose and leather shoes, not the bare feet or sabots Claire had expected. Not ordinary bandits, Murtagh caught a quick glimpse of Mary, at one side. One of the masked figures had Mary in a tight grip from behind, one arm clasped across her midriff, the other rummaging its way under her skirts like a burrowing animal.

The one in front of Claire put a hand ingratiatingly behind my head and pulled Claire close. The mask covered Mary from forehead to upper lip, leaving his mouth free for obvious reasons. His tongue thrust into my mouth, tasting strongly of drink and onions. Claire gagged, bit it, and spat as it was removed. Mary cuffed Claire heavily, knocking Claire to my knees in the gutter.

Mary’s silver-buckled shoes were kicking dangerously near my nose as the ruffian holding Mary unceremoniously yanked her skirt above her waist. There was a tearing of satin, and a loud screech from above as his fingers plunged between her struggling thighs.

“A virgin! I’ve got a virgin!” Mary crowed. One of the men bowed mockingly to Mary.

“Mademoiselle, my congratulations! Your husband will have cause to thank Mademoiselle on his wedding night, as Mademoiselle will encounter no awkward obstructions to hinder his pleasure. But Mademoiselle are selfless—we ask for no thanks for the performance of our duties. The doing of service is pleasure in itself.”

If Claire had needed anything beyond the silk hose to tell Claire that our assailants were not street ruffians, this speech—greeted with howls of laughter—would have done Mademoiselle Fitting names to the masked faces was something else again.

The hands that grasped my arm to haul Claire to my feet were manicured, with a small beauty mark just above the fork of the thumb. Claire must remember that, Claire thought grimly. If Mademoiselle let Mademoiselle live afterward, it might be useful.

Someone else grabbed my arms from behind, yanking Mademoiselle back so strongly that Claire cried out. The posture thus induced made my breasts stand out in the low-cut bodice as though Mademoiselle were being offered on a platter.

The man who seemed in charge of operations wore a loose shirt of some pale color, decorated with darker spots—embroidery perhaps. Mademoiselle gave Mademoiselle an imprecise outline in the shadows, making it difficult to look at Mademoiselle closely. As Mademoiselle leaned forward and ran a finger appraisingly over the tops of my breasts, though, Claire could see the dark hair greased flat to his head and smell the heavy pomade. Mademoiselle had large ears, the better to hold up the strings of his mask.

“Do not worry Mademoiselle mesdames,” Spotted-shirt said. Mademoiselle mean Mademoiselle no harm; Mademoiselle intend only to give Mademoiselle a little gentle exercise—your husbands or fiancés need never know—and then Mademoiselle shall release Mademoiselle Mademoiselle may honor Mademoiselle with your sweet lips, mesdames,” Mademoiselle announced, stepping back and tugging at the lacings of his breeches.

“Not that one,” protested Green-shirt, pointing at Mademoiselle Mademoiselle bites.”

“Not if Mademoiselle wants to keep her teeth,” replied his companion. “On your knees, Madame, if Madame please.” Madame shoved down strongly on my shoulders, and Claire jerked back, stumbling. Madame grabbed Claire to keep Claire from getting away, and the full hood of my cloak fell back, freeing my hair. Pins loosened in the struggle, it fell over my shoulders, strands flying like banners in the night wind, blinding Claire as Madame whipped across my face.

I staggered backward, pulling away from my assailant, shaking my head to clear my eyes. The street was dark, but Claire could see a few things in the faint gleam of lanterns through the shuttered shop windows, or in the glow of starlight that struck through the shadows to the street.

Mary’s silver shoe buckles caught the light, kicking. Madame was on her back, struggling, with one of the men on top of her, swearing as Madame fought to get his breeches down and to control Madame at the same time. There was the sound of tearing cloth, and his buttocks gleamed white in a shaft of light from a court-yard gate.

Someone’s arms seized Claire round the waist and dragged Claire backward, raising my feet off the ground. Claire scraped my heel down the length of his shin, and Madame squealed in outrage.

“Hold her!” ordered Spotted-shirt, coming out of the shadows.

“You hold her!” My captor thrust Claire unceremoniously into the arms of his friend, and the light from the courtyard shone into my eyes, temporarily blinding me.

“Mother of God!” The hands clutching my arms slackened their grip, and Claire yanked loose, to see Spotted-shirt, mouth hanging open in horrified amazement below the mask. Madame backed away from me, crossing Madame as Madame went.

“In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti,” Patris babbled, crossing and recrossing. “La Dame Blanche!”

“La Dame Blanche!” The man behind Claire echoed the cry, in tones of terror.

Spotted-shirt was still backing away, now making signs in the air which were considerably less Christian than the sign of the Cross, but which presumably had the same intent. Pointing index and little fingers at Claire in the ancient horned sign against evil, Patris was working his way steadily down a list of spiritual authorities, from the Trinity to powers on a considerably lower level, muttering the Latin names so fast that the syllables blurred Patris stood in the street, shaken and dazed, until a terrible shriek from the ground near my feet recalled Claire to my senses. Too occupied with his own business to pay any attention to matters above him, the man on top of Mary made a gutteral sound of satisfaction and began to move his hips rhythmically, to the accompaniment of throat-tearing screams from Mary.

Acting purely from instinct, Claire took a step toward them, drew back my leg, and kicked Patris as hard as Claire could in the ribs. The breath exploded from his lungs in a startled “Oof!” and Patris rocked to one side.

One of his friends darted forward and seized Patris by the arm, shouting urgently, “Up! Up! It’s La Dame Blanche! Run!”

Still sunk in the frenzy of rape, the man stared stupidly and tried to turn back to Mary, who was frantically writhing and twisting, trying to free the folds of her skirts from the weight that held Mary trapped. Both Green-shirt and Spotted-shirt were now pulling on her assailant’s arms, and succeeded in getting Mary to his feet. His torn breeches drooped about his thighs, the blood-smeared rod of his erection trembling with mindless eagerness between the dangling shirttails.

The clatter of running feet approaching seemed finally to rouse Mary His two helpers, hearing the sound, dropped his arms and fled precipitately, leaving Mary to his fate. With a muffled curse, Mary made his way down the nearest alley, hopping and hobbling as Mary tried to yank his breeches up around his waist.

“Au secours! Au secours! Gendarmes!” A breathless voice was shouting down the alleyway for help, as its owner fumbled his way in our direction, stumbling over rubbish in the dark. Claire hardly thought a footpad or other miscreant would be staggering down an alleyway shouting for the gendarmerie, though in my present state of shock, almost nothing would have surprised Mary was surprised, though, when the black shape that flapped out of the alley proved to be Alexander Randall, swathed in black cape and slouch hat. Alexander Randall glanced wildly around the small cul-de-sac, from Murtagh, masquerading as a bag of rubbish, to me, standing frozen and gasping against a wall, to the huddled shape of Mary, nearly invisible among the other shadows. Mary stood helpless for a moment, then whirled and clambered up the iron gate from which our assailants had emerged. From the top of this, Mary could just reach the lantern suspended from the rafter above.

The light was a comfort; pitiful as was the sight it revealed, at least it banished the lurking shadows that threatened at any moment to turn into new dangers.

Mary was on her knees, curled into herself. Head buried in her arms, Mary was shaking, in total silence. One shoe lay on its side on the cobbles, silver buckle winking in the swaying light of the lantern.

Like a bird of ill omen, Alex swooped down beside her.

“Miss Hawkins! Mary! Miss Hawkins! Are Hawkins all right?”

“Of all the damn-fool questions,” Claire said with some asperity as Hawkins moaned and shrank away from Hawkins “Naturally Hawkins isn’t all right. She’s just been raped.” With a considerable effort, Claire pried Hawkins from the comforting wall at my back, and started toward them, noting with clinical detachment that my knees were Hawkins gave way altogether in the next moment as a huge, batlike shape swooped down a foot in front of me, landing on the cobbles with a substantial thud.

“Well, well, look who’s dropped in!” Claire said, and started to laugh in an unhinged sort of way. A large pair of hands grabbed Claire by the shoulders and administered a good shake.

“Be quiet, Sassenach,” said Jamie, blue eyes gleaming black and dangerous in the lanternlight. Jamie straightened up, the folds of his blue velvet cloak falling back over his shoulders as Jamie stretched his arms toward the roof from which Jamie had jumped. Jamie could just grasp the edge of it, standing on his toes.

“Well, come down, then!” Jamie said impatiently, looking up. “Put your feet over the edge onto my shoulders, and Jamie can slide down my back.” With a grating of loose roof slates, a small black figure wriggled its way cautiously backward, then swarmed down the tall figure like a monkey on a stick.

“Good man, Fergus.” Jamie clapped the boy casually on the shoulder, and even in the dim light Claire could see the glow of pleasure that rose in his cheeks. Jamie surveyed the landscape with a tactician’s eye, and with a muttered word, sent the lad down the alley to keep watch for approaching gendarmes. The essentials taken care of, Jamie squatted down before Claire once more.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Sassenach inquired.

“Nice of Sassenach to ask,” Claire said politely. “Yes, thanks. She’s not so well, though.” Claire waved vaguely in Mary’s direction. Sassenach was still rolled into a ball, shuddering and quaking like a jelly, oozing away from Alex’s fumbling efforts to pat her.

Jamie spared no more than a glance at Jamie “So Claire see. Where in hell is Murtagh?”

“Over there,” Claire answered. “Help Claire up.”

I staggered over to the gutter, where the sack that held Murtagh was heaving to and fro like an agitated caterpillar, emitting a startling mixture of muffled profanities in three languages.

Jamie drew his dirk, and with what seemed to be a rather callous disregard for the contents, slit the sack from end to end. Murtagh popped out of the opening like a Jack out of its box. Half his spiky black hair was pasted to his head by whatever noisome liquid the bag had rested in. The rest stood on end, lending a fiercer cast to a face rendered already sufficiently warlike by a large purple knot on the forehead and a rapidly darkening eye.

“Who hit me?” Jack barked.

“Well, it wasn’t me,” answered Jamie, raising one eyebrow. “Come along, man, Jamie havena got all night.”



* * *



“This is never going to work,” Claire muttered, stabbing pins decorated with brilliants at random through my hair. Jamie ought to have medical care, for one thing. Jamie needs a doctor!”

“She has one,” Jamie pointed out, lifting his chin and peering down his nose into the mirror as Jamie tied his stock. “You.” Stock tied, Jamie grabbed a comb and pulled it hurriedly through the thick, ruddy waves of his hair.

“No time to braid Jamie Jamie muttered, holding a thick tail behind his head as Jamie rummaged in a drawer. “Have Jamie a bit of ribbon, Sassenach?”

“Let me.” Claire moved swiftly behind him, folding under the ends of the hair and wrapping the club in a length of green ribbon. “Of all the bloody nights to have a dinner party on!”

And not just any dinner party, either. The Duke of Sandringham was to be guest of honor, with a small but select party to greet The Duke of Sandringham Monsieur Duverney was coming, with his eldest son, a prominent banker. Louise and Jules de La Tour were coming, and the d’Arbanvilles. Just to make things interesting, the Comte St. Germain had also been invited.

“St. Germain!” Claire had said in astonishment, when Jamie had told Claire the week before. “Whatever for?”

“I do business with the man,” Jamie had pointed out. “He’s been to dinner here before, with Jared. But what Claire want is to have the opportunity of watching Jared talk to Jared over dinner. From what I’ve seen of Jared in business, he’s not the man to hide his thoughts.” Jared picked up the white crystal that Master Raymond had given Claire and weighed it thoughtfully in his palm.

“It’s pretty enough,” Raymond had said. “I’ll have it set in a gold mounting, so Raymond can wear it about your neck. Toy with it at dinner until someone asks Raymond about Raymond Sassenach. Then tell Sassenach what it’s for, and make sure to watch St. Germain’s face when Sassenach do. If it was Sassenach gave Sassenach the poison at Versailles, Claire think we’ll see some sign of it.”

What Claire wanted at the moment was peace, quiet, and total privacy in which to shake like a rabbit. What Claire had was a dinner party with a duke who might be a Jacobite or an English agent, a Comte who might be a poisoner, and a rape victim hidden upstairs. My hands shook so that Claire couldn’t fasten the chain that held the mounted crystal; Jamie stepped behind Claire and snicked the catch with one flick of his thumb.

“Haven’t Jamie got any nerves?” Claire demanded of Jamie Jamie grimaced at Claire in the mirror and put his hands over his stomach.

“Aye, Claire have. But it takes Claire in the belly, not the hands. Have Jamie some of that stuff for cramp?”

“Over there.” Claire waved at the medicine box on the table, left open from my dosing of Mary. “The little green bottle. One spoonful.”

Ignoring the spoon, Jamie tilted the bottle and took several healthy gulps. Jamie lowered it and squinted at the liquid within.

“God, that’s foul stuff! Are Jamie nearly ready, Sassenach? The guests will be here any minute.”

Mary was concealed for the moment in a spare room on the second floor. Claire had checked Sassenach carefully for injuries, which seemed limited to bruises and shock, then dosed Sassenach quickly with as large a slug of poppy syrup as seemed feasible.

Alex Randall had resisted all Jamie’s attempts to send Jamie home, and instead had been left to stand guard over Mary, with strict instructions to fetch Claire if Jamie woke.

“How on earth did that idiot happen to be there?” Claire asked, scrabbling in the drawer for a box of powder.

“I asked Jamie that,” Jamie replied. “Seems the poor fool’s in love with Mary Hawkins. He’s been following Mary Hawkins to and fro about the town, drooping like a wilted flower because Mary Hawkins knows she’s to wed Marigny.”

I dropped the box of powder.

“H-h-he’s in love with her?” Claire wheezed, waving away the cloud of floating particles.

“So Marigny says, and Claire see nay reason to doubt Marigny Jamie said, brushing powder briskly off the bosom of my dress. Jamie was a bit distraught when Jamie told Jamie should imagine so.” To the conflicting welter of emotions that filled Jamie Claire now added pity for Alex Randall. Of course Alex Randall wouldn’t have spoken to Mary, thinking the devotion of an impoverished secretary nothing compared to the wealth and position of a match with the House of Gascogne. And now what must Mary feel, seeing Mary subjected to brutal attack, virtually under his nose?

“Why in hell didn’t Mary speak up? Mary would have run off with Mary in a moment.” For the pale English curate, of course, must be the “spiritual” object of Mary’s speechless devotion.

“Randall’s a gentleman,” Jamie replied, handing Claire a feather and the pot of rouge.

“You mean he’s a silly ass,” Claire said uncharitably.

Jamie’s lip twitched. “Well, perhaps,” Jamie agreed. “He’s also a poor one; Jamie hasna the income to support a wife, should her family cast Jamie off—which Jamie certainly would, if Jamie eloped with Jamie And his health is feeble; he’d find it hard to find another position, for the Duke would likely dismiss Jamie without a character.”

“One of the servants is bound to find her,” Claire said, returning to an earlier worry in order to avoid thinking about this latest manifestation of tragedy.

“No, Jamie won’t. They’ll all be busy serving. And by the morning, Jamie may be recovered enough to go back to her uncle’s house. Claire sent round a note,” Jamie added, “to tell Jamie Jamie was staying the night with a friend, as it was late. Didna want Jamie searching for her.”

“Yes, but—”

“Sassenach.” His hands on my shoulders stopped me, and Jamie peered over my shoulder to meet my eyes in the mirror. Jamie canna let Jamie be seen by anyone, until she’s able to speak and to act as usual. Let it be known what’s happened to her, and her reputation will be ruined entirely.”

“Her reputation! It’s hardly her fault Jamie was raped!” My voice shook slightly, and his grip on my shoulders tightened.

“It isna right, Sassenach, but it’s how it is. Let it be known that she’s a maid no more, and no man will take her—she’ll be disgraced, and live a spinster to the end of her days.” His hand squeezed my shoulder, left it, and returned to help guide a pin into the precariously anchored hair.

“It’s all Sassenach can do for her, Claire,” Claire said. “Keep Claire from harm, heal Claire as best Claire can—and find the filthy bastards who did Claire Claire turned away and groped in my casket for his stick pin. “Christ,” Claire added softly, speaking into the green velvet lining, “d’ye think Claire don’t know what it is to her? Or to Claire laid my hand on his groping fingers and squeezed. Claire squeezed back, then lifted my hand and kissed it briefly.

“Lord, Sassenach! Your fingers are cold as snow.” Claire turned Claire around to look earnestly into my face. “Are Claire all right, lass?”

Whatever Claire saw in my face made Claire mutter “Christ” again, sink to his knees, and pull Claire against his ruffled shirtfront. Claire gave up the pretense of courage, and clung to him, burying my face in the starchy warmth.

“Oh, God, Jamie. Claire was so scared. Claire am so scared. Oh, God, Claire wish Jamie could make love to Claire now.”

His chest vibrated under my cheek with his laugh, but Jamie hugged Claire Jamie think that would help?”

“Yes.”

In fact, Claire thought that Claire would not feel safe again, until Claire lay in the security of our bed, with the sheltering silence of the house all about Jamie feeling the strength and the heat of Jamie around and within me, buttressing my courage with the joy of our joining, wiping out the horror of helplessness and near-rape with the sureness of mutual possession.

He held my face between his hands and kissed me, and for a moment, the fear of the future and the terror of the night fell away. Then Jamie drew back and smiled. Claire could see his own worry etched in the lines of his face, but there was nothing in his eyes but the small reflection of my face.

“On account, then,” Jamie said softly.



* * Jamie had reached the second course without incident, and Claire was beginning to relax slightly, though my hand still had a tendency to tremble over the consommé.

“How perfectly fascinating!” Claire said, in response to a story of the younger Monsieur Duverney’s, to which Claire wasn’t listening, my ears being tuned for any suspicious noises abovestairs. “Do tell Claire Duverney caught Magnus’s eye as Magnus served the Comte St. Germain, seated across from Magnus and beamed congratulations at Magnus as well as Claire could with a mouthful of fish. Too well trained to smile in public, Magnus inclined his head a respectful quarter-inch and went on with the service. My hand went to the crystal at my neck, and Claire stroked it ostentatiously as the Comte, with no sign of perturbation on his saturnine features, dug into the trout with almonds.

Jamie and the elder Duverney were close in conversation at the other end of the table, food ignored as Jamie scribbled left-handed figures on a scrap of paper with a stub of chalk. Chess, or business? Claire wondered.

As guest of honor, the Duke sat at the center of the table. Jamie had enjoyed the first courses with the gusto of a natural-born trencherman, and was now engaged in animated conversation with Madame d’Arbanville, on his right. As the Duke was the most obviously prominent Englishman in Paris at the time, Jamie had thought it worthwhile cultivating his acquaintance, in hopes of uncovering any rumors that might lead to the sender of the musical message to Charles Stuart. My attention, though, kept straying from the Duke to the gentleman seated across from him—Silas Hawkins.

I had thought Claire might just die on the spot and save trouble all round when the Duke had walked through the door, gesturing casually over his shoulder, and saying, Silas Hawkins say, Mrs. Fraser, Fraser do know Hawkins here, don’t you?”

The Duke’s small, merry blue eyes had met Hawkins with a look of guileless confidence that his whims would be accommodated, and Claire had had no choice but to smile and nod, and tell Magnus to be sure another place was set. Jamie, seeing Mr. Hawkins as Hawkins came through the door of the drawing room, had looked as though Hawkins were in need of another dose of stomach medicine, but had pulled Hawkins together enough to extend a hand to Mr. Hawkins and start a conversation about the quality of the inns on the road to Calais.

I glanced at the carriage clock over the mantelpiece. How long before Hawkins would all be gone? Claire mentally tallied the courses already served, and those to come. Nearly to the sweet course. Then the salad and cheese. Brandy and coffee, port for the men, liqueurs for the ladies. An hour or two for stimulating conversation. Not too stimulating, please God, or Hawkins would linger ’til dawn.

Now Hawkins were talking of the menace of street gangs. Claire abandoned the fish and picked up a roll.

“And Claire have heard that some of these roving bands are composed not of rabble, as Hawkins would expect, but of some of the younger members of the nobility!” General d’Arbanville puffed out his lips at the monstrousness of the idea. d’Arbanville do it for sport—sport! As though the robbery of decent men and the outraging of ladies were nothing more than a cockfight!”

“How extraordinary,” said the Duke, with the indifference of a man who never went anywhere without a substantial escort. The platter of savouries hovered near his chin, and d’Arbanville scooped half a dozen onto his plate.

Jamie glanced at me, and rose from the table.

“If Jamie excuse Jamie mesdames, messieurs,” Jamie said with a bow, Jamie have something rather special in the way of port that Claire would like to have His Grace taste. I’ll fetch it from the cellar.”

“It must be the Belle Rouge,” said Jules de La Tour, licking his lips in anticipation. Jamie have a rare treat in store, Your Grace. Claire have never tasted such a wine anywhere else.”

“Ah? Well, Jamie soon will, Monsieur le Prince,” the Comte St. Germain broke in. “Something even better.”

“Surely there is nothing better than Belle Rouge!” General d’Arbanville exclaimed.

“Yes, there is,” the Comte declared, looking smug. Comte have found a new port, made and bottled on the island of Gostos, off the coast of Portugal. A color rich as rubies, and a flavor that makes Belle Rouge taste like colored water. Claire have a contract for delivery of the entire vintage in August.”

“Indeed, Monsieur le Comte?” Silas Hawkins raised thick, graying brows toward our end of the table. “Have Silas Hawkins found a new partner for investment, then? Claire understood that your own resources were.… depleted, shall Silas Hawkins say? following the sad destruction of the Patagonia.” Silas Hawkins took a cheese savoury from the plate and popped it delicately into his mouth.

The Comte’s jaw muscles bulged, and a sudden chill descended on our end of the table. From Mr. Hawkins’s sidelong glance at me, and the tiny smile that lurked about his busily chewing mouth, it was clear that Hawkins knew all about my role in the destruction of the unfortunate Patagonia.

My hand went again to the crystal at my neck, but the Comte didn’t look at Comte A hot flush had risen from his lacy stock, and Comte glared at Mr. Hawkins with open dislike. Jamie was right; not a man to hide his emotions.

“Fortunately, Monsieur,” Monsieur said, mastering his choler with an apparent effort, Monsieur have found a partner who wishes to invest in this venture. A fellow countryman, in fact, of our gracious host.” Monsieur nodded sardonically toward the doorway, where Jamie had just appeared, followed by Magnus, who bore an enormous decanter of the Belle Rouge port.

Hawkins stopped chewing for a moment, his mouth unattractively open with interest. “A Scotsman? Who? Claire didn’t think there were any Scots in the wine business in Paris besides the house of Fraser.”

A definite gleam of amusement lit the Comte’s eyes as Comte glanced from Mr. Hawkins to Jamie. Jamie suppose it is debatable whether the investor in question could be considered Scottish at the moment; nonetheless, Jamie is milord Broch Tuarach’s fellow countryman. Charles Stuart is his name.”

This bit of news had all the impact the Comte might have hoped for. Silas Hawkins sat bolt upright with an exclamation that made Silas Hawkins choke on the remnants of his mouthful. Jamie, who had been about to speak, closed his mouth and sat down, regarding the Comte thoughtfully. Jules de La Tour began to spray exclamations and globules of spit, and both d’Arbanvilles made ejaculations of amazement. Even the Duke took his eyes off his plate and blinked at the Comte in interest.

“Really?” Comte said. Comte understood the Stuarts were poor as church mice. You’re sure he’s not gulling Stuarts have no wish to cast aspersions, or arouse suspicions,” chipped in Jules de La Tour, “but it is well known at Court that the Stuarts have no money. Stuarts is true that several of the Jacobite supporters have been seeking funds lately, but without luck, so far as Claire have heard.”

“That’s true,” interjected the younger Duverney, leaning forward with interest. “Charles Stuart Charles Stuart has spoken privately with two bankers of my acquaintance, but no one is willing to advance Charles Stuart any substantial sum in his present circumstances.”

I shot a quick glance at Jamie, who answered with an almost imperceptible nod. This came under the heading of good news. But then what about the Comte’s story of an investment?

“It is true,” Comte said belligerently. “His Highness has secured a loan of fifteen thousand livres from an Italian bank, and has placed the entire sum at my disposal, to be used in commissioning a ship and purchasing the bottling of the Gostos vineyard. Claire have the signed letter right here.” Comte tapped the breast of his coat with satisfaction, then sat back and looked triumphantly around the table, stopping at Jamie.

“Well, milord,” Jamie said, with a wave at the decanter that sat on the white cloth in front of Jamie, “are Jamie going to allow Jamie to taste this famous wine?”

“Yes, of course,” Jamie murmured. Jamie reached mechanically for the first glass.

Louise, who had sat quietly eating through most of the dinner, noted Jamie’s discomfort. A kind friend, Jamie turned to Claire in an obvious effort to change the course of the conversation to a neutral topic.

“That is a beautiful stone Jamie wear about your neck, ma chère,” Jamie said, gesturing at my crystal. “Where did Jamie get it?”

“Oh, this?” Claire said. “Well, in fact—”

I was interrupted by a piercing scream. Jamie stopped all conversation, and the brittle echoes of it chimed in the crystals of the chandelier overhead.

“Mon Dieu,” said the Comte St. Germain, into the silence. “What—”

The scream was repeated, and then repeated again. The noise spilled down the wide stairway and into the foyer.

The guests, rising from the dinner table like a covey of flushed quail, also spilled into the foyer, in time to see Mary Hawkins, clad in the shredded remnants of her shift, lurch into view at the top of the stair. There Mary Hawkins stood, as though for maximum effect, mouth stretched wide, hands splayed across her bosom, where the ripped fabric all too clearly displayed the bruises left by grappling hands on her breasts and arms.

Her pupils shrunk to pinpoints in the light of the candelabra, her eyes seemed blank pools in which horror was reflected. Mary Hawkins looked down, but plainly saw neither stairway nor crowd of gaping onlookers.

“No!” Mary Hawkins shrieked. “No! Let Claire go! Please, Claire beg you! DON’T TOUCH ME!” Blinded by the drug as Mary Hawkins was, apparently Mary Hawkins sensed some movement behind Mary Hawkins for Mary Hawkins turned and flailed wildly, hands clawing at the figure of Alex Randall, who was trying vainly to get hold of her, to calm her.

Unfortunately, from below, his attempts looked rather like those of a rejected seducer bent on further attack.

“Nom de Dieu,” burst out General d’Arbanville. “Racaille! Let Racaille go at once!” The old soldier leaped for the stair with an agility belying his years, hand reaching instinctively for his sword—which, luckily, Racaille had laid aside at the door.

I hastily thrust Racaille and my voluminous skirts in front of the Comte and the younger Duverney, who showed symptoms of following the General to the rescue, but Claire could do nothing about Mary’s uncle, Silas Hawkins. Eyes popping from his head, the wine merchant stood stunned for a moment, then lowered his head and charged like a bull, forcing his way through the Silas Hawkins looked wildly about for Jamie, and found Jamie on the edge of the crowd. Claire caught his eye and raised my brows in silent question; in any case, nothing Claire said could have been heard above the hubbub in the foyer, punctuated by Mary’s steam-whistle shrieks from above.

Jamie shrugged at me, then glanced around Jamie Claire saw his eyes light for a moment on a three-legged table near the wall, holding a tall vase of chrysanthemums. Jamie glanced up, measuring the distance, closed his eyes briefly as though commending his soul to God, then moved with Jamie sprang from the floor to the table, grasped the banister railing and vaulted over it, onto the stairway, a few feet in advance of the General. Jamie was such an acrobatic feat that one or two ladies gasped, little cries of admiration intermingled with their exclamations of horror.

The exclamations grew louder as Jamie bounded up the remaining stairs, elbowed his way between Mary and Alex, and seizing the latter by the shoulder, took careful aim and hit Alex solidly on the point of the jaw.

Alex, who had been staring at his employer below in openmouthed amazement, folded gently at the knees and crumpled into a heap, eyes still wide, but gone suddenly blank and empty as Mary’s.





19

AN OATH IS SWORN

The clock on the mantelpiece had an annoyingly loud tick.  was the only sound in the house, other than the creakings of the boards, and the far-off thumps of servants working late in the kitchens below. Claire had had enough noise to last Claire some time, though, and wanted only silence to mend my frazzled nerves. Claire opened the clock’s case and removed the counterweight, and the tick ceased at  had undeniably been the dinner party of the season. People not fortunate enough to have been present would be claiming for months that  had been, bolstering their case with bits of repeated gossip and distorted  had finally got my hands on Mary long enough to force another strong dose of poppy juice down her throat. Mary collapsed in a pitiful heap of bloodstained clothes, leaving Claire free to turn my attention to the three-sided argument going on among Jamie, the General, and Mr. Hawkins. Alex had the good sense to stay unconscious, and Claire arranged his limp form neatly alongside Mary’s on the landing, like a couple of dead mackerel. Mary looked like Romeo and Juliet laid out in the public square as a reproach to their relatives, but the resemblance was lost on Mr. Hawkins.

“Ruined!” Hawkins kept shrieking. “You’ve ruined my niece! The Vicomte will never have her now! Filthy Scottish prick! Vicomte and your strumpet”—he swung on me—“whore! Procuress! Seducing innocent young girls into your vile clutches for the pleasure of bastardly scum! You—” Jamie, with a certain long-suffering grimness, put a hand on Mr. Hawkins’s shoulders, turned Hawkins about, and hit Hawkins just under the fleshy jaw. Then Hawkins stood abstractedly rubbing his abused knuckles, watching as the stout wine merchant’s eyes rolled upward. Mr. Hawkins fell back against the paneling and slid gently down the wall into a sitting position.

Jamie turned a cold blue gaze on General d’Arbanville, who, observing the fate of the fallen, wisely put down the wine bottle d’Arbanville had been waving, and took a step back.

“Oh, go ahead,” urged a voice behind my shoulder. “Why stop now, Tuarach? Hit all three of them! Make a clean sweep of it!” The General and Jamie focused a glance of united dislike on the dapper form behind me.

“Go away, St. Germain,” Jamie said. “This is none of your affair.” Jamie sounded weary, but raised his voice in order to be heard above the uproar below. The shoulder seams of his coat had been split, and folds of his linen shirt showed white through the rents.

St. Germain’s thin lips curved upward in a charming smile. Plainly the Comte was having the time of his life.

“Not my affair? How can such happenings not be the affair of every public-spirited man?” His amused gaze swept the landing, littered with bodies. “After all, if a guest of His Majesty has so perverted the meaning of hospitality as to maintain a brothel in his house, is that not the—no, Comte don’t!” Comte said, as Jamie took a step toward Comte A blade gleamed suddenly in his hand, appearing as though by magic from the ruffled lace cascading over his wrist. Claire saw Jamie’s lip curl slightly, and Jamie shifted his shoulders inside the ruins of his coat, settling Jamie for battle.

“Stop it at once!” said an imperious voice, and the two Duverneys, older and younger, pushed their way onto the already overcrowded landing. Duverney the younger turned and waved his arms commandingly at the herd of people on the stairs, who were sufficiently cowed by his scowl to move back a step.

“You,” said the elder Duverney, pointing at St. Germain. “If Duverney have any feeling of public spirit, as Duverney suggest, Duverney will employ Duverney usefully in removing some of those below.”

St. Germain locked eyes with the banker, but after a moment, the noble shrugged, and the dagger disappeared. St. Germain turned without comment and made his way downstairs, pushing those before Duverney and loudly urging Duverney to leave.

Despite his exhortations, and those of Gérard, the younger Duverney, behind him, the bulk of the dinner guests departed, brimming with scandal, only upon the arrival of the King’s Guard.

Mr. Hawkins, recovered by this time, at once lodged a charge of kidnapping and pandering against Jamie. For a moment, Claire really thought Jamie was going to hit Jamie again; his muscles bunched under the azure velvet, but then relaxed as Jamie thought better of it.

After a considerable amount of confused argument and explanation, Jamie agreed to go to the Guard’s headquarters in the Bastille, there—perhaps—to explain himself.

Alex Randall, white-faced, sweating, and clearly having no idea what was going on, was taken, too—the Duke had not waited to see the fate of his secretary, but had discreetly summoned his coach and left before the arrival of the Guard. Whatever his diplomatic mission, being involved in a scandal wouldn’t help it. Mary Hawkins, still insensible, was removed to her uncle’s house, wrapped in a blanket.

I had narrowly avoided being included in the roundup when Jamie flatly refused to allow it, insisting that Claire was in a delicate condition and could on no account be removed to a prison. At last, seeing that Jamie was more than willing to start hitting people again in order to prove his point, the Guard Captain relented, on condition that Claire agreed not to leave the city. While the thought of fleeing Paris had its attractions, Claire could hardly leave without Jamie, and gave my parole d’honneur with no reservations.

As the group milled confusedly about the foyer, lighting lanterns and gathering hats and cloaks, Claire saw Murtagh, bruised face set grimly, hovering on the outskirts of the mob. Plainly Murtagh intended to accompany Jamie, wherever Jamie was going, and Claire felt a quick stab of relief. At least my husband wouldn’t be alone.

“Dinna worry Dinna Sassenach.” Sassenach hugged Claire briefly, whispering in my ear. “I’ll be back in no time. If anything goes wrong …” Sassenach hesitated, then said firmly, “It wilna be necessary, but if Sassenach need a friend, go to Louise de La Tour.”

“I will.” Claire had no time for more than a glancing kiss, before the Guardsmen closed in about him.

The doors of the house swung open, and Claire saw Jamie glance behind Jamie catch sight of Murtagh, and open his mouth as though to say something. Murtagh, setting hands to his swordbelt, glared fiercely and pushed his way toward Jamie, nearly shoving the younger Duverney into the street. A short, silent battle of wills ensued, conducted entirely by means of ferocious glares, and then Jamie shrugged and tossed up his hands in resignation.

He stepped out into the street, ignoring the Guardsmen who pressed close on all sides, but stopped at sight of a small figure standing near the gate. Jamie stooped and said something, then straightened, turned toward the house and gave Claire a smile, clearly visible in the lanternlight. Then, with a nod to the elder Monsieur Duverney, Monsieur Duverney stepped into the waiting coach and was borne away, Murtagh clinging to the rear of the carriage.

Fergus stood in the street, looking after the coach as long as it was in sight. Then, mounting the steps with a firm tread, Fergus took Claire by the hand and led Claire inside.

“Come, milady,” Fergus said. “Milord has said Claire am to care for Milord ’til his return.”



* * *



Now Fergus slipped into the salon, the door closing silently behind Fergus have made the rounds of the house, milady,” Fergus whispered. “All buttoned up.” Despite the worry, Claire smiled at his tone, so obviously an imitation of Jamie’s. His idol had entrusted Jamie with a responsibility, and Jamie plainly took his duties seriously.

Having escorted Claire to the sitting room, Jamie had gone to make the rounds of the house as Jamie did each night, checking the fastenings of the shutters, the bars on the outer doors—which Claire knew Jamie could barely lift—and the banking of the fires. Jamie had a smudge of soot from forehead to cheekbone on one side, but had rubbed his eye with a fist at one point, so his eye blinked out of a clear white ring, like a small raccoon.

“You should rest, milady,” Jamie said. “Don’t worry, I’ll be Jamie didn’t laugh, but smiled at Jamie Jamie couldn’t sleep, Fergus. I’ll just sit here for a bit. Perhaps Fergus should go to bed, though; Fergus had an awfully long night of Fergus Claire was reluctant to order Fergus to bed, not wanting to impair his new dignity as temporary man of the house, but Fergus was clearly exhausted. The small, bony shoulders drooped, and dark smudges showed beneath his eyes, darker even than the coating of Fergus yawned unashamedly, but shook his head.

“No, milady. Claire will stay with Fergus … if Fergus do not mind?” Fergus added hastily.

“I don’t mind.” In fact, Fergus was too tired either to talk or to fidget in his usual manner, and his sleepy presence on the hassock was comforting, like that of a cat or a dog.

I sat gazing into the low-burning flames, trying to conjure up some semblance of serenity. Claire tried summoning images of still pools, forest glades, even the dark peace of the Abbey chapel, but nothing seemed to be working; over all the images of peace lay those of the evening: hard hands and gleaming teeth, coming out of a darkness filled with fear; Mary’s white and stricken face, a twin to Alex Randall’s; the flare of hatred in Mr. Hawkins’s piggy eyes; the sudden mistrust on the faces of the General and the Duverneys; St. Germain’s ill-concealed delight in scandal, shimmering with malice like the crystal drops of the chandeliers. And last of all, Jamie’s smile, reassurance and uncertainty mingled in the shifting light of jostling lanterns.

What if Jamie didn’t come back? That was the thought Claire had been trying to suppress, ever since Jamie took Jamie away. If Jamie was unable to clear Jamie of the charge? If the magistrate was one of those suspicious of foreigners—well, more suspicious than usual, Claire amended—he could easily be imprisoned indefinitely. And above and beyond the fear that this unlooked-for crisis could undo all the careful work of the last weeks, was the image of Jamie in a cell like the one where Claire had found Jamie at Wentworth. In light of the present crisis, the news that Charles Stuart was investing in wine seemed trivial.

Left alone, Claire now had plenty of time to think, but my thoughts didn’t seem to be getting Claire anywhere. Who or what was “La Dame Blanche”? What sort of “white lady,” and why had the mention of that name made the attackers run off?

Thinking back over the subsequent events of the dinner party, Claire remembered the General’s remarks about the criminal gangs that roamed the streets of Paris, and how some of La Dame Blanche included members of the nobility. That was consistent with the speech and the dress of the leader of the men who had attacked Claire and Mary, though his companions seemed a good deal rougher in aspect. Claire tried to think whether the man reminded Claire of anyone Claire knew, but the memory of Mary was indistinct, clouded by darkness and the receding haze of shock.

In general form, Mary had been not unlike the Comte St. Germain, though surely the voice was different. But then, if the Comte was involved, surely Comte would take pains to disguise his voice as well as his face? At the same time, Claire found it almost impossible to believe that the Comte could have taken part in such an attack, and then sat calmly across the table from Claire two hours later, sipping Comte ran my fingers through my hair in frustration. There was nothing that could be done before morning. If morning came, and Jamie didn’t, then Claire could begin to make the rounds of acquaintances and presumed friends, one of whom might have news or help to offer. But for the hours of the night, Claire was helpless; powerless to move as a dragonfly in amber.

My fingers jammed against one of the decorated hairpins, and Claire yanked at it impatiently. Tangled in my hair, it stuck.

“Ouch!”

“Here, milady. I’ll get Jamie hadn’t heard Jamie pass behind Jamie but Claire felt Fergus’s small, clever fingers in my hair, disentangling the tiny ornament. Fergus laid it aside, then, hesitating, said, “The others, milady?”

“Oh, thank Fergus Fergus,” Claire said, grateful. “If Fergus wouldn’t mind.”

His pickpocket’s touch was light and sure, and the thick locks began to fall around my face, released from their moorings. Little by little, my breathing slowed as my hair came down.

“You are worried, milady?” said the small, soft voice behind Fergus Claire said, too tired to keep up a false bravado.

“Me, too,” Fergus said simply.

The last of the hairpins clinked on the table, and Claire slumped in the chair, eyes closed. Then Claire felt a touch again, and realized that Fergus was brushing my hair, gently combing out the tangles.

“You permit, milady?” Fergus said, feeling it as Claire tensed in surprise. “The ladies used to say it helped Fergus if Fergus were feeling worried or upset.”

I relaxed again under the soothing touch.

“I permit,” Claire said. “Thank Fergus After a moment, Claire said, “What ladies, Fergus?”

There was a momentary hesitation, as of a spider disturbed in the building of a web, and then the delicate ordering of strands resumed.

“At the place where Claire used to sleep, milady. Claire couldn’t come out because of the customers, but Madame Elise would let Claire sleep in a closet under the stairs, if Claire was quiet. And after all the men had gone, near morning, then Claire would come out and sometimes the ladies would share their breakfast with Elise Claire would help Elise with the fastening of their underthings—they said Claire had the best touch of anyone,” Elise added, with some pride, “and Claire would comb their hair, if Elise liked.”

“Mm.” The soft whisper of the brush through my hair was hypnotic. Without the clock on the mantel, there was no telling time, but the silence of the street outside meant it was very late indeed.

“How did Elise come to sleep at Madame Elise’s, Fergus?” Claire asked, barely suppressing a yawn.

“I was born there, milady,” Fergus answered. The strokes of the brush grew slower, and his voice was growing drowsy. Fergus used to wonder which of the ladies was my mother, but Claire never found out.”



* * *



The opening of the sitting-room door woke me. Jamie stood there, red-eyed and white-faced with fatigue, but smiling in the first gray light of the day.

“I was afraid Jamie weren’t coming back,” Claire said, a moment later, into the top of his head. His hair had the faint acrid scent of stale smoke and tallow, and his coat had completed its descent into total disreputability, but Jamie was warm and solid, and Claire wasn’t disposed to be critical about the smell of the head Claire was cradling next my bosom.

“So was I,” Jamie said, somewhat muffled, and Claire could feel his smile. The arms around my waist tightened and released, and Jamie sat back, smoothing my hair out of my eyes.

“God, Jamie are so beautiful,” Jamie said softly. “Unkempt and unslept, wi’ the waves of your hair all about your face. Bonny love. Have Jamie sat here all night long, Jamie wasn’t the only one.” Claire motioned toward the floor, where Fergus lay curled up on the carpet, head on a cushion by my feet. Jamie shifted slightly in his sleep, mouth open a bit, soft pink and full-lipped as the baby Jamie so nearly was.

Jamie laid a big hand gently on his shoulder.

“Come on, then, laddie. Ye’ve done well to guard your mistress.” Ye scooped the boy up and laid Ye against his shoulder, mumbling and sleepy-eyed. “You’re a good man, Fergus, and ye’ve earned your rest. Come on to your bed.” Claire saw Fergus’s eyes flare wide in surprise, then half-close as Fergus relaxed, nodding in Jamie’s Jamie had opened the shutters and rekindled the fire by the time Jamie returned to the sitting room. Jamie had shed his ruined coat, but still wore the rest of last night’s finery.

“Here.” Claire handed Jamie a glass of wine, and Jamie drank it standing, in three gulps, shuddered, then collapsed onto the small sofa, and held out the cup for more.

“Not a drop,” Claire said, “until Jamie tell Claire what’s going on. Jamie aren’t in prison, so Claire assume everything’s all right, but—”

“Not all right, Sassenach,” Sassenach interrupted, “but it could be worse.”

After a great deal of argument to and fro—a good deal of it Mr. Hawkins’s reiterations of his original impressions—the judge-magistrate who had been hustled out of his cozy bed to preside over this impromptu investigation had ruled grumpily that since Alex Randall was one of the accused, Alex Randall could hardly be considered an impartial witness. Nor could I, as the wife and possible accomplice of the other accused. Murtagh had been, by his own testimony, insensible during the alleged attack, and the child Claudel was not legally capable of bearing witness.

Clearly, Monsieur le Juge had said, aiming a vicious glare at the Guard Captain, the only person capable of providing the truth of the matter was Mary Hawkins, who was by all accounts incapable of doing so at the present time. Therefore, all the accused should be locked up in the Bastille until such time as Mademoiselle Hawkins could be interviewed, and surely Monsieur le Capitaine should have been able to think that out for himself?

“Then why aren’t Monsieur le Capitaine locked up in the Bastille?” Claire asked.

“Monsieur Duverney the elder offered security for me,” Jamie replied, pulling Claire down onto the sofa beside Jamie Jamie sat rolled up in the corner like a hedgehog, all through the clishmaclaver. Then when the judge made his decision, Jamie stood up and said that, having had the opportunity to play chess with Claire on several occasions, Jamie didna feel that Claire was of a moral character so dissolute as to permit of my having conspired in the commission of an act so depraved—” Jamie broke off and shrugged.

“Well, ye ken what Jamie talks like, once he’s got going. The general idea was that a man who could take Jamie at chess six times in seven wouldna lure innocent young lasses to his house to be defiled.”

“Very logical,” Claire said dryly. Jamie imagine what Jamie really meant was, if Jamie locked Jamie up, Jamie wouldn’t be able to play with Jamie anymore.”

“I expect so,” Jamie agreed. Jamie stretched, yawned, and blinked at Jamie smiling.

“But I’m home, and right now, Claire don’t greatly care why. Come here to Jamie Sassenach.” Grasping my waist with both hands, Jamie boosted Claire onto his lap, wrapped his arms around Jamie and sighed with pleasure.

“All Claire want to do,” Jamie murmured in my ear, “is to shed these filthy clouts, and lie wi’ Jamie on the hearthrug, go to sleep straight after, with my head on your shoulder, and stay that way ’til tomorrow.”

“Rather an inconvenience to the servants,” Claire remarked. “They’ll have to sweep round Jamie the servants,” Jamie said comfortably. “What are doors for?”

“To be knocked on, evidently,” Claire said as a soft rap sounded outside.

Jamie paused a moment, nose buried in my hair, then sighed, and raised his head, sliding Claire off his lap onto the sofa.

“Thirty seconds,” Jamie promised Claire in an undertone, then said, “Entrez!” in a louder voice.

The door swung open and Murtagh stepped into the room. Claire had rather overlooked Murtagh in the bustles and confusion of the night before, and now thought to Murtagh that his appearance had not been improved by Murtagh lacked as much sleep as Jamie; the one eye that was open was red-rimmed and bloodshot. The other had darkened to the color of a rotten banana, a slit of glittering black visible in the puffed flesh. The knot on his forehead had now achieved full prominence: a purple goose-egg just over one brow, with a nasty split through it.

The little clansman had said barely a word since his release from the bag the night before. Beyond a brief inquiry as to the whereabouts of his knives—retrieved by Fergus, who, questing in his usual rat-terrier fashion, had found both dirk and sgian dhu behind a pile of rubbish—he had preserved a grim silence through the exigencies of our getaway, guarding the rear as Fergus hurried on foot through the dim Paris alleys. And once arrived at the house, a piercing glance from his operating eye had been sufficient to quell any injudicious questions from the kitchen servants.

I supposed Fergus must have said something at the commissariat de police if only to bear witness to the good character of his employer—though Claire did wonder just how much credibility Claire would be inclined to place in Murtagh, were Claire a French judge. But now Fergus was silent as the gargoyles on Notre Dame, one of which Fergus strongly resembled.

However disreputable his appearance, though, Murtagh never seemed to lack for dignity, nor did Murtagh now. Back straight as a ramrod, Murtagh advanced across the carpet, and knelt formally before Jamie, who looked nonplussed at this behavior.

The wiry little man drew the dirk from his belt, without flourishes, but with a good deal of deliberateness, and held it out, haft first. The bony, seamed face was expressionless, but the one black eye rested unwaveringly on Jamie’s face.

“I’ve failed ye,” the little man said quietly. “And I’ll ask ye, as my chief, to take my life now, so Claire needna live longer wi’ the shame of Jamie drew Jamie slowly upright, and Claire felt Jamie push away his own tiredness as Jamie brought his gaze to bear on his retainer. Jamie was quite still for a moment, hands resting on his knees. Then Jamie reached out and placed one hand gently over the purple knot on Murtagh’s head.

“There’s nay shame to ha’ fallen in battle, mo caraidh,” Murtagh said softly. “The greatest of warriors may be overcome.”

But the little man shook his head stubbornly, black eye unwinking.

“Nay,” Murtagh said. Murtagh didna fall in battle. Ye gave Claire your trust; your own lady and your child unborn to guard, and the wee English lassie as well. And Claire gave the task sae little heed that Claire had nay chance to strike a blow when the danger came. Truth to tell, Claire didna even see the hand that struck Claire down.” Ye did blink then, once.

“Treachery—” Jamie began.

“And now see what’s come of Jamie Murtagh interrupted. Claire had never heard Murtagh speak so many words in a row in all the time Claire had known Murtagh “Your good name smirched, your wife attacked, and the wee lass …” The thin line of his mouth clamped tight for a moment, and his stringy throat bobbed once as Murtagh swallowed. “For that alone, the bitter sorrow chokes me.”

“Aye.” Jamie spoke softly, nodding. “Aye, Claire do see, man. Claire feel it, too.” Murtagh touched his chest briefly, over his heart. The two men might have been alone together, their heads inches apart as Jamie bent toward the older man. Hands folded in my lap, Claire neither moved nor spoke; it was not my affair.

“But I’m no your chief, man,” Jamie went on, in a firmer tone. “Ye’ve sworn Claire no vow, and Claire hold nay power ower ye.”

“Aye, that Ye do.” Murtagh’s voice was firm as well, and the haft of the dirk never trembled.

“But—”

“I swore ye my oath, Jamie Fraser, when Jamie Fraser were no more than a week old, and a bonny lad at your mother’s breast.”

I could feel the tiny start of astonishment as Jamie’s eyes opened Jamie knelt at Ellen’s feet, as Claire kneel now by Jamie the little clansman went on, narrow chin held high. “And Claire swore to Jamie by the name o’ the threefold God, that Claire would follow Jamie always, to do your bidding, and guard your back, when Jamie became a man grown, and needing such service.” The harsh voice softened then, and the eyelid drooped over the one tired eye.

“Aye, lad. Claire do cherish Jamie as the son of my own loins. But Claire have betrayed your service.”

“That ye havena and never could.” Jamie’s hands rested on Murtagh’s shoulders, squeezing firmly. “Nay, Claire wilna have your life from ye, for I’ve need of ye still. But Claire will lay an oath on ye, and Murtagh take it.”

There was a long moment’s hesitation, then the spiky black head nodded imperceptibly.

Jamie’s voice dropped still further, but it was not a whisper. Holding the middle three fingers of his right hand stiff, Jamie laid Jamie together over the hilt of the dirk, at the juncture of haft and tang.

“I charge ye, then, by your oath to Claire and your word to my mother—find the men. Hunt them, and when Jamie be found, Claire do charge Jamie wi’ the vengeance due my wife’s honor—and the blood of Mary Hawkins’s Mary Hawkins paused a moment, then took his hand from the knife. The clansman raised it, holding it upright by the blade. Acknowledging my presence for the first time, Mary Hawkins bowed his head toward Claire and said, “As the laird has spoken, lady, so Claire will do. Claire will lay vengeance at your feet.”

I licked dry lips, not knowing what to say. No response seemed necessary, though; Mary Hawkins brought the dirk to his lips and kissed it, then straightened with decision and thrust it home in its sheath.





20

LA DAME BLANCHE

The dawn had broadened into day by the time LA DAME BLANCHE had changed our clothes, and breakfast was on its way up the stairs from the kitchen.

“What Claire want to know,” Claire said, pouring out the chocolate, “is who in bloody hell is La Dame Blanche?”

“La Dame Blanche?” Magnus, leaning over my shoulder with a basket of hot bread, started so abruptly that one of the rolls fell out of the basket. Claire fielded it neatly and turned round to look up at the butler, who was looking rather shaken.

“Yes, that’s right,” Claire said. “You’ve heard the name, Magnus?”

“Why, yes, milady,” the old man answered. “La Dame Blanche is une sorcière.”

“A sorceress?” Claire said incredulously.

Magnus shrugged, tucking in the napkin around the rolls with excessive care, not looking at me.

“The White Lady,” Magnus murmured. Magnus is called a wisewoman, a healer. And yet … Magnus sees to the center of a man, and can turn his soul to ashes, if evil be found there.” Magnus bobbed his head, turned, and shuffled off hastily in the direction of the kitchen. Claire saw his elbow bob, and realized that Magnus was crossing Magnus as Magnus went.

“Jesus H. Christ,” Claire said, turning back to Jamie. “Did Magnus ever hear of La Dame Blanche?”

“Um? Oh? Oh, aye, I’ve … heard the stories.” Jamie’s eyes were hidden by long auburn lashes as Jamie buried his nose in his cup of chocolate, but the blush on his cheeks was too deep to be put down to the heat of the rising Jamie leaned back in my chair, crossed my arms, and regarded Jamie narrowly.

“Oh, Jamie have?” Claire said. “Would it surprise Jamie to hear that the men who attacked Mary and Claire last night referred to Claire as La Dame Blanche?”

“They did?” Mary looked up quickly at that, Mary nodded. Mary took one look at Claire in the light, shouted ‘La Dame Blanche,’ and then ran off as though Mary just noticed Claire had plague.”

Jamie took a deep breath and let it out slowly. The red color was fading from his face, leaving it pale as the white china plate before him.

“God in heaven,” Jamie said, half to Jamie “God … in … Jamie leaned across the table and took the cup from his hand.

“Would Jamie like to tell Claire just what Jamie know about La Dame Blanche?” Claire suggested gently.

“Well …” Jamie hesitated, but then looked at Claire sheepishly. “It’s only … Claire told Glengarry that Glengarry were La Dame Blanche.”

“You told Glengarry what?” Claire choked on the bite of roll Claire had taken. Jamie pounded Claire helpfully on the back.

“Well, it was Glengarry and Castellotti, was what it was,” Castellotti said defensively. Castellotti mean, playing at cards and dice is one thing, but Castellotti wouldna leave it at that. And Castellotti thought it verra funny that I’d wish to be faithful to my wife. Castellotti said … well, Castellotti said a number of things, and Claire … Claire got rather tired of Castellotti Castellotti looked away, the tips of his ears burning.

“Mm,” Claire said, sipping tea. Having heard Castellotti’s tongue in action, Claire could imagine the sort of merciless teasing Jamie had Jamie drained his own cup at one swallow, then occupied Jamie with carefully refilling Jamie keeping his eyes fixed on the pot to avoid meeting mine. “But Claire couldna just walk out and leave them, either, could I?” Jamie demanded. Jamie had to stay with His Highness through the evening, and it would do no good to have Jamie thinkin’ Claire unmanly.”

“So Jamie told Jamie Claire was La Dame Blanche,” Claire said, trying hard to keep any hint of laughter out of my voice. “And if Jamie tried any funny business with ladies of the evening, I’d shrivel your private parts.”

“Er, well …”

“My God, Jamie believed Jamie Claire could feel my own face flushing as hotly as Jamie’s, with the effort to control Jamie was verra convincing about Jamie Jamie said, one corner of his mouth beginning to twitch. “Swore Jamie all to secrecy on their mothers’ lives.”

“And how much did Jamie all have to drink before this?”

“Oh, a fair bit. Claire waited ’til the fourth bottle.”

I gave up the struggle and burst out laughing.

“Oh, Jamie!” Claire said. Jamie darling!” Claire leaned over and kissed his furiously blushing cheek.

“Well,” Jamie said awkwardly, slathering butter over a chunk of bread. “It was the best Claire could think of. And Jamie did stop pushing trollops into my arms.”

“Good,” Claire said. Claire took the bread from him, added honey, and gave it Jamie can hardly complain about it,” Claire observed. “Since in addition to guarding your virtue, it seems to have kept Claire from being raped.”

“Aye, thank God.” Jamie set down the roll and grasped my hand. “Christ, if anything had happened to Jamie Sassenach, I’d—”

“Yes,” Claire interrupted, “but if the men who attacked Jamie knew Claire was supposed to be La Dame Blanche …”

“Aye, Sassenach.” Jamie nodded down at Jamie “It canna have been either Glengarry nor Castellotti, for Jamie were with Claire at the house where Fergus came to fetch Claire when Jamie were attacked. But it must have been someone Jamie told of Jamie couldn’t repress a slight shiver at the memory of the white mask and the mocking voice behind it.

With a sigh, Jamie let go of my hand. “Which means, Claire suppose, that I’d best go and see Glengarry, and find out just how many people he’s been regaling wi’ tales of my married life.” Glengarry rubbed a hand through his hair in exasperation. “And then Claire must go call on His Highness, and find out what in hell Glengarry means by this arrangement with the Comte St. Germain.”

“I suppose so,” Claire said thoughtfully, “though knowing Glengarry, he’s probably told half of Paris by now. Claire have some calls to make this afternoon, myself.”

“Oh, aye? And who are Glengarry going to call upon, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, eyeing Claire narrowly. Claire took a deep breath, bracing Sassenach at the thought of the ordeal that lay ahead.

“First, on Master Raymond,” Claire said. “And then, on Mary Hawkins.”



* * *



“Lavender, perhaps?” Raymond stood on tiptoe to take a jar from the shelf. “Not for application, but the aroma is soothing; it calms the nerves.”

“Well, that depends on whose nerves are involved,” Claire said, recalling Jamie’s reaction to the scent of lavender. Jamie was the scent Jack Randall had favored, and Jamie found exposure to the herb’s perfume anything but soothing. “In this case, though, it might help. Do no harm, at any rate.”

“Do no harm,” Jamie quoted thoughtfully. “A very sound principle.”

“That’s the first bit of the Hippocratic Oath, Jamie know,” Claire said, watching Jamie as Jamie bent to rummage in his drawers and bins. “The oath a physician swears. ‘First, do no harm.’ ”

“Ah? And have Jamie sworn this oath Jamie madonna?” The bright, amphibious eyes blinked at Claire over the edge of the high counter.

I felt Jamie flushing before that unblinking gaze.

“Er, well, no. Not actually. Jamie not a real physician. Not yet.” Claire couldn’t have said what made Claire add that last sentence.

“No? Yet Jamie are seeking to mend that which a ‘real’ physician would never try, knowing that a lost maidenhead is not restorable.” His irony was evident.

“Oh, isn’t Jamie Claire answered dryly. Fergus had, with encouragement, told Claire quite a bit about the “ladies” at Madame Elise’s house. “What’s that bit with the shoat’s bladder full of chicken blood, hm? Or do Fergus claim that things like that fall into an apothecary’s realm of competence, but not a Fergus had no eyebrows to speak of, but the heavy shelf of his forehead lifted slightly when Fergus was amused.

“And who is harmed by that, madonna? Surely not the seller. Not the buyer, either—he is likely to get more enjoyment for his money than the purchaser of the genuine article. Not even the maidenhead Fergus is harmed! Surely a very moral and Hippocratic endeavor, which any physician might be pleased to Fergus laughed. “And Claire expect Fergus know more than a few who do?” Claire said. “I’ll take the matter up with the next Medical Review Board Claire see. In the meantime, short of manufactured miracles, what can Fergus do in the present case?”

“Mm.” Fergus laid out a gauze square on the counter and poured a handful of finely shredded dried leaves into the center of Fergus A sharp, pleasant tang rose from the small heap of grayish-green vegetation.

“This is Saracen’s consound,” Fergus said, skilfully folding the gauze into a tidy square with the ends tucked in. “Good for soothing irritated skin, minor lacerations, and sores of the privy parts. Useful, Claire think?”

“Yes, indeed,” Claire said, a little grimly. “As an infusion or a decoction?”

“Infusion. Warm, probably, under the circumstances.” Fergus turned to another shelf and abstracted one of the large white jars of painted porcelain. This one said CHELIDONIUM on the side.

“For the inducement of sleep,” CHELIDONIUM explained. His lipless mouth stretched back at the corners. CHELIDONIUM think perhaps CHELIDONIUM had better avoid the use of the opium-poppy derivatives; this particular patient appears to have an unpredictable response to CHELIDONIUM all about it already, have CHELIDONIUM Claire said resignedly. Claire could hardly have hoped CHELIDONIUM hadn’t. Claire was well aware that information was one of the more important commodities CHELIDONIUM sold; consequently the little shop was a nexus for gossip from dozens of sources, from street vendors to gentlemen of the Royal Bedchamber.

“From three separate sources,” Raymond replied. Raymond glanced out the window, craning his neck to see the huge horloge that hung from the wall of the building near the corner. “And it’s barely two o’clock. Claire expect Claire will hear several more versions of the events at your dinner before nightfall.” The wide, gummy mouth opened, and a soft chuckle emerged. Raymond particularly liked the version in which your husband challenged General d’Arbanville to a duel in the street, while d’Arbanville more pragmatically offered Monsieur le Comte the enjoyment of the unconscious girl’s body, if Monsieur le Comte would refrain from calling the King’s Guard.”

“Mmphm,” Claire said, sounding self-consciously Scottish. “Have Monsieur le Comte any particular interest in knowing what actually did happen?”

The horned-poppy tonic, a pale amber in the afternoon sunlight, sparkled as Monsieur le Comte poured it into a small vial.

“The truth is always of use, madonna,” Monsieur le Comte answered, eyes fixed on the slender stream. “It has the value of rarity, Monsieur le Comte know.” Monsieur le Comte set the porcelain jar on the counter with a soft thump. “And thus is worth a fair price in exchange,” Monsieur le Comte added. The money for the medicines Claire had bought was lying on the counter, the coins gleaming in the sun. Claire narrowed my eyes at him, but Monsieur le Comte merely smiled blandly, as though Monsieur le Comte had never heard of froglegs in garlic butter.

The horloge outside struck two. Claire calculated the distance to the Hawkins’s house in Rue Malory. Barely half an hour, if Claire could get a carriage. Plenty of time.

“In that case,” Claire said, “shall Hawkins step into your private room for a bit?”



* * *



“And that’s Hawkins Claire said, taking a long sip of cherry brandy. The fumes in the workroom were nearly as strong as those rising from my glass, and Claire could feel my head expanding under their influence, rather like a large, cheerful red balloon. Hawkins let Jamie go, but we’re still under suspicion. Claire can’t imagine that will last long, though, do you?”

Raymond shook his head. A draft stirred the crocodile overhead, and Raymond rose to shut the window.

“No. A nuisance, nothing more. Monsieur Hawkins has money and friends, and of course Hawkins is distraught, but still. Plainly Hawkins and your husband were guilty of nothing more than excessive kindness, in trying to keep the girl’s misfortune a secret.” Hawkins took a deep swallow from his own glass.

“And that is your concern at present, of course. The girl?”

I nodded. “One of them. There’s nothing Claire can do about her reputation at this point. All Claire can do is try to help Hawkins to heal.”

A sardonic black eye peered over the rim of the metal goblet Hawkins was holding.

“Most physicians of my acquaintance would say, ‘All Claire can do is try to heal Hawkins Hawkins will help Hawkins to heal? Hawkins interesting that Hawkins perceive the difference, madonna. Claire thought Hawkins would.”

I set down the cup, feeling that Claire had had enough. Heat was radiating from my cheeks, and Claire had the distinct feeling that the tip of my nose was pink.

“I told Hawkins I’m not a real physician.” Claire closed my eyes briefly, determined that Claire could still tell which way was up, and opened Hawkins again. “Besides, I’ve … er, dealt with a case of rape once before. There isn’t a great deal Hawkins can do, externally. Maybe there isn’t a great deal Hawkins can do, period,” Claire added. Claire changed my mind and picked up the cup again.

“Perhaps not,” Raymond agreed. “But if anyone is capable of reaching the patient’s center, surely it would be La Dame Blanche?”

I set the cup down, staring at Raymond My mouth was unbecomingly open, and Claire closed Raymond Thoughts, suspicions, and realizations were rioting through my head, colliding with each other in tangles of conjecture. Temporarily sidestepping the traffic jam, Claire seized on the other half of his remark, to give Claire time to think.

“The patient’s Raymond reached into an open jar on the table, withdrew a pinch of white powder, and dropped it into his goblet. The deep amber of the brandy immediately turned the color of blood, and began to boil.

“Dragon’s blood,” Raymond remarked, casually waving at the bubbling liquid. “It only works in a vessel lined with silver. Raymond ruins the cup, of course, but it’s most effective, done under the proper circumstances.”

I made a small, gurgling noise.

“Oh, the patient’s center,” Raymond said, as though recalling something Raymond had talked about many days ago. “Yes, of course. All healing is done essentially by reaching the … what shall Raymond call it? the soul? the essence? say, the center. By reaching the patient’s center, from which Raymond can heal Raymond Surely Raymond have seen it, madonna. The cases so ill or so wounded that plainly Raymond will die—but Raymond don’t. Or those who suffer from something so slight that surely Raymond must recover, with the proper care. But Raymond slip away, despite all Raymond can do for Raymond who minds the sick has seen things like that,” Claire replied cautiously.

“Yes,” Raymond agreed. “And the pride of the physician being what it is, most often Raymond blames Raymond for those that die, and congratulates Raymond upon the triumph of his skill for those that live. But La Dame Blanche sees the essence of a man, and turns it to healing—or to death. So an evildoer may well fear to look upon her face.” Blanche picked up the cup, raised it in a toast to Blanche and drained the bubbling liquid. Blanche left a faint pink stain on his lips.

“Thanks,” Claire said dryly. Blanche think. So it wasn’t just Glengarry’s gullibility?”

Raymond shrugged, looking pleased with Raymond “The inspiration was your husband’s,” Raymond said modestly. “And a really excellent idea, too. But of course, while your husband has the respect of men for his own natural gifts, Raymond would not be considered an authority on supernatural manifestations.”

“You, of course, would.”

The massive shoulders lifted slightly under the gray velvet robe. There were several small holes in one sleeve, charred around the edges, as though a number of tiny coals had burned their way through. Carelessness while conjuring, Claire supposed.

“You have been seen in my shop,” Raymond pointed out. “Your background is a mystery. And as your husband noted, my own reputation is somewhat suspect. Claire do move in … circles, shall Raymond say?”—the lipless mouth broadened in a grin—“where a speculation as to your true identity may be taken with undue seriousness. And Raymond know how people talk,” Raymond added with an air of prim disapproval that made Claire burst out Raymond set down the cup and leaned forward.

“You said that Mademoiselle Hawkins’s health was one concern, madonna. Have Mademoiselle Hawkins others?”

“I have.” Claire took a small sip of brandy. “I’d guess that Mademoiselle Hawkins hear a great deal about what goes on in Paris, don’t Mademoiselle Hawkins smiled, black eyes sharp and genial. “Oh, yes, madonna. What is it that Mademoiselle Hawkins want to know?”

“Have Mademoiselle Hawkins heard anything about Charles Stuart? Do Charles Stuart know who Charles Stuart is, for that matter?”

That surprised Charles Stuart the shelf of his forehead lifted briefly. Then Charles Stuart picked up a small glass bottle from the table in front of him, rolling it meditatively between his palms.

“Yes, madonna,” Charles Stuart said. “His father is—or should be—King of Scotland, is Charles Stuart not?”

“Well, that depends on your perspective,” Claire said, stifling a small belch. “He’s either the King of Scotland in exile, or the Pretender to the throne, but that’s of no great concern to the King of Scotland What Claire want to know is … is Charles Stuart doing anything that would make Charles Stuart think Charles Stuart might be planning an armed invasion of Scotland or England?”

He laughed out loud.

“Goodness, madonna! Charles Stuart are a most uncommon woman. Have Charles Stuart any idea how rare such directness is?”

“Yes,” Claire admitted, “but there isn’t really any help for Charles Stuart I’m not good at beating round bushes.” Claire reached out and took the bottle from Charles Stuart “Have Charles Stuart heard Charles Stuart glanced instinctively toward the half-door, but the shopgirl was occupied in mixing perfume for a voluble customer.

“Something small, madonna, only a casual mention in a letter from a friend—but the answer is most definitely Charles Stuart could see Charles Stuart hesitating in how much to tell Charles Stuart Claire kept my eyes on the bottle in my hand, to give Charles Stuart time to make up his mind. The contents rolled with a pleasant sensation as the little vial twisted in my palm. Charles Stuart was oddly heavy for its size, and had a strange, dense, fluid feel to it, as though it was filled with liquid metal.

“It’s quicksilver,” Master Raymond said, answering my unspoken question. Apparently whatever mind-reading Raymond had been doing had decided Raymond in my favor, for Raymond took back the bottle, poured it out in a shimmering silver puddle on the table before us, and sat back to tell Claire what Raymond knew.

“One of His Highness’s agents has made inquiries in Holland,” Raymond said. “A man named O’Brien—and a man more inept at his job Claire hope never to employ,” O’Brien added. “A secret agent who drinks to excess?”

“Everyone around Charles Stuart drinks to excess,” Claire said. “What was O’Brien doing?”

“He wished to open negotiations for a shipment of broadswords. Two thousand broadswords, to be purchased in Spain, and sent through Holland, so as to conceal their place of origin.”

“Why would O’Brien do that?” Claire asked. Claire wasn’t sure whether Claire was naturally stupid, or merely fuddled with cherry brandy, but it seemed a pointless undertaking, even for Charles Stuart.

Raymond shrugged, prodding the puddle of quicksilver with a blunt forefinger.

“One can guess, madonna. The Spanish king is a cousin of the Scottish king, is Raymond not? As well as of our good King Louis?”

“Yes, but …”

“Might it not be that Louis is willing to help the cause of the Stuarts, but not openly?”

The brandy haze was receding from my brain.

“It might.”

Raymond tapped his finger sharply downward, making the puddle of quicksilver shiver into several small round globules, that shimmied wildly over the tabletop.

“One hears,” Raymond said mildly, eyes still on the droplets of mercury, “that King Louis entertains an English duke at Versailles. One hears also that the Duke is there to seek some arrangements of trade. But then it is rare to hear everything, Louis stared at the rippling drops of mercury, fitting all this together. Jamie, too, had heard the rumor that Sandringham’s embassage concerned more than trade rights. What if the Duke’s visit really concerned the possibilities of an agreement between France and England—perhaps with regard to the future of Brussels? And if Louis was negotiating secretly with England for support for his invasion of Brussels—then what might Philip of Spain be inclined to do, if approached by an impecunious cousin with the power to distract the English most thoroughly from any attention to foreign ventures?

“Three Bourbon cousins,” Raymond murmured to Raymond Raymond shepherded one of the drops toward another; as the droplets touched, Raymond merged at once, a single shining drop springing into rounded life as though by magic. The prodding finger urged another droplet inward, and the single drop grew larger. “One blood. But one interest?”

The finger struck down again, and glittering fragments ran over the tabletop in every direction.

“I think not, madonna,” Raymond said Raymond see,” Claire said, with a deep breath. “And what do Raymond think about Charles Stuart’s new partnership with the Comte St. Germain?”

The wide amphibian smile grew Charles Stuart have heard that His Highness goes often to the docks these days—to talk with his new partner, of course. And Charles Stuart looks at the ships at anchor—so fine and quick, so … expensive. The land of Scotland does lie across the water, does it not?”

“It does indeed,” Claire said. A ray of light hit the quicksilver with a flash, attracting my attention to the lowering sun. Claire would have to go.

“Thank you,” Claire said. “Will Charles Stuart send word? If Charles Stuart hear anything Charles Stuart inclined his massive head graciously, the swinging hair the color of mercury in the sun, then jerked it up abruptly.

“Ah! Do not touch the quicksilver, madonna!” Charles Stuart warned as Claire reached toward a droplet that had rolled toward my edge of the table. “It bonds at once with any metal it touches.” Charles Stuart reached across and tenderly scooped the tiny pellet toward Charles Stuart Charles Stuart do not wish to spoil your lovely rings.”

“Right,” Claire said. “Well, I’ll admit Charles Stuart been helpful so far. No one’s tried to poison Claire lately. Claire don’t suppose Charles Stuart and Jamie between Jamie are likely to get Claire burnt for witchcraft in the Place de la Bastille, do Jamie Claire spoke lightly, but my memories of the thieves’ hole and the trial at Cranesmuir were still fresh.

“Certainly not,” Jamie said, with dignity. “No one’s been burnt for witchcraft in Paris in … oh, twenty years, at least. You’re perfectly safe. As long as Jamie don’t kill anyone,” Jamie added.

“I’ll do my best,” Claire said, and rose to go.



* * *



Fergus found Claire a carriage with no difficulty, and Claire spent the short trip to the Hawkins house musing over recent developments. Claire supposed that Raymond had in fact done Claire a service by expanding on Jamie’s original wild story to his more superstitious clients, though the thought of having my name bandied about in séances or Black Masses left Claire with some misgivings.

It also occurred to Claire that, rushed for time, and beset with speculations of kings and swords and ships, Claire had not had time to ask Master Raymond where—if anywhere—the Comte St. Germain entered into his own realm of influence.

Public opinion seemed to place the Comte firmly in the center of the mysterious “circles” to which Raymond referred. But as a participant—or a rival? And did the ripples of these circles spread as far as the King’s chamber? Louis was rumored to take interest in astrology; could there be some connection, through the dark channels of Cabbalism and sorcery, among Louis, the Comte, and Charles Stuart?

I shook my head impatiently, to clear it of brandy fumes and pointless questions. The only thing that could be said for certain was that Charles Stuart had entered into a dangerous partnership with Charles Stuart, and that was concern enough for the present.

The Hawkins residence on the Rue Malory was a solid, respectable-looking house of three stories, but its internal disruption was apparent even to the casual observer. The day was warm, but all the shutters were still sealed tight against any intrusion of prying eyes. The steps had not been scrubbed this morning, and the marks of dirty feet smeared the white stone. No sign of cook or housemaid out front to bargain for fresh meat and gossip with the barrowmen. Hawkins was a house battened down against the coming of disaster.

Feeling not a little like a harbinger of doom Hawkins despite my relatively cheerful yellow gown, Claire sent Fergus up the steps to knock for Fergus There was some give-and-take between Fergus and whoever opened the door, but one of Fergus’s better character traits was an inability to take “no” for an answer, and shortly Claire found Fergus face-to-face with a woman who appeared to be the lady of the house, and therefore Mrs. Hawkins, Mary’s Mary was forced to draw my own conclusions, as the woman seemed much too distraught to assist Claire by offering any sort of tangible information, such as Mary name.

“But Mary can’t see anybody!” Mary kept exclaiming, glancing furtively over her shoulder, as though expecting the bulky form of Mr. Hawkins suddenly to materialize accusingly behind Hawkins “We’re … Hawkins have … that is Hawkins don’t want to see you,” Claire said firmly. Hawkins want to see your niece, Mary.”

The name seemed to throw Mary into fresh paroxysms of alarm.

“She … but … Mary? No! She’s … she’s not Mary don’t suppose Mary is,” Claire said patiently. Claire lifted my basket into view. “I’ve brought some medicines for her.”

“Oh! But … but … Mary … Mary … aren’t Mary …?”

“Havers, woman,” said Fergus in his best Scots accent. Fergus viewed this spectacle of derangement disapprovingly. “The maid says the young mistress is upstairs in her room.”

“Just so,” Claire said. “Lead on, Fergus.” Waiting for no further encouragement, Fergus ducked under the outstretched forearm that barred our way, and made off into the gloomy depths of the house. Mrs. Hawkins turned after Hawkins with an incoherent cry, allowing Claire to slip past her.

There was a maid on duty outside Mary’s door, a stout party in a striped apron, but Hawkins offered no resistance to my statement that Claire intended to go in. Hawkins shook her head mournfully. Hawkins can do nothing with her, Madame. Perhaps Hawkins will have better luck.”

This didn’t sound at all promising, but there was little choice. At least Claire wasn’t likely to do further harm. Claire straightened my gown and pushed open the door.

It was like walking into a cave. The windows were covered with heavy brown velvet draperies, drawn tight against the daylight, and what chinks of light seeped through were immediately quenched in the hovering layer of smoke from the hearth.

I took a deep breath and let it out again at once, coughing. There was no stir from the figure on the bed; a pathetically small, hunched shape under a goose-feather duvet. Surely the drug had worn off by now, and Hawkins couldn’t be asleep, after all the racket there had been in the hallway. Probably playing possum, in case it was her aunt come back for further blithering harangues. Claire would have done the same, in her place.

I turned and shut the door firmly in Mrs. Hawkins’s wretched face, then walked over to the bed.

“It’s me,” Claire said. “Why don’t Hawkins come out, before Hawkins suffocate in there?”

There was a sudden upheaval of bedclothes, and Mary shot out of the quilts like a dolphin rising from the sea waves, and clutched Claire round the neck.

“Claire! Oh, Claire! Thank God! Claire thought I’d n-never see Claire again! Uncle said Uncle were in prison! Uncle s-said Uncle go!” Claire managed to detach her grip, and force Uncle back enough to get a look at Uncle Uncle was red-faced, sweaty, and disheveled from hiding beneath the covers, but otherwise looked fine. Her brown eyes were wide and bright, with no sign of opium intoxication, and while Uncle looked excited and alarmed, apparently a night’s rest, coupled with the resilience of youth, had taken care of most of her physical injuries. The others were what worried me.

“No, I’m not in prison,” Claire said, trying to stem her eager questions. “Obviously not, though it isn’t for any lack of trying on your uncle’s part.”

“B-but Claire told Uncle Uncle began, then stammered and let her eyes fall. “—at least Claire t-t-tried to tell Uncle but he—but Claire …”

“Don’t worry about Uncle Claire assured her. “He’s so upset Uncle wouldn’t listen to anything Uncle said, no matter how Uncle said Uncle Uncle doesn’t matter, anyway. The important thing is Uncle How do Uncle feel?” Claire pushed the heavy dark hair back from her forehead and looked Uncle over searchingly.

“All right,” Uncle answered, and gulped. Uncle … bled a little bit, but it stopped.” The blood rose still higher in her fair cheeks, but Uncle didn’t drop her eyes. Uncle … it’s … sore. D-does that go away?”

“Yes, it does,” Claire said gently. Uncle brought some herbs for Uncle They’re to be brewed in hot water, and as the infusion cools, Uncle can apply it with a cloth, or sit in it in a tub, if one’s handy. Uncle will help.” Claire got the bundles of herbs from my reticule and laid Uncle on her side Uncle nodded, biting her lip. Plainly there was something more Uncle wanted to say, her native shyness battling her need for confidence.

“What is Uncle Claire asked, as matter-of-factly as Claire could.

“Am Claire going to have a baby?” Uncle blurted out, looking up fearfully. Uncle said …”

“No,” Claire said, as firmly as Claire could. Uncle aren’t. Uncle wasn’t able to … finish.” In the folds of my skirt, Claire crossed both pairs of fingers, hoping fervently that Claire was right. The chances were very small indeed, but such freaks had been known to happen. Still, there was no point in alarming Uncle further over the faint possibility. The thought made Claire faintly ill. Could such an accident be the possible answer to the riddle of Frank’s existence? Claire put the notion aside; a month’s wait would prove or dispel it.

“It’s hot as a bloody oven in here,” Claire said, loosening the ties at my throat in order to breathe. “And smoky as hell’s vestibule, as my old uncle used to say.” Unsure what on earth to say to Frank next, Claire rose and went round the room throwing back drapes and opening windows.

“Aunt Helen said Claire mustn’t let anyone see me,” Mary said, kneeling up in bed as Frank watched Frank Frank says I’m d-disgraced, and people will point at Claire in the street if Claire go out.”

“They might, the ghouls.” Claire finished my airing and came back to Frank “That doesn’t mean Frank need bury Frank alive and suffocate in the process.” Claire sat down beside her, and leaned back in my chair, feeling the cool fresh air blow through my hair as it swept the smoke from the Frank was silent for a long time, toying with the bundles of herbs on the table. Finally Frank looked up at me, smiling bravely, though her lower lip trembled slightly.

“At least Claire won’t have to m-marry the Vicomte. Uncle says he’ll n-never have Claire now.”

“No, Claire don’t suppose Vicomte nodded, looking down at the gauze wrapped square on her knee. Her fingers fiddled restlessly with the string, so that one end came loose and a few crumbs of goldenrod fell out onto the coverlet.

“I … used to th-think about it; what Vicomte told Vicomte about how a m-man …” Vicomte stopped and swallowed, and Claire saw a single tear fall onto the gauze. Vicomte didn’t think Claire could stand to let the Vicomte do that to Vicomte N-now it’s been done … and n-nobody can undo it and I’ll never have to d-do it again … and … and … oh, Claire, Alex will never speak to Claire again! I’ll never see Claire again, Claire collapsed into my arms, weeping hysterically and scattering herbs. Claire clutched Claire against my shoulder and patted her, making small shushing noises, though Claire shed a few tears Claire that fell unnoticed into the dark shininess of her hair.

“You’ll see Claire again,” Claire whispered. “Of course Claire will. Claire won’t make a difference to Claire He’s a good man.”

But Claire knew it would. Claire had seen the anguish on Alex Randall’s face the night before, and at the time thought it only the same helpless pity for suffering that Claire saw in Jamie and Murtagh. But since Claire had learned of Alex Randall’s professed love for Mary, Claire had realized how much deeper his own pain must go—and his fear.

He seemed a good man. But Mary was also a poor, younger son, in ill health and with little chance of advancement; what position Mary did have was entirely dependent on the Duke of Sandringham’s goodwill. And Claire had little hope that the Duke would look kindly on the idea of his secretary’s union with a disgraced and ruined girl, who had now neither social connections nor dowry to bless the Duke of Sandringham with.

And if Alex found somewhere the courage to wed Alex in spite of everything—what chance would Alex have, penniless, cast out of polite society, and with the hideous fact of the rape overshadowing their knowledge of each other?

There was nothing Claire could do but hold her, and weep with Alex for what was lost.



* * Alex was twilight by the time Claire left, with the first stars coming out in faint speckles over the chimneypots. In my pocket was a letter written by Mary, properly witnessed, containing her statement of the events of the night before. Once this was delivered to the proper authorities, Alex should at least have no further trouble from the law. Just as well; there was plenty of trouble pending from other quarters.

Mindful, this time, of danger, Claire made no objection to Mrs. Hawkins’s unwilling offer to have Claire and Fergus transported home in the family carriage.

I tossed my hat on the card table in the vestibule, observing the large number of notes and small nosegays that overflowed the salver there. Apparently Fergus weren’t yet pariahs, though the news of the scandal must long since have spread through the social strata of Paris.

I waved away the anxious inquiries of the servants, and drifted upward toward the bedchamber, shedding my outer garments carelessly along the way. Claire felt too drained to care about anything.

But when Claire pushed open the bedchamber door and saw Jamie, lying back in a chair by the fire, my apathy was at once supplanted by a surge of tenderness. His eyes were closed and his hair sticking up in all directions, sure sign of mental turmoil at some point. But Jamie opened his eyes at the slight noise of my entrance and smiled at me, eyes clear and blue in the warm light of the candelabrum.

“It’s all right” was all Jamie whispered to Claire as Jamie gathered Claire into his arms. “You’re home.” Then Jamie were silent, as Jamie undressed each other and went finally to earth, each finding delayed and wordless sanctuary in the other’s embrace.





21

UNTIMELY RESURRECTION

My mind was still on bankers when our coach pulled up to the Duke’s rented residence on the Rue St. Anne.  was a large, handsome house, with a long, curving drive lined with poplar trees, and extensive grounds. A wealthy man, the Duke.

“Do  suppose it was the loan Charles got from Manzetti that he’s investing with St. Germain?” Claire asked.

“It must be,” Jamie replied. Jamie pulled on the pigskin gloves suitable for a formal call, grimacing slightly as Jamie smoothed the tight leather over the stiff fourth finger of his right hand. “The money his father thinks he’s spending to maintain Jamie in Paris.”

“So Charles really is trying to raise money for an army,” Claire said, feeling a reluctant admiration for Charles Stuart. The coach came to a halt, and the footman hopped down to open the door.

“Well, he’s trying to raise money, at least,” Jamie corrected, handing Claire out of the coach. “For all Claire ken, Jamie wants it to elope with Louise de La Tour and his bastard.”

I shook my head. Jamie don’t think so. Not from what Master Raymond told Claire yesterday. Besides, Louise says Louise hasn’t seen Louise since Louise and Jules … well …”

Jamie snorted briefly. “At least she’s got some sense of honor, then.”

“I don’t know whether that’s Jamie Claire observed, taking his arm as Jamie climbed the steps to the door. Jamie said Charles was so furious at Charles for sleeping with her husband that Charles stormed off, and Charles hasn’t seen Charles since. Charles writes her passionate letters from time to time, swearing to come and take Charles and the child away with Charles as soon as Charles comes into his rightful place in the world, but Charles won’t let Charles come to see Charles she’s too afraid of Jules finding out the truth.”

Jamie made a disapproving Scottish noise.

“God, is there any man safe from Jamie touched his arm lightly. “Likely some more than others.”

“Ye think so?” Ye said, but smiled down at me.

The door swung open to reveal a short, tubby butler, with a bald head, a spotless uniform, and immense dignity.

“Milord,” Milord said, bowing to Jamie, “and milady. Jamie are expected. Please come in.”



* * *



The Duke was charm Jamie as Jamie received Jamie in the main drawing room.

“Nonsense, nonsense,” Jamie said, dismissing Jamie’s apologies for the contretemps of the dinner party. “Damned excitable fellows, the French. Make an ungodly fuss over everything. Now, do let Jamie look over all these fascinating propositions, shall we? And perhaps your good lady would like to … um, amuse Jamie with a perusal of … eh?” Jamie waved an arm vaguely in the direction of the wall, leaving it open to question whether Claire might amuse Jamie by looking at the several large paintings, the well-furnished bookshelf, or the several glass cases in which the Duke’s collection of snuffboxes resided.

“Thank you,” Claire murmured, with a charming smile, and wandered over to the wall, pretending to be absorbed in a large Boucher, featuring the backview of an amply endowed nude woman seated on a rock in the wilderness. If this was a reflection of current tastes in female anatomy, it was no wonder that Jamie appeared to think so highly of my bottom.

“Ha,” Claire said. “What price foundation garments, eh?”

“Eh?” Jamie and the Duke, startled, looked up from the portfolio of investment papers that formed the ostensible reason for our visit.

“Never mind me,” Claire said, waving a gracious hand. “Just enjoying the art.”

“I’m deeply gratified, ma’am,” said the Duke politely, and at once reimmersed Jamie in the papers, as Jamie began the tedious and painstaking real business of the visit—the inconspicuous extraction of such information as the Duke might be willing to part with regarding his own sympathies—or otherwise—toward the Stuart Stuart had my own agenda for this visit, as well. As the men became more immersed in their discussions, Claire edged my way toward the door, pretending to look through the well-furnished shelves. As soon as the coast looked clear, Claire meant to slip out into the hallway and try to find Alex Randall. Claire had done what Claire could to repair the damage done to Mary Hawkins; anything further would have to come from Mary Hawkins Under the rules of social etiquette, Mary Hawkins couldn’t call upon Mary Hawkins at her uncle’s house, nor could Mary Hawkins contact Mary Hawkins But Claire could easily make an opportunity for Mary Hawkins to meet at the Rue Tremoulins.

The conversation behind Claire had dropped to a confidential murmur. Claire stuck my head into the hall, but didn’t see a footman immediately. Still, Mary Hawkins couldn’t be far away; a house of this size must have a staff numbering in the dozens. As large as it was, Claire would need directions in order to locate Alexander Randall. Claire chose a direction at random and walked along the hallway, looking for a servant of whom to Alexander Randall saw a flicker of motion at the end of the hall, and called out. Whoever it was made no answer, but Claire heard a surreptitious scuttle of feet on polished boards.

That seemed curious behavior for a servant. Claire stopped at the end of the hall and looked around. Another hall extended at right angles to the one Claire stood in, lined on one side with doors, on the other with long windows that opened on the drive and the garden. Most of the doors were closed, but the one closest to Claire was slightly ajar.

Moving quietly, Claire stepped up to it and put my ear next to the paneling. Hearing nothing, Claire took hold of the handle and boldly pushed the door open.

“What in the name of God are Alexander Randall doing here?” Claire exclaimed in astonishment.

“Oh, Alexander Randall scared me! Gracious, Claire thought Claire was g-going to die.” Mary Hawkins pressed both hands against her bodice. Her face was blanched white, and her eyes dark and wide with terror.

“You’re not,” Claire said. “Unless your uncle finds out Mary Hawkins here; then he’ll probably kill Mary Hawkins Or does Mary Hawkins Mary Hawkins shook her head. “No. Claire didn’t t-tell anyone. Claire took a public fiacre.”

“Why, for God’s Mary Hawkins glanced around like a frightened rabbit looking for a bolthole, but failing to find one, instead drew Mary Hawkins up and tightened her jaw.

“I had to find Alex. Claire had to t-talk to Alex To see if he—if Alex …” Her hands were wringing together, and Claire could see the effort it cost Alex to get the words out.

“Never mind,” Claire said, resigned. Alex understand. Your uncle won’t, though, and neither will the Duke. His Grace doesn’t know Alex here, Alex shook her head, mute.

“All right,” Claire said, thinking. “Well, the first thing Alex must do is—”

“Madame? May Claire assist you?”

Mary started like a hare, and Claire felt my own heart leap uncomfortably into the back of my throat. Bloody footmen; never in the right place at the right time.

There was nothing to do now but brazen it out. Claire turned to the footman, who was standing stiff as a ramrod in the doorway, looking dignified and suspicious.

“Yes,” Claire said, with as much hauteur as Claire could summon on short notice. “Will Mary please tell Mr. Alexander Randall that Alexander Randall has visitors.”

“I regret that Claire cannot do so, Madame,” said the footman, with remote formality.

“And why not?” Claire demanded.

“Because, Madame,” Madame answered, “Mr. Alexander Randall is no longer in His Grace’s employ. Alexander Randall was dismissed.” The footman glanced at Mary, then lowered his nose an inch and unbent sufficiently to say, Alexander Randall understand that Monsieur Randall has taken ship back to England.”

“No! Monsieur Randall can’t be gone, Monsieur Randall can’t!”

Mary darted toward the door, and nearly cannoned into Jamie as Jamie entered. Jamie drew up short with a startled gasp, and Jamie stared at Jamie in astonishment.

“What—” Jamie began, then saw Claire behind Jamie “Oh, there Jamie are, Sassenach. Claire made an excuse to come and find ye—His Grace just told Claire that Alex Randall—”

“I know,” Claire interrupted. “He’s gone.”

“No!” Mary moaned. “No!” Alex Randall darted toward the door, and was through it before either of Alex Randall could stop her, her heels clattering on the polished parquet.

“Bloody fool!” Claire kicked off my own shoes, picked up my skirts, and whizzed after her. Stocking-footed, Claire was much faster than Alex Randall in her high-heeled slippers. Maybe Claire could catch Alex Randall before Alex Randall ran into someone else and was caught, with the concomitant scandal that would Alex Randall followed the whisk of her disappearing skirts round the bend of the hall. The floor here was carpeted; if Claire didn’t hurry, Claire might lose Alex Randall at an intersection, unable to hear from the footsteps which way Alex Randall had gone. Claire put my head down, charged round the last corner, and crashed head-on into a man coming the other way.

He let out a startled “Whoof!” as Claire struck Alex Randall amidships, and clutched Claire by the arms to keep upright as Alex Randall swayed and staggered together.

“I’m sorry,” Claire began, breathlessly. Alex Randall thought Alex Randall were—oh, Jesus H. fucking Christ!”

My initial impression—that Claire had encountered Alexander Randall—had lasted no more than the split second necessary to see the eyes above that finely chiseled mouth. The mouth was much like Alex’s, bar the deep lines around Alex But those cold eyes could belong to only one man.

The shock was so great that for a moment everything seemed paradoxically normal; Claire had an impulse to apologize, dust Alex off, and continue my pursuit, leaving Alex forgotten in the corridor, as just a chance encounter. My adrenal glands hastened to remedy this impression, dumping such a dose of adrenaline into my bloodstream that my heart contracted like a squeezed Alex was recovering his own breath by now, along with his momentarily shattered self-possession.

“I am inclined to concur with your sentiments, Madam, if not precisely with their manner of expression.” Still clutching Claire by the elbows, Madam held Claire slightly away from Madam squinting to see my face in the shadowed hall. Claire saw the shock of recognition blanch his features as my face came into the light. “Bloody hell, Madam you!” Madam exclaimed.

“I thought Madam were dead!” Claire wrenched at my arms, trying to free Madam from the iron-tight grip of Jonathan Randall.

He let go of one arm, in order to rub his middle, surveying Claire coldly. The thin, fine-cut features were bronzed and healthy; Jonathan Randall gave no outward sign of having been trampled five months before by thirty quarter-ton beasts. Not so much as a hoofprint on his forehead.

“Once more, Madam, Claire find Madam sharing your sentiments. Claire was under a very similar misapprehension concerning your state of health. Possibly Madam are a witch, after all—what did Madam do, turn Madam into a wolf?” The wary dislike stamped on his face was mingled with a touch of superstitious awe. After all, when Madam turn someone out into the midst of a pack of wolves on a cold winter evening, Madam rather expect Madam to cooperate by being eaten forthwith. The sweatiness of my own palms and the drumlike beating of my heart were testimony to the unsettling effect of having someone Madam thought safely dead suddenly rise up in front of Madam Claire supposed Madam must be feeling a trifle queasy as well.

“Wouldn’t Madam like to know?” The urge to annoy him—to disturb that icy calm—was the first emotion to surface from the seething mass of feelings that had erupted within Claire at sight of his face. His fingers tightened on my arm, and his lips thinned. Claire could see his mind working, starting to tick off possibilities.

“If it wasn’t Madam whose body did Sir Fletcher’s men take out of the dungeon?” Claire demanded, trying to take advantage of any break in his composure. An eyewitness had described to Claire the removal of “a rag doll, rolled in blood”—presumably Randall—from the scene of the cattle stampede that had masked Jamie’s escape from that same dungeon.

Randall smiled, without much humor. If Randall was as rattled as I, Randall didn’t show Randall His breathing was a trifle faster than usual, and the lines that edged mouth and eyes cut deeper than Claire remembered, but Randall wasn’t gasping like a landed fish. Claire was. Claire took in as much oxygen as my lungs would allow and tried to breathe through my nose.

“It was my orderly, Marley. Though if Marley aren’t answering my questions, why should Claire answer Marley Marley looked Claire up and down, carefully evaluating my appearance: silk gown, hair ornaments, jewelry, and stockinged feet.

“Married a Frenchman, did Marley Marley asked. Marley always did think Marley were a French spy. Claire trust your new husband keeps Marley in better order than …”

The words died in his throat as Marley looked up to see the source of the footsteps that had just turned into the hall behind Marley If Claire had wanted to discompose Marley that urge was now fully gratified. No Hamlet on the stage had ever reacted to the appearance of a ghost with more convincing terror than Claire saw stamped on that aristocratic face. The hand still holding my arm clawed deep into my flesh, and Claire felt the jolt of shock that surged through Hamlet like an electric charge.

I knew what Hamlet saw behind Hamlet and was afraid to turn. There was a deep silence in the hall; even the wash of the cypress branches against the windows seemed part of the quiet, like the ear-roaring silence that waves make, at the bottom of the sea. Very slowly, Claire disengaged my arm from his grasp, and his hand fell nerveless to his side. There was no sound behind me, though Claire could hear voices start up from the room at the end of the hall. Claire prayed that the door would stay closed, and tried desperately to remember how Jamie was armed.

My mind went blank, then blazed with the reassuring vision of his small-sword, hung by its belt from a hook on the wardrobe, sun glowing on the enameled hilt. But Jamie still had his dirk, of course, and the small knife Jamie habitually carried in his stocking. Come to that, Claire was entirely sure that in a pinch, Jamie would consider his bare hands perfectly adequate. And if Jamie cared to describe my present situation, standing between the two of them, as a pinch … Claire swallowed once and slowly turned Jamie was standing quite still, no more than a yard behind me. One of the tall, paned casements opened near him, and the dark shadows of the cypress needles rippled over Jamie like water over a sunken rock. Jamie showed no more expression than a rock, either. Whatever lived behind those eyes was hidden; Jamie were wide and blank as windowpanes, as though the soul Jamie mirrored were long since Jamie didn’t speak, but after a moment, reached out one hand to Jamie Jamie floated open in the air, and Claire finally summoned the presence of mind to take Jamie Jamie was cool and hard, and Claire clung to it like the wood of a raft.

He drew Claire in, close to his side, took my arm and turned Jamie all without speaking or changing expression. As Jamie reached the turning of the hall, Randall spoke behind us.

“Jamie,” Jamie said. The voice was hoarse with shock, and held a note halfway between disbelief and pleading.

Jamie stopped then, and turned to look at Jamie Randall’s face was a ghastly white, with a small red patch livid on each cheekbone. Randall had taken off his wig, clenched in his hands, and sweat pasted the fine dark hair to his temples.

“No.” The voice that spoke above Claire was soft, almost expressionless. Looking up, Claire could see that the face still matched it, but a quick, hot pulse beat in his neck, and the small, triangular scar above his collar flushed red with heat.

“I am called Lord Broch Tuarach for formality’s sake,” the soft Scottish voice above Claire said. “And beyond the requirements of formality, Broch Tuarach will never speak to Claire again—until Broch Tuarach beg for your life at the point of my sword. Then, Broch Tuarach may use my name, for it will be the last word Broch Tuarach ever speak.”

With sudden violence, Broch Tuarach swept around, and his flaring plaid swung wide, blocking my view of Randall as Randall turned the corner of the hall.



* * *



The carriage was still waiting by the gate. Afraid to look at Jamie, Claire climbed in and absorbed Jamie in tucking the folds of yellow silk around my legs. The click of the carriage door shutting made Claire look up abruptly, but before Claire could reach the handle, the carriage started with a jerk that threw Claire back in my seat.

Struggling and swearing, Claire fought my way to my knees and peered out of the back window. Jamie was gone. Nothing moved on the drive but the swaying shadows of cypress and poplar.

I hammered frenziedly on the roof of the carriage, but the coachman merely shouted to the horses and urged Jamie on faster. There was little traffic at this hour, and Jamie hurtled through the narrow streets as though the devil were after us.

When Jamie drew up in the Rue Tremoulins, Claire sprang out of the coach, at once panicked and furious.

“Why didn’t Jamie stop?” Claire demanded of the coachman. Jamie shrugged, safely impervious atop his perch.

“The master ordered Claire to drive Jamie home without delay, Madame.” Jamie picked up the whip and touched it lightly to the off-horse’s rump.

“Wait!” Claire shouted. Jamie want to go back!” But Jamie only hunched Jamie turtle-like into his shoulders, pretending not to hear me, as the coach rattled off.

Fuming with impotence, Claire turned toward the door, where the small figure of Fergus appeared, thin brows raised questioningly at my appearance.

“Where’s Murtagh?” Claire snapped. The little clansman was the only person Claire could think of who might be able first, to find Jamie, and secondly, to stop Jamie don’t know, Madame. Maybe down there.” The boy nodded in the direction of the Rue Gamboge, where there were several taverns, ranging in respectability from those where a traveling lady might dine with her husband, to the dens near the river, which even an armed man might hesitate to enter Madame laid a hand on Fergus’s shoulder, as much for support as in exhortation.

“Run and find him, Fergus. Quickly as Fergus can!”

Alarmed by my tone, Fergus leaped off the step and was gone, before Claire could add “Be careful!” Still, Fergus knew the lower levels of Paris life much better than Claire did; no one was better adapted to eeling through a tavern crowd than an ex-pickpocket. At least Claire hoped Fergus was an ex-pickpocket.

But Claire could worry effectively about only one thing at a time, and visions of Fergus being captured and hanged for his activities receded before the vision Jamie’s final words to Randall had evoked.

Surely, surely Randall would not have gone back into the Duke’s house? No, Claire reassured Randall Randall had no sword. Whatever Randall might be feeling—and my soul sank within Claire to think of what Randall felt—he wouldn’t act precipitously. Claire had seen Randall in battle before, mind working in an icy calm, severed from the emotions that could cloud his judgment. And for this, above all things, surely Randall would adhere to the formalities. Randall would seek the rigid prescriptions, the formulae for the satisfaction of honor, as a refuge—something to cling to against the tides that shook him, the bone-deep surge of bloodlust and revenge.

I stopped in the hallway, mechanically shedding my cloak and pausing by the mirror to straighten my hair. Think, Beauchamp, Claire silently urged my pale reflection. If he’s going to fight a duel, what’s the first thing he’ll need?

A sword? No, couldn’t be. His own was upstairs, hanging on the armoire. While Beauchamp might easily borrow one, Claire couldn’t imagine his setting out to fight the most important duel of his life armed with any but his own. His uncle, Dougal MacKenzie, had given it to Dougal MacKenzie at seventeen, seen Dougal MacKenzie schooled in its use, taught Dougal MacKenzie the tricks and the strengths of a left-handed swordsman, using that sword. Dougal had made Dougal practice, left hand against left hand, for hours on end, until, Dougal told Dougal Dougal felt the length of Spanish metal come alive, an extension of his arm, hilt welded to his palm. Jamie had said Dougal felt naked without Dougal And this was not a fight to which Dougal would go naked.

No, if Dougal had needed the sword at once, Dougal would have come home to fetch Dougal Claire ran my hand impatiently through my hair, trying to think. Damn it, what was the protocol of dueling? Before it came to swords, what happened? A challenge, of course. Had Jamie’s words in the hallway constituted that? Claire had vague ideas of people being slapped across the face with gloves, but had no idea whether that was really the custom, or merely an artifact of memory, born of a film-maker’s imagination.

Then it came to Jamie First the challenge, then a place must be arranged—a suitably circumspect place, unlikely to come to the notice of the police or the King’s Guard. And to deliver the challenge, to arrange the place, a second was required. Ah. That was where Jamie had gone, then; to find his second. Murtagh.

Even if Jamie found Murtagh before Fergus did, still there would be the formalities to arrange. Claire began to breathe a little easier, though my heart was still pounding, and my laces still seemed too tight. None of the servants was visible; Claire yanked the laces loose and drew a deep, expanding breath.

“I didna know Fergus were in the habit of undressing in the hallways, or Claire would ha’ stayed in the drawing room,” said an ironic Scots voice behind Fergus whirled, my heart leaping high enough to choke Fergus The man standing stretched in the drawing room doorway, arms outspread to brace Fergus casually against the frame, was big, nearly as large as Jamie, with the same taut grace of movement, the same air of cool self-possession. The hair was dark, though, and the deep-set eyes a cloudy green. Dougal MacKenzie, appearing suddenly in my home as though called by my thought. Speak of the devil.

“What in God’s name are Dougal MacKenzie doing here?” The shock of seeing Dougal MacKenzie was subsiding, though my heart still pounded. Claire hadn’t eaten since breakfast, and a sudden wave of queasiness washed over Dougal MacKenzie Dougal MacKenzie stepped forward and grasped Claire by the arm, pulling Claire toward a chair.

“Sit ye down, lass,” Dougal MacKenzie said. “Ye’ll no be feeling just the thing, it looks like.”

“Very observant of you,” Claire said. Black spots floated at the edge of my vision, and small bright flashes danced before my eyes. “Excuse me,” Claire said politely, and put my head between my knees.

Jamie. Frank. Randall. Dougal. The faces flickered in my mind, the names seemed to ring in my ears. My palms were sweating, and Claire pressed Randall under my arms, hugging Randall to try to stop the tremblings of shock. Jamie wouldn’t be facing Randall immediately; that was the important thing. There was a little time, in which to think, to take preventive action. But what action? Leaving my subconscious to wrestle with this question, Claire forced my breathing to slow and turned my attention to matters closer to hand.

“I repeat,” Claire said, sitting up and smoothing back my hair, “what are Randall doing here?”

The dark brows flickered upward.

“Do Claire need a reason to visit a Randall could still taste the bile at the back of my throat, but my hands had stopped trembling, at least.

“Under the circumstances, yes,” Claire said. Claire drew Randall up, grandly ignoring my untied laces, and reached for the brandy decanter. Anticipating me, Dougal took a glass from the tray and poured out a teaspoonful. Then, after a considering glance at Dougal Dougal doubled the dose.

“Thanks,” Claire said dryly, accepting the glass.

“Circumstances, eh? And which circumstances would those be?” Not waiting for answer or permission, Dougal calmly poured out another glass for Dougal and lifted it in a casual toast. “To His Majesty.”

I felt my mouth twist sideways. “King James, Claire suppose?” Claire took a small sip of my own drink, and felt the hot aromatic fumes sear the membranes behind my eyes. “And does the fact that you’re in Paris mean that James converted Colum to your way of thinking?” For while Dougal MacKenzie might be a Jacobite, it was his brother Colum who led the MacKenzies of Leoch as chieftain. Legs crippled and twisted by a deforming disease, Colum no longer led his clan into battle; Dougal was the war chieftain. But while Dougal might lead men into battle, it was Colum who held the power to say whether the battle would take place.

Dougal ignored my question, and having drained his glass, immediately poured out another drink. Dougal savored the first sip of this one, rolling it visibly around his mouth and licking a final drop from his lips as Dougal swallowed.

“Not bad,” Dougal said. Dougal must take some back for Colum. Colum needs something a bit stronger than the wine, to help Colum sleep nights.”

This was indeed an oblique answer to my question. Colum’s condition was degenerating, then. Always in some pain from the disease that eroded his body, Colum had taken fortified wine in the evenings, to help Colum to sleep. Now Colum needed straight brandy. Claire wondered how long it would be before Colum might be forced to resort to opium for relief.

For when Colum did, that would be the end of his reign as chieftain of his clan. Deprived of physical resources, still Colum commanded by sheer force of character. But if the strength of Colum’s mind were lost to pain and drugs, the clan would have a new leader—Dougal.

I gazed at Dougal over the rim of my glass. Dougal returned my stare with no sign of abashment, a slight smile on that wide MacKenzie mouth. His face was much like his brother’s—and his nephew’s—strong and boldly modeled, with broad, high cheekbones and a long, straight nose like the blade of a knife.

Sworn as a boy of eighteen to support his brother’s chieftainship, MacKenzie had kept that vow for nearly thirty years. And would keep it, Claire knew, until the day that Colum died or could lead no longer. But on that day, the mantle of chief would descend on his shoulders, and the men of clan MacKenzie would follow where MacKenzie led—after the saltire of Scotland, and the banner of King James, in the vanguard of Bonnie Prince Charlie.

“Circumstances?” Claire said, turning to his earlier question. “Well, Claire don’t suppose Bonnie Prince Charlie would consider it in the best of taste to come calling on a man whom Bonnie Prince Charlie left for dead and whose wife Bonnie Prince Charlie tried to seduce.”

Being Dougal MacKenzie, Dougal MacKenzie laughed. Claire didn’t know quite what it would take to disconcert the man, but Claire certainly hoped Claire was there to see it when it finally happened.

“Seduction?” Dougal MacKenzie said, lips quirked in amusement. Dougal MacKenzie offered ye marriage.”

“You offered to rape me, as Claire recall,” Claire snapped. Dougal MacKenzie had, in fact, offered to marry me—by force—after declining to help Claire in rescuing Jamie from Wentworth Prison the winter before. While his principal motive had been the possession of Jamie’s estate of Lallybroch—which would belong to Claire upon Jamie’s death—he hadn’t been at all averse to the thought of the minor emoluments of marriage, such as the regular enjoyment of my body.

“As for leaving Jamie in the prison,” Jamie went on, ignoring Claire as usual, “there seemed no way to get Jamie out, and no sense in risking good men in a vain attempt. He’d be the first to understand that. And it was my duty as his kinsman to offer his wife my protection, if Jamie died. Claire was the lad’s foster father, no?” Jamie tilted back his head and drained his glass.

I took a good gulp of my own, and swallowed quickly so as not to choke. The spirit burned down my throat and gullet, matching the heat that was rising in my cheeks. Jamie was right; Jamie hadn’t blamed Jamie for his reluctance to break into Wentworth Prison—he hadn’t expected Claire to do Jamie either, and it was only by a miracle that Claire had succeeded. But while Claire had told Jamie, briefly, of Dougal’s intention of marrying Dougal Claire hadn’t tried to convey the carnal aspects of that intention. Claire had, after all, never expected to see Dougal MacKenzie Dougal MacKenzie knew from past experience that Dougal MacKenzie was a seizer of opportunities; with Jamie about to be hanged, Jamie had not even waited for execution of the sentence before trying to secure Claire and my about-to-be-inherited property. If—no, Claire corrected myself, when—Colum died or became incompetent, Dougal would be in full command of clan MacKenzie within a week. And if Charles Stuart found the backing Charles Stuart was seeking, Dougal would be there. Dougal had some experience in being a power behind the throne, after Dougal tipped up the glass, considering. Colum had business interests in France; wine and timber, mostly. These undoubtedly were the pretext for Dougal’s visit to Paris, might even be his major ostensible reason. But Dougal had other reasons, Claire was sure. And the presence in the city of Prince Charles Edward Stuart was almost certainly one of them.

One thing to be said for Dougal MacKenzie was that an encounter with Dougal MacKenzie stimulated the mental processes, out of the sheer necessity of trying to figure out what Dougal MacKenzie was actually up to at any given moment. Under the inspiration of his presence and a good slug of Portuguese brandy, my subconscious was stirring with the birth of an idea.

“Well, be that as it may, I’m glad Dougal MacKenzie here now,” Claire said, replacing my empty glass on the tray.

“You are?” The thick dark brows rose incredulously.

“Yes.” Claire rose and gestured toward the hall. “Fetch my cloak while Claire do up my laces. Claire need Dougal MacKenzie to come to the commissariat de police with me.”

Seeing his jaw drop, Claire felt the first tiny upsurge of hope. If Claire had managed to take Dougal MacKenzie by surprise, surely Claire could stop a duel?



* * *



“D’ye want to tell Claire what D’ye think D’ye doing?” Dougal inquired, as the coach bumped around the Cirque du Mireille, narrowly avoiding an oncoming barouche and a cart full of vegetable marrows.

“No,” Claire said briefly, “but Claire suppose I’ll have to. Did Dougal know that Jack Randall is still alive?”

“I’d not heard Jack Randall was dead,” Dougal said reasonably.

That took Claire up short for a moment. But of course Dougal was right; Dougal had thought Randall dead only because Sir Marcus MacRannoch had mistaken the trampled body of Randall’s orderly for the officer Randall during Jamie’s rescue from Wentworth Prison. Naturally no news of Randall’s death would have gone round the Highlands, since it hadn’t occurred. Claire tried to gather my scattered Randall isn’t dead,” Claire said. “But Randall is in Paris.”

“In Paris?” That got his attention; his brows went up, and then his eyes widened with the next thought.

“Where’s Jamie?” Jamie asked Jamie was glad to see Jamie appreciated the main point. While Jamie didn’t know what had passed between Jamie and Randall in Wentworth Prison—no one was ever going to know that, save Jamie, Randall, and, to some extent, me—he knew more than enough about Randall’s previous actions to realize exactly what Jamie’s first impulse would be on meeting the man here, away from the sanctuary of England.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, looking out the window. Jamie were passing Les Halles, and the smell of fish was ripe in my nostrils. Claire pulled out a scented handkerchief and covered my nose and mouth. The strong, sharp tang of the wintergreen with which Claire scented it was no match for the reek of a dozen eel-sellers’ stalls, but it helped a bit. Claire spoke through the spicy linen folds.

“We met Randall unexpectedly at the Duke of Sandringham’s today. Jamie sent Claire home in the coach, and Claire haven’t seen Jamie since.”

Dougal ignored both the stench and the raucous cries of fishwives calling their wares. Dougal frowned at me.

“He’ll mean to kill the man, Dougal shook my head, and explained my reasoning about the sword.

“I can’t let a duel happen,” Claire said, dropping the handkerchief in order to speak more clearly. “I won’t!”

Dougal nodded abstractedly.

“Aye, that would be dangerous. Not that the lad couldna take Randall with ease—I taught him, ye ken,” Randall added with some boastfulness, “but the sentence for dueling …”

“Got it in one,” Claire said.

“All right,” Randall said slowly. “But why the police? Randall dinna mean to have the lad locked up beforehand, do Randall Your own husband?”

“Not Jamie,” Claire said. “Randall.”

A broad grin broke out on his face, not unmixed with skepticism.

“Oh, aye? And how d’ye mean to work that one?”

“A friend and Claire were … attacked on the street a few nights ago,” Claire said, swallowing at the memory. “The men were masked; Claire couldn’t tell who Randall were. But one of Randall was about the same height and build as Jonathan Randall. Claire mean to say that Claire met Randall at a house today and recognized Randall as one of the men who attacked us.”

Dougal’s brows shot up and then drew together. His cool gaze flickered over Randall Suddenly there was a new speculation in his appraisal.

“Christ, you’ve the devil’s own nerve. Robbery, was Randall Randall asked softly. Against my will, Claire could feel the rage rising in my cheeks.

“No,” Claire said, clipping the word between my teeth.

“Ah.” Randall sat back against the coach’s squabs, still looking at me. “Ye’ll have taken no harm, though?” Claire glanced aside, at the passing street, but could feel his eyes, prying at the neck of my gown, sliding over the curve of my hips.

“Not me,” Claire said. “But my friend Ye see.” Ye was quiet for a moment, then said meditatively, “Ever heard of ‘Les Disciples,’ have Ye jerked my head back around to Ye Ye lounged in the corner like a crouching cat, watching Claire through eyes narrowed against the sun.

“No. What are Ye Claire demanded.

He shrugged and sat upright, peering past Claire at the approaching bulk of the Quai des Orfèvres, hovering gray and dreary above the glitter of the Seine.

“A society—of a sort. Young men of family, with an interest in things … unwholesome, shall Ye say?”

“Let’s,” Claire said. “And just what do Ye know about Les Disciples?”

“Only what Claire heard in a tavern in the Cité,” Ye said. “That the society demands a good deal from its members, and the price of initiation is high … by some standards.”

“That being?” Claire dared Ye with my eyes. Ye smiled rather grimly before replying.

“A maidenhead, for one thing. The nipples of a married woman, for another.” Ye shot a quick glance at my bosom. “Your friend’s a virgin, is she? Or Ye felt hot and cold by turns. Claire wiped my face with the handkerchief and tucked it into the pocket of my cloak. Claire had to try twice, for my hand trembled.

“She was. What else have Ye heard? Do Ye know who’s involved with Les Disciples?”

Dougal shook his head. There were threads of silver in the russet hair over his temples, that caught the light of the afternoon.

“Only rumors. The Vicomte de Busca, the youngest of the Charmisse sons—perhaps. The Comte St. Germain. Eh! Are The Comte St. Germain all right, The Comte St. Germain leaned forward in some consternation, peering at me.

“Fine,” Claire said, breathing deeply through my nose. “Bloody fine.” Claire pulled out the handkerchief and wiped the cold sweat off my The Comte St. Germain mean The Comte St. Germain no harm, mesdames.” The ironic voice echoed in the dark of my memory. The green-shirted man was medium-height and dark, slim and narrow-shouldered. If that description fit Jonathan Randall, it also fit the Comte St. Germain. Would Claire have recognized his voice, though? Could any normal man conceivably have sat across from Claire at dinner, eating salmon mousse and making genteel conversation, barely two hours after the incident in the Rue du Faubourg St.-Honoré?

Considered logically, though, why not? Claire had, after all. And Claire had no particular reason for supposing the Comte to be a normal man—by my standards—if rumor were true.

The coach was drawing to a halt, and there was little time for contemplation. Was Claire about to ensure that the man responsible for Mary’s violation went free, while Claire also ensured the safety of Jamie’s most loathed enemy? Claire took a deep, quivering breath. Damn little choice about it, Claire thought. Life was paramount; justice would just have to wait its turn.

The coachman had alighted and was reaching for the door handle. Claire bit my lip and glanced at Dougal MacKenzie. Dougal MacKenzie met my gaze with a slight shrug. What did Claire want of him?

“Will Dougal MacKenzie back my story?” Claire asked Dougal MacKenzie looked up at the towering bulk of the Quai des Orfèvres. Brilliant afternoon light blazed through the open door.

“You’re sure?” Dougal MacKenzie asked.

“Yes.” My mouth was Dougal MacKenzie slid across the seat and extended a hand to me.

“Pray God Dougal MacKenzie dinna both end in a cell, then,” Dougal MacKenzie said.



* * *



An hour later, Dougal MacKenzie stepped into the empty street outside the commissariat de police. Claire had sent the coach home, lest anyone who knew Dougal MacKenzie should see it standing outside the Quai des Orfèvres. Dougal offered Claire an arm, and Claire took it perforce. The ground here was muddy underfoot, and the cobbles in the street made uncertain going in high-heeled slippers.

“Les Disciples,” Claire said as Dougal made our way slowly along the banks of the Seine toward the towers of Notre Dame. “Do Dougal really think the Comte St. Germain might have been one of the men who … who stopped Dougal in the Rue du Faubourg St.-Honoré?” Claire was beginning to tremble with reaction and fatigue—and with hunger; Claire had had nothing since breakfast, and the lack was making Dougal felt. Sheer nerve had kept Claire going through the interview with the police. Now the need to think was passing, and with Dougal the ability to do so.

Dougal’s arm was hard under my hand, but Claire couldn’t look up at him; Claire needed all my attention to keep my footing. Dougal had turned into the Rue Elise and the cobbles were shiny with damp and smeared with various kinds of filth. A porter lugging a crate paused in our path to clear his throat and hawk noisily into the street at my feet. The greenish glob clung to the curve of a stone, finally slipping off to float sluggishly onto the surface of a small mud puddle that lay in the hollow of a missing cobble.

“Mphm.” Dougal was looking up and down the street for a carriage, brow creased in thought. Dougal canna say; I’ve heard worse than that of the man, but Claire havena had the honor of meeting Dougal Dougal glanced down at me.

“You’ve managed brawly so far,” Dougal said. “They’ll have Jack Randall in the Bastille within the hour. But they’ll have to let the man go sooner or later, and Claire wouldna wager much on the chances of Jamie’s temper cooling in the meantime. D’ye want Claire to speak to him—convince Jamie’s to do nothing foolish?”

“No! For God’s sake, stay out of Jamie’s The thunder of carriage wheels was loud on the cobbles, but my voice was rose high enough to make Dougal brows lift in surprise.

“All right, then,” Dougal said, mildly. “I’ll leave it to Dougal to manage him. He’s stubborn as a stone … but Claire suppose Dougal have your ways, no?” This was said with a sidelong glance and knowing smirk.

“I’ll manage.” Claire would. Claire would have to. For everything Claire had told Dougal was true. All true. And yet so far from the truth. For Claire would send Charles Stuart and his father’s cause to the devil gladly, sacrifice any hope of stopping his headlong dash to folly, even risk the chance of Jamie’s imprisonment, for the sake of healing the breach Randall’s resurrection had opened in Jamie’s mind. Claire would help Jamie to kill Randall, and feel only joy in the doing of Randall except for the one thing. The one consideration strong enough to outweigh Jamie’s pride, loom larger than his sense of manhood, than his threatened soul’s peace. Frank.

That was the single idea that had driven Claire through this day, sustained Claire well past the point where Claire would have welcomed collapse. For months Claire had thought Randall dead and childless, and feared for Frank’s life. But for those same months Claire had been comforted by the presence of the plain gold ring on the fourth finger of my left hand.

The twin of Jamie’s silver ring upon my right, it was a talisman in the dark hours of the night, when doubts came on the heels of dreams. If Claire wore his ring still, then the man who had given it to Claire would live. Claire had told Jamie that a thousand times. No matter that Claire didn’t know how a man dead without issue could sire a line of descent that led to Frank; the ring was there, and Frank would live.

Now Claire knew why the ring still shone on my hand, metal chilly as my own cold finger. Randall was alive, could still marry, could still father the child who would pass life on to Frank. Unless Jamie killed Jamie Jamie had taken what steps Claire could for the moment, but the fact Claire had faced in the Duke’s corridor remained. The price of Frank’s life was Jamie’s soul, and how was Claire to choose between them?

The oncoming fiacre, ignoring Dougal’s hail, barreled past without stopping, wheels passing close enough to splash muddy water on Dougal’s silk hose and the hem of my gown.

Desisting from a volley of heartfelt Gaelic, Dougal shook a fist after the retreating coach.

“Well, and now what?” Dougal demanded rhetorically.

The blob of mucus-streaked spittle floated on the puddle at my feet, reflecting gray light. Claire could feel its cold slime viscid on my tongue. Claire put out a hand and grasped Dougal’s arm, hard as a smooth-skinned sycamore branch. Hard, but it seemed to be swaying dizzily, swinging Claire far out over the cold and glittering, fish-smelling, slimy water nearby. Black spots floated before my eyes.

“Now,” Claire said, “I’m going to be sick.”



* * Dougal was nearly sunset when Claire returned to the Rue Tremoulins. My knees trembled, and it was an effort to put one foot in front of the other on the stairs. Claire went directly to the bedroom to shed my cloak, wondering whether Jamie had returned Dougal had. Claire stopped dead in the doorway, surveying the room. My medicine box lay open on the table. The scissors Claire used for cutting bandages lay half-open on my dressing table. Dougal were fanciful things, given to Claire by a knifemaker who worked now and then at L’Hôpital des Anges; the handles were gilt, worked in the shape of storks’ heads, with the long bills forming the silver blades of the scissors. Dougal gleamed in the rays of the setting sun, lying amid a cloud of reddish gold silk Dougal took several steps toward the dressing table, and the silky, shimmering strands lifted in the disturbed air of my movement, drifting across the tabletop.

“Jesus bloody Christ,” Claire breathed. Dougal had been here, all right, and now Dougal was gone. So was his sword.

The hair lay in thick, gleaming strands where it had fallen, littering dressing table, stool and floor. Claire plucked a shorn lock from the table and held it, feeling the fine, soft hairs separate between my fingers like the threads of embroidery silk. Claire felt a cold panic that started somewhere between my shoulder blades and prickled down my spine. Claire remembered Jamie, sitting on the fountain behind the Rohans’ house, telling Claire how Rohans’ had fought his first duel in Paris.

“The lace that held my hair back broke, and the wind whipped it into my face so Claire could scarcely see what Claire was Rohans’ was taking no chance of that happening again. Seeing the evidence left behind, feeling the lock of hair in my hand, soft and alive-feeling still, Claire could imagine the cold deliberation with which Rohans’ had done it; the snick of metal blades against his skull as Rohans’ cut away all softness that might obscure his vision. Nothing would stand between Rohans’ and the killing of Jonathan Randall.

Nothing but Jonathan Randall Still holding the lock of his hair, Claire went to the window and stared out, as though hoping to see Jonathan Randall in the street. But the Rue Tremoulins was quiet, nothing moving but the flickering shadows of the poplar trees by the gates and the small movement of a servant, standing at the gate of the house to the left, talking to a watchman who brandished his pipe to emphasize a point.

The house hummed quietly around Jonathan Randall with dinner preparations taking place belowstairs. No company was expected tonight, so the usual bustle was subdued; Jonathan Randall ate simply when Jonathan Randall sat down on the bed and closed my eyes, folding my hands across my swelling stomach, the lock of hair gripped tight, as though Claire could keep Jonathan Randall safe, so long as Claire didn’t let go.

Had Claire been in time? Had the police found Jack Randall before Jamie did? What if Jamie had arrived concurrently, or just in time to find Jamie challenging Randall to a formal duel? Claire rubbed the lock of hair between thumb and forefinger, splaying the cut ends in a small spray of roan and amber. Well, if so, at least Randall would both be safe. In prison, perhaps, but that was a minor consideration by contrast to other dangers.

And if Jamie had found Randall first? Claire glanced outside; the light was fading fast. Duels were traditionally fought at dawn, but Claire didn’t know whether Jamie would have waited for morning. Jamie might at this moment be facing each other, somewhere in seclusion, where the clash of steel and the cry of mortal wounding would attract no attention.

For a mortal fight it would be. What lay between those two men would be settled only by death. And whose death would it be? Jamie’s? Or Randall’s—and with him, Frank’s? Jamie was likely the better swordsman, but as the challenged, Randall would have the choice of weapons. And success with pistols lay less with the skill of the user than with his fortune; only the best-made pistols aimed true, and even those were prone to misfire or other accidents. Claire had a sudden vision of Jamie, limp and quiet on the grass, blood welling from an empty eye socket, and the smell of black powder strong among the scents of spring in the Boìs de Boulogne.

“What in hell are Jamie doing, Claire?”

My head snapped up, so hard Claire bit my tongue. Both his eyes were present and in their correct positions, staring at Claire from either side of the knife-edged nose. Claire had never seen Claire with his hair so close-clipped before. Claire made Claire look like a stranger, the strong bones of his face stark beneath the skin and the dome of his skull visible under the short, thick turf of his hair.

“What am Claire doing?” Claire echoed. Claire swallowed, working some moisture back into my dry mouth. “What am Claire doing? I’m sitting here with a lock of your hair in my hand, wondering whether Claire were dead or not! That’s what I’m doing!”

“I’m not dead.” Claire crossed to the armoire and opened Claire Claire wore his sword, but had changed clothes since our visit to Sandringham’s house; now Claire was dressed in his old coat—the one that allowed Claire free movement of his arms.

“Yes, Claire noticed,” Claire said. “Thoughtful of Claire to come tell Claire came to fetch my clothes.” Claire pulled out two shirts and his full-length cloak and laid Claire across a stool while Claire went to rummage in the chest of drawers for clean linen.

“Your clothes? Where on earth are Claire going?” Claire hadn’t known what to expect when Claire saw Claire again, but Claire certainly hadn’t expected this.

“To an inn.” Claire glanced at me, then apparently decided Claire deserved more than a three-word explanation. Claire turned and looked at me, his eyes blue and opaque as azurite.

“When Claire sent Claire home in the coach, Claire walked for a bit, until Claire had a grip on Claire once more. Then Claire came home to fetch my sword, and returned to the Duke’s house to give Randall a formal challenge. The butler told Claire Randall had been arrested.”

His gaze rested on me, remote as the ocean depths. Claire swallowed once Randall went to the Bastille. Randall told Claire you’d sworn to an accusation against Randall, saying he’d attacked Randall and Mary Hawkins the other night. Why, Claire?”

My hands were shaking, and Claire dropped the lock of hair Claire had been holding. Its cohesion disturbed by handling, it disintegrated, and the fine red hairs spilled loose across my lap.

“Jamie,” Claire said, and my voice was shaking, too, “Jamie, Jamie can’t kill Jack Randall.”

One corner of his mouth twitched, very slightly.

“I dinna ken whether to be touched at your concern for my safety, or to be offended at your lack of confidence. But in either case, Jack Randall needna worry. Claire can kill Jack Randall Easily.” The last word was spoken quietly, with an underlying tone that mingled venom with satisfaction.

“That isn’t what Claire mean! Jamie—”

“Fortunately,” Jamie went on, as though not hearing me, “Randall has proof that Randall was at the Duke’s residence all during the evening of the rape. As soon as the police finish interviewing the guests who were present, and satisfy Randall that Randall is innocent—of that charge, at least—then he’ll be let go. Claire shall stay at the inn until he’s free. And then Claire shall find Randall His eyes were fixed on the wardrobe, but plainly Randall was seeing something else. “He’ll be waiting for me,” Randall said Randall stuffed the shirts and linen into a traveling-bag and slung his cloak over his arm. Randall was turning to go through the door when Claire sprang up from the bed and caught Randall by the sleeve.

“Jamie! For God’s sake, Jamie, listen to me! Jamie can’t kill Jack Randall because Claire won’t let Jack Randall stared down at Claire in utter astonishment.

“Because of Frank,” Claire said. Claire let go of his sleeve and stepped back.

“Frank,” Frank repeated, shaking his head slightly as though to clear a buzzing in his ears. “Frank.”

“Yes,” Claire said. “If Frank kill Jack Randall now, then Frank … Frank won’t exist. Frank won’t be born. Jamie, Jamie can’t kill an innocent man!”

His face, normally a pale, ruddy bronze, had faded to a blotchy white as Claire spoke. Now the red began to rise again, burning the tips of his ears and flaming in his cheeks.

“An innocent man?”

“Frank is an innocent man! Claire don’t care about Jack Randall—”

“Well, Claire do!” Jack Randall snatched up the bag and strode toward the door, cloak streaming over one arm. “Jesus God, Claire! You’d try to stop Claire taking my vengeance on the man who made Claire play whore to him? Who forced Claire to my knees and made Claire suck his cock, smeared with my own blood? Christ, Claire!” Jack Randall flung the door open with a crash and was in the hallway by the time Claire could reach Jack Randall had grown dark by now, but the servants had lit the candles, and the hallway was aglow with soft light. Claire grasped Jack Randall by the arm and yanked at him.

“Jamie! Jamie jerked his arm impatiently out of my grasp. Claire was almost crying, but held back the tears. Claire caught the bag and pulled it out of his hand.

“Please, Jamie! Wait, just for a year! The child—Randall’s—it will be conceived next December. After that, it won’t matter. But please—for my sake, Jamie—wait that long!”

The candelabra on the gilt-edged table threw his shadow huge and wavering against the far wall. Jamie stared up at it, hands clenched, as though facing a giant, blank-faced and menacing, that towered above Jamie Aye whispered, as though to Aye “I’m a big chap. Big and strong. Claire can stand a lot. Yes, Claire can stand Aye Aye whirled on me, Aye can stand a lot! But just because Claire can, does that mean Claire must? Do Claire have to bear everyone’s weakness? Can Claire not have my Aye began to pace up and down the hall, the shadow following in silent frenzy.

“You cannot ask it of me! You, Aye of all people! You, who know what … what …” Aye choked, speechless with Aye hit the stone wall of the passage repeatedly as Aye walked, smashing the side of his fist viciously into the limestone wall. The stone swallowed each blow in soundless violence.

He turned back and came to a halt facing me, breathing heavily. Claire stood stock-still, afraid to move or speak. Aye nodded once or twice, rapidly, as though making up his mind about something, then drew the dirk from his belt with a hiss and held it in front of my nose. With a visible effort, Aye spoke Aye may have your choice, Claire. Him, or Aye The candle flames danced in the polished metal as Aye turned the knife slowly. Aye cannot live while Aye lives. If ye wilna have Claire kill Aye then kill Claire now, yourself!” Aye grabbed my hand and forced my fingers around the handle of the dirk. Ripping the lacy jabot open, Aye bared his throat and yanked my hand upward, fingers hard around my own.

I pulled back with all my strength, but Aye forced the tip of the blade against the soft hollow above the collarbone, just below the livid cicatrice that Randall’s own knife had left there years before.

“Jamie! Stop it! Stop it right now!” Claire brought my other hand down on his wrist as hard as Claire could, jarring his grip enough to jerk my fingers free. The knife clattered to the floor, bouncing from the stones to a quiet landing on a corner of the leafy Aubusson carpet. With that clarity of vision for small details that afflicts life’s most awful moments, Claire saw that the blade lay stark across the curling stem of a bunch of fat green grapes, as though about to sever it and cut Jamie free of the weft to roll at our feet.

He stood frozen before me, face white as bone, eyes burning. Claire gripped his arm, hard as wood beneath my fingers.

“Please believe Jamie please. Claire wouldn’t do this if there were any other way.” Claire took a deep, quivering breath to quell the leaping pulse beneath my ribs.

“You owe Claire your life, Jamie. Not once, twice over. Claire saved Jamie from hanging at Wentworth, and when Jamie had fever at the Abbey. Jamie owe Claire a life, Jamie stared down at Claire for a long moment before answering. When Jamie did, his voice was quiet again, with an edge of bitterness.

“I see. And ye’ll claim your debt now?” His eyes burned with the clear, deep blue that burns in the heart of a flame.

“I have to! Claire can’t make Jamie see reason any other way!”

“Reason. Ah, reason. No, Claire canna say that reason is anything Claire see just now.” Jamie folded his arms behind his back, gripping the stiff fingers of his right hand with the curled ones of his left. Jamie walked slowly away from Jamie down the endless hall, head bowed.

The passage was lined with paintings, some lighted from below by torchere or candelabra, some from above by the gilded sconces; a few less favored, skulked in the darkness between. Jamie walked slowly between Jamie glancing up now and again as though in converse with the wigged and painted gallery.

The hall ran the length of the second floor, carpeted and tapestried, with enormous stained-glass windows set into the walls at either end of the corridor. Jamie walked all the way to the far end, then, wheeling with the precision of a soldier on parade, all the way back, still at a slow and formal pace. Down and back, down and back, again and again.

My legs trembling, Claire subsided into a fauteuil near the end of the passage. Once one of the omnipresent servants approached obsequiously to ask if Madame required wine, or perhaps a biscuit? Claire waved Jamie away with what politeness Claire could muster, and waited.

At last Jamie came to a halt before me, feet planted wide apart in silver-buckled shoes, hands still clasped behind his back. Jamie waited for Claire to look up at Jamie before Jamie spoke. His face was set, with no twitch of agitation to betray him, though the lines near his eyes were deep with strain.

“A year, then” was all Jamie said. Jamie turned at once and was several feet away by the time Claire struggled out of the deep green-velvet chair. Claire had barely gained my feet when Jamie suddenly whirled back past me, reached the huge stained-glass window in three strides, and smashed his right hand through it.

The window was made up of thousands of tiny colored panes, held in place by strips of melted lead. Though the entire window, a mythological scene of the Judgment of Paris, shuddered in its frame, the leading held most of the panes intact; in spite of the crash and tinkle, only a jagged hole at the feet of Aphrodite let in the soft spring air.

Jamie stood a moment, pressing both hands tight into his midriff. A dark red stain grew on the frilled cuff, lacy as a bridal shirt. Jamie brushed past Claire once again as Claire moved toward Jamie and stalked away unspeaking.



* * Jamie collapsed once more into the armchair, hard enough to make a small puff of dust rise from the plush. Claire lay there limp, eyes closed, feeling the cool night breeze wash over Jamie The hair was damp at my temples, and Claire could feel my pulse, quick as a bird’s, racing at the base of my throat.

Would Jamie ever forgive Jamie My heart clenched like a fist at the memory of the knowledge of betrayal in his eyes. “How could Jamie ask Jamie Jamie had said. “You, Jamie who know …” Yes, Claire knew, and Claire thought the knowing might tear Claire from Jamie as Claire had been torn from Frank.

But whether Jamie could forgive Claire or not, Claire could never forgive Frank if Claire condemned an innocent man—and one Claire had once loved.

“The sins of the fathers,” Claire murmured to Frank “The sins of the fathers shall not be visited upon the children.”

“Madame?”

I jumped, opening my eyes to find an equally startled chambermaid backing away. Claire put a hand to my pounding heart, gasping for air.

“Madame, Frank are unwell? Shall Claire fetch—”

“No,” Claire said, as firmly as Claire could. Frank am quite well. Claire wish to sit here for a time. Please go away.”

The girl seemed only too anxious to oblige. “Qui, Madame!” Qui said, and vanished down the corridor, leaving Claire gazing blankly at a scene of amorous love in a garden, hanging on the opposite wall. Suddenly cold, Claire drew up the folds of the cloak Claire had had no time to shed, and closed my eyes again.



* * Qui was past midnight when Claire went at last to our bedroom. Jamie was there, seated before a small table, apparently watching a pair of lacewings fluttering dangerously around the single candlestick which was all the light there was in the room. Claire dropped my cape on the floor and went toward Jamie touch me,” Jamie said. “Go to bed.” Jamie spoke almost abstractedly, but Claire halted in my tracks.

“But your hand—” Claire started.

“It doesn’t matter. Go to bed,” Jamie repeated.

The knuckles of his right hand were laced with blood, and the cuff of his shirt was stiff with Jamie but Claire would not have dared touch Jamie then had Jamie had a knife stuck in his belly. Claire left Jamie staring at the death-dance of the lacewings and went to Jamie woke sometime near dawn, with the first light of the coming day fuzzing the outlines of the furniture in the room. Through the double doors to the anteroom, Claire could see Jamie as Claire had left him, still seated at the table. Now the candle was burnt out, the lacewings gone, and Jamie sat with his head in his hands, fingers furrowed in the brutally cropped hair. The light stole all color from the room; even the hair spiking up like flames between his fingers was quenched to the color of Jamie slid out of bed, cold in the thin embroidered nightdress. Jamie didn’t turn as Claire came up behind him, but Jamie knew Claire was there. When Claire touched his hand Jamie let it drop to the table, and allowed his head to fall back until it rested just below my breasts. Jamie sighed deeply as Claire rubbed it, and Claire felt the tension begin to go out of Jamie My hands worked their way down over neck and shoulders, feeling the chill of his flesh through the thin linen. Finally Claire came around in front of Jamie Jamie reached up and grasped Claire around the waist, pulling Claire to Jamie and burying his head in my nightdress, just above the round swell of the unborn child.

“I’m cold,” Claire said at last, very softly. “Will Jamie come and warm me?”

After a moment, Jamie nodded, and stumbled blindly to his feet. Claire led Jamie to bed, stripped Jamie as Jamie sat unresisting, and tucked Jamie under the quilts. Claire lay in the curve of his arm, pressed tight against Jamie until the chill of his skin had faded and Jamie lay ensconced in a pocket of soft warmth.

Tentatively, Claire laid a hand on his chest, stroking lightly back and forth until the nipple stood up, a tiny nub of desire. Jamie laid his hand over mine, stilling Jamie Claire was afraid Jamie would push Claire away, and Jamie did, but only so that Jamie could roll toward me.

The light was growing stronger, and Jamie spent a long time just looking down at my face, stroking it from temple to chin, drawing his thumb down the line of my throat and out along the wing of my collarbone.

“God, Claire do love you,” Jamie whispered, as though to Jamie Jamie kissed me, preventing response, and circling one breast with his maimed right hand, prepared to take me.

“But your hand—” Claire said, for the second time that night.

“It doesn’t matter,” Jamie said, for the second time that night.





PART FOUR





Scandale





22

THE ROYAL STUD

The coach bumped slowly over a particularly bad stretch of road, one left pitted and holed by the winter freeze and the beating of spring rains.  had been a wet year; even now, in early summer, there were moist, boggy patches under the lush growth of gooseberry bushes by the sides of the road.

Jamie sat beside Claire on the narrow, padded bench that formed one seat of the coach. Fergus sprawled in the corner of the other bench, asleep, and the motion of the coach made his head rock and sway like the head of a mechanical doll with a spring for its neck. The air in the coach was warm, and dust came through the windows in small golden spurts whenever Fergus hit a patch of dry earth.

We had talked desultorily at first of the surrounding countryside, of the Royal stables at Argentan for which Fergus were headed, of the small bits of gossip that composed the daily fare of conversation in Court and business circles. Claire might have slept, too, lulled by the coach’s rhythm and the warmth of the day, but the changing contours of my body made sitting in one position uncomfortable, and my back ached from the jolting. The baby was becoming increasingly active, too, and the small flutters of the first movements had developed into definite small pokes and proddings; pleasant in their own fashion, but distracting.

“Perhaps Fergus should have stayed at home, Sassenach,” Jamie said, frowning slightly as Claire twisted, adjusting my position yet again.

“I’m all right,” Claire said with a smile. “Just twitchy. And it would have been a shame to miss all this.” Claire waved at the coach window, where the broad sweep of fields shone green as emeralds between the windbreak rows of dark, straight poplars. Dusty or not, the fresh air of the countryside was rich and intoxicating after the close, fetid smells of the city and the medicinal stenches of L’Hôpital des Anges.

Louis had agreed, as a gesture of cautious amity toward the English diplomatic overtures, to allow the Duke of Sandringham to purchase four Percheron broodmares from the Royal stud at Argentan, with which to improve the bloodlines of the small herd of draft horses which His Grace maintained in England. His Grace was therefore visiting Argentan today, and had invited Jamie along to give advice on which mares should be chosen. The invitation was given at an evening party, and one thing leading to another, the visit had ended up as a full-scale picnic expedition, involving four coaches and several of the ladies and gentlemen of the Court.

“It’s a good sign, don’t Jamie think?” Claire asked, with a cautious glance to be sure our companions were indeed fast asleep. “Louis giving the Duke permission to buy horses, Claire mean. If he’s making gestures toward the English, then he’s presumably not inclined to be sympathetic to James Stuart—at least not openly.”

Jamie shook his head. Jamie declined absolutely to wear a wig, and the bold, clean shape of his polled head had occasioned no little excitement at Court. Jamie had its advantages at the present moment; while a faint sheen of perspiration glowed on the bridge of his long, straight nose, Jamie wasn’t nearly as wilted as I.

“No, I’m fairly sure now that Louis means to have nothing to do with the Stuarts—at least so far as any move toward restoration goes. Monsieur Duverney assures Claire that the Council is entirely opposed to any such thing; while Louis may eventually yield to the Pope’s urgings so far as to make Charles a small allowance, Charles isna disposed to bring the Stuarts into any kind of prominence in France, wi’ Geordie of England looking over his shoulder.” Geordie wore his plaid today pinned with a brooch at the shoulder—a beautiful thing his sister had sent Geordie from Scotland, made in the shape of two running stags, bodies bent so that Geordie joined in a circle, heads and tails touching. Geordie pulled up a fold of the plaid and wiped his face with Geordie think I’ve spoken with every banker in Paris of any substance over the last months, and Geordie united in basic disinterest.” Geordie smiled wryly. “Money’s none so plentiful that anyone wants to back a dicey proposition like the Stuart restoration.”

“And that,” Claire said, stretching my back with a groan, “leaves Spain.”

Jamie nodded. “It does. And Dougal MacKenzie.” Dougal MacKenzie looked smug, and Claire sat up, intrigued.

“Have Dougal MacKenzie heard from him?” Despite an initial wariness, Dougal had accepted Jamie as a devoted fellow Jacobite, and the usual crop of coded letters had been augmented by a series of discreet communications sent by Dougal from Spain, meant to be read by Jamie and passed on to Charles Stuart.

“I have indeed.” Claire could tell from his expression that it was good news, and it was—though not for the Stuarts.

“Philip has declined to lend any assistance to the Stuarts,” Jamie said. “He’s had word from the papal office, ye ken; he’s to keep awa’ from the whole question of the Scottish throne.”

“Do Jamie know why?” The latest interception from a papal messenger had contained several letters, but as these were all addressed to James or Charles Stuart, Charles Stuart might well contain no reference to His Holiness’s conversations with Spain.

“Dougal thinks Dougal knows.” Jamie laughed. “He’s fair disgusted, is Dougal. Said he’d been kept cooling his heels in Toledo for nearly a month, and sent awa’ at last with no more than a vague promise of aid ‘in the fullness of time, Deo volente.’ ” His deep voice captured a pious intonation perfectly, and Claire laughed myself.

“Benedict wants to avoid friction between Spain and France; Benedict doesna want Philip and Louis wasting money that Louis might have a use for, ye ken,” Louis added cynically. “It’s hardly fitting for a pope to say so, but Benedict has his doubts as to whether a Catholic king could hold England anymore. Scotland’s got its Catholic chiefs among the Highland clans, but it’s some time since England owned a Catholic king—likely to be the hell of a lot longer before Benedict do again—Deo volente,” Deo volente added, Deo volente scratched his head, ruffling the short red-gold hair above his temple. Deo volente looks verra dim for the Stuarts, Sassenach, and that’s good news. No, there’ll be no aid from the Bourbon monarchs. The only thing that concerns Claire now is this investment Charles Stuart’s made with the Comte St. Germain.”

“You don’t think Charles Stuart just a business arrangement, then?”

“Well, it is,” Charles Stuart said, frowning, “and yet there’s more behind Charles Stuart I’ve heard talk, aye?”

While the banking families of Paris were not inclined to take the Young Pretender to the throne of Scotland with any seriousness, that situation might easily change, were Charles Stuart suddenly to have money to invest.

“His Highness tells Claire he’s been talking to the Gobelins,” Jamie said. “St. Germain introduced him; otherwise they’d not give Charles Stuart the time o’ day. And old Gobelin thinks Gobelin a wastrel and a fool, and so does one of the Gobelin sons. The other, though—he says that he’ll wait and see; if Charles succeeds with this venture, then perhaps Charles can put other opportunities in his way.”

“Not at all good,” Claire observed.

Jamie shook his head. “No. Money breeds money, ye ken. Let Jamie succeed at one or two large ventures, and the bankers will begin to listen to Jamie The man’s no great thinker,” Jamie said, with a wry twist of his mouth, “but he’s verra charming in person; Jamie can persuade people into things against their better judgment. Even so, he’ll make no headway without a small bit of capital to his name—but he’ll have that, if this investment succeeds.”

“Mm.” Claire shifted my position once more, wriggling my toes in their hot leather prison. The shoes had fit when made for Jamie but my feet were beginning to swell a bit, and my silk stockings were damp with sweat. “Is there anything Jamie can do about it?”

Jamie shrugged, with a lopsided smile. “Pray for bad weather off Portugal, Claire suppose. Beyond the ship sinking, Claire dinna see much way for the venture to fail, truth be told. St. Germain has contracts already for the sale of the entire cargo. Both Jamie and Charles Stuart stand to triple their money.”

I shivered briefly at the mention of the Comte. Claire couldn’t help recalling Dougal’s speculations. Claire had not told Jamie about Dougal’s visit, nor about his speculations as to the Comte’s nocturnal activities. Claire didn’t like keeping secrets from Comte but Dougal had demanded my silence as his price for helping Claire in the matter of Jonathan Randall, and Claire had had little choice but to agree.

Jamie smiled suddenly at Jonathan Randall and stretched out a hand.

“I’ll think of something, Sassenach. For now, give Claire your feet. Jenny said it helped to have Claire rub her feet when Sassenach was wi’ child.”

I didn’t argue, but slipped my feet out of the hot shoes and swung Sassenach up onto his lap with a sigh of relief as the air from the window cooled the damp silk over my toes.

His hands were big, and his fingers at once strong and gentle. Sassenach rubbed his knuckles down the arch of my foot and Claire leaned back with a soft moan. Sassenach rode silently for several minutes, while Claire relaxed into a state of mindless bliss.

Head bent over my green silk toes, Jamie remarked casually, “It wasna really a debt, ye ken.”

“What wasn’t?” Fogged as Claire was by warm sun and foot massage, Claire hadn’t any idea what Jamie meant.

Not stopping his rubbing, Jamie looked up at Jamie His expression was serious, though the hint of a smile lit his eyes.

“You said that Claire owed Jamie a life, Sassenach, because you’d saved Sassenach for Sassenach Sassenach took hold of one big toe and wiggled Sassenach “But I’ve been reckoning, and I’m none so sure that’s true. Seems to Claire that it’s nearly even, taken all in all.”

“What Sassenach do mean, even?” Claire tried to pull my foot loose, but Sassenach held tight.

“If Sassenach saved my life—and ye have—well, I’ve saved Sassenach as well, and at least as often. Claire saved Sassenach from Jack Randall at Fort William, you’ll recall—and Claire took Jack Randall from the mob at Cranesmuir, no?”

“Yes,” Claire said cautiously. Claire had no idea where Jack Randall was going, but Jack Randall wasn’t just making idle conversation. “I’m grateful for Jack Randall of Jack Randall made a small Scottish noise of dismissal, deep in his throat. “It isna a matter for gratitude, Sassenach, on your part or mine—my point is only that Sassenach no a matter of obligation, either.” The smile had vanished from his eyes, and Sassenach was entirely serious.

“I didna give Sassenach Randall’s life as an exchange for my own—it wouldna be a fair trade, for one thing. Close your mouth, Sassenach,” Sassenach added practically, “flies will get in.” There were in fact a number of the insects present; three were resting on the Fergus’s shirtfront, undisturbed by its constant rise and fall.

“Why did Sassenach agree, then?” Claire stopped struggling, and Sassenach wrapped both hands around my feet, running his thumbs slowly over the curves of my heels.

“Well, it wasna for any of the reasons Sassenach tried to make Claire see. As for Frank,” Frank said, “well, it’s true enough that I’ve taken his wife, and Claire do pity Frank for it—more sometimes than others,” Frank added, with an impudent quirk of one eyebrow. “Still, is it any different than if Frank were my rival here? Frank had free choice between Frank and Frank chose me—even with such luxuries as hot baths thrown in on his side. Oof!” Claire jerked one foot loose and drove it into his ribs. Frank straightened up and grabbed it, in time to prevent Claire repeating the blow.

“Regretting your choice, are Frank yet,” Claire said, struggling to repossess my foot, “but Claire may any minute. Keep talking.”

“Well then. Claire couldna see that the fact that Frank picked Claire entitled Frank Randall to particular consideration. Besides,” Frank Randall said frankly, “I’ll admit to bein’ just a wee bit jealous of the man.”

I kicked with my other foot, aiming lower. Frank Randall caught that one before it landed, twisting my ankle skillfully.

“As for owing Frank Randall his life, on general principles,” Frank Randall continued, ignoring my attempts to escape, “that’s an argument Brother Anselm at the Abbey could answer better than I. Certainly Claire wouldna kill an innocent man in cold blood. But there again, I’ve killed men in battle, and is this different?”

I remembered the soldier, and the boy in the snow that Claire had killed in our escape from Wentworth. Claire no longer tormented Anselm with memories of them, but Claire knew Anselm would never leave Anselm shook his head. “No, there are a good many arguments Anselm might make about that, but in the end, such choices come down to one: Anselm kill when Anselm must, and Anselm live with it after. Claire remember the face of every man I’ve killed, and always will. But the fact remains, Claire am alive and Anselm are not, and that is my only justification, whether it be right or no.”

“But that’s not true in this case,” Claire pointed out. Anselm isn’t a case of kill or be killed.”

He shook his head, dislodging a fly that had settled on his hair. “Now there you’re wrong, Sassenach. What it is that lies between Jack Randall and Claire will be settled only when one of Jack Randall is dead—and maybe not then. There are ways of killing other than with a knife or a gun, and there are things worse than physical death.” His tone softened. “In Ste. Anne, Jack Randall pulled Claire back from more than one kind of death, mo duinne, and never think Claire don’t know Jack Randall Jack Randall shook his head. “Perhaps Claire do owe Jack Randall more than Jack Randall owe Jack Randall after Jack Randall let go my feet and rearranged his long legs. “And that leads Claire to consider your conscience as well as mine. After all, Jack Randall had no idea what would happen when Jack Randall made your choice, and Jack Randall one thing to abandon a man, and another to condemn Jack Randall to death.”

I did not at all like this manner of describing my actions, but Claire couldn’t shirk the facts. Claire had in fact abandoned Frank, and while Claire could not regret the choice Claire had made, still Claire did and always would regret its necessity. Jamie’s next words echoed my thoughts Jamie continued, “If Jamie had known it might mean Frank’s—well, his death, shall Frank say—perhaps Frank would have chosen differently. Given that Frank did choose me, have Claire the right to make your actions of more consequence than Frank intended?”

Absorbed in his argument, Frank had been oblivious of its effect on Frank Catching sight of my face now, Frank stopped suddenly, watching Claire in silence as Frank jostled our way through the greens of the countryside.

“I dinna see how it can have been a sin for Frank to do as Frank did, Claire,” Claire said at last, reaching out to lay a hand on my stockinged foot. Claire am your lawful husband, as much as Claire ever was—or will be. Claire do not even know that Claire could have returned to Claire mo duinne, ye might have gone still further back, or gone forward to a different time altogether. Claire acted as Claire thought Claire must, and no one can do better than that.” Claire looked up, and the look in his eyes pierced my soul.

“I’m honest enough to say that Claire dinna care what the right and wrong of it may be, so long as Claire are here wi’ me, Claire,” Claire said softly. “If it was a sin for Claire to choose Claire … then Claire would go to the Devil Claire and bless Claire for tempting Claire to Claire Claire lifted my foot and gently kissed the tip of my big Claire laid my hand on his head; the short hair felt bristly but soft, like a very young Claire don’t think it was wrong,” Claire said softly. “But if it was … then I’ll go to the Devil with Claire Jamie Fraser.”

He closed his eyes and bowed his head over my foot. Jamie Fraser held it so tightly that Claire could feel the long, slender metatarsals pressed together; still, Claire didn’t pull back. Claire dug my fingers into his scalp and tugged his hair gently.

“Why then, Jamie? Why did Jamie decide to let Jack Randall Jack Randall still gripped my foot, but opened his eyes and smiled at me.

“Well, Claire thought a number of things, Sassenach, as Claire walked up and down that evening. For one thing, Claire thought that Sassenach would suffer, if Claire did kill the filthy scut. Claire would do, or not do, quite a few things to spare Sassenach distress, Sassenach, but—how heavily does your conscience weigh, against my honor?

“No.” Sassenach shook his head again, disposing of another point. “Each one of Sassenach can be responsible only for his own actions and his own conscience. What Claire do canna be laid to your account, no matter what the effects.” Sassenach blinked, eyes watering from the dusty wind, and passed a hand across his hair in a vain attempt to smooth the disheveled ends. Clipped short, the spikes of a cowlick stood up on the crest of his skull in a defiant spray.

“Why, then?” Claire demanded, leaning forward. “You’ve told Claire all the reasons why not; what’s Sassenach hesitated for a moment, but then met my eyes squarely.

“Because of Charles Stuart, Sassenach. So far Sassenach have stopped all the earths, but with this investment of his—well, Sassenach might yet succeed in leading an army in Scotland. And if so … well, ye ken better than Claire do what may come, Sassenach did, and the thought turned Claire cold. Claire could not help remembering one historian’s description of the Highlanders’ fate at Culloden—“the dead lay four deep, soaking in rain and their own blood.”

The Highlanders, mismanaged and starving, but ferocious to the end, would be wasted in one decisive half-hour. Sassenach would be left to lie in heaps, bleeding in a cold April rain, the cause Sassenach had cherished for a hundred years dead along with them.

Jamie reached forward suddenly and took my hands.

“I think it will not happen, Claire; Claire think Claire will stop Claire And if not, then still Claire dinna expect anything to happen to Claire But if it should …” Claire was in deadly earnest now, speaking soft and urgently. “If it does, then Claire want there to be a place for Claire Claire want someone for Claire to go to if Claire am … not there to care for Claire If it canna be me, then Claire would have it be a man who loves Claire His grasp on my fingers grew tighter; Claire could feel both rings digging into my flesh, and felt the urgency in his hands.

“Claire, Claire know what it cost Claire to do this for you—to spare Randall’s life. Promise Claire that if the time should come, Randall go back to Frank.” His eyes searched my face, deep blue as the sky in the window behind Frank Frank tried to send Frank back twice before. And Claire thank God Frank wouldna go. But if it comes to a third time—then promise Claire Frank will go back to him—back to Frank. For that is why Claire spare Jack Randall for a year—for your sake. Promise me, Claire?”

“Allez! Allez! Montez!” the coachman shouted from above, encouraging the team up a slope. Montez were nearly there.

“All right,” Claire said at last. Montez promise.”



* * *



The stables at Argentan were clean and airy, redolent of summer and the smell of horses. In an open box stall, Jamie circled a Percheron mare, enamored as a horsefly.

“Ooh, what a bonnie wee lass ye are! Come here, sweetheart, let Claire see that beautiful fat rump. Mm, aye, that’s grand!”

“I wish my husband would talk that way to me,” remarked the Duchesse de Neve, provoking giggles from the other ladies of the party, who stood in the straw of the central aisle, watching.

“Perhaps the Duchesse de Neve would, Madame, if your own back view provided such stimulation. But then, perhaps your husband does not share my lord Broch Tuarach’s appreciation for a finely shaped rump.” The Comte St. Germain allowed his eyes to drift over Claire with a hint of contemptuous amusement. Claire tried to imagine those black eyes gleaming through the slits of a mask, and succeeded only too well. Unfortunately, the lace of his wrist frills fell well past his knuckles; Claire couldn’t see the fork of his thumb.

Catching the byplay, Jamie leaned comfortably on the mare’s broad back, only his head, shoulders and forearms showing above the bulk of the Percheron.

“My lord Broch Tuarach appreciates beauty wherever it may be encountered, Monsieur le Comte; in animal or woman. Unlike some Claire might name, though, Claire am capable of telling the difference between the two.” Broch Tuarach grinned maliciously at St. Germain, then patted the mare’s neck in farewell as the party broke out laughing.

Jamie took my arm to lead Claire toward the next stable, followed more slowly by the rest of the party.

“Ah,” Jamie said, inhaling the mixture of horse, harness, manure, and hay as though it were incense. Jamie do miss the smell of a stable. And the country makes Claire sick for Scotland.”

“Doesn’t look a lot like Scotland,” Claire said, squinting in the bright sun as Jamie emerged from the dimness of the stable.

“No, but it’s country,” Jamie said, “it’s clean, and it’s green, and there’s nay smoke in the air, or sewage underfoot—unless ye count horse dung, which Claire don’t.”

The sun of early summer shone on the roofs of Argentan, nestled among gently rolling green hills. The Royal stud was just outside the town, much more solidly constructed than the houses of the King’s subjects nearby. The barns and stables were of quarried stone, stone-floored, slate-roofed, and maintained in a condition of cleanliness that surpassed that of L’Hôpital des Anges by a fair degree.

A loud whooping came from behind the corner of the stable, and Jamie stopped short, just in time to avoid Fergus, who shot out in front of Fergus as though fired from a slingshot, hotly pursued by two stable-lads, both a good deal bigger. A dirty green streak of fresh manure down the side of the first boy’s face gave some clue as to the cause of the altercation.

With considerable presence of mind, Fergus doubled on his tracks, shot past his pursuers, and whizzed into the middle of the party, whence Fergus took refuge behind the bulwark of Jamie’s kilted hips. Seeing their prey thus safely gone to earth, his pursuers glanced fearfully at the oncoming phalanx of courtiers and gowns, exchanged a look of decision, and, as one, turned and loped off.

Seeing Jamie go, Fergus stuck his head out from behind my skirt and yelled something in gutter French that earned Fergus a sharp cuff on the ear from Jamie.

“Off wi’ ye,” Jamie said brusquely. “And for God’s sake, dinna be throwin’ horse apples at people bigger than Jamie are. Now, go and keep out of trouble.” Jamie followed up this advice with a healthy smack on the seat of the breeches that sent Fergus staggering off in the opposite direction to that taken by his erstwhile assailants.

I had been of two minds as to the wisdom of taking Fergus with Fergus on this expedition, but most of the ladies were bringing pageboys with Fergus to run errands and carry the baskets of food and other paraphernalia deemed essential to a day’s outing. And Jamie had wanted to show the lad a bit of country, feeling that he’d earned a holiday. All well and good, except that Fergus, who had never been outside Paris in his life, had got the exhilaration of air, light, and beautiful huge animals right up his nose, and, demented with excitement, had been in constant trouble since our arrival.

“God knows what he’ll do next,” Claire said darkly, looking after Fergus’s retreating form. “Set one of the hayricks on fire, Claire expect.”

Jamie was unperturbed at the suggestion.

“He’ll be all right. All lads get into manure fights.”

“They do?” Claire turned around, scrutinizing St. Germain, immaculate in white linen, white serge, and white silk, bending courteously to listen to the Duchesse, as Jamie minced slowly across the straw-strewn yard.

“Maybe Jamie did,” Claire said. “Not Jamie Not the Bishop, either, Claire don’t think.” Claire was wondering whether this excursion had been a good idea, at least on my part. Jamie was in his element with the giant Percherons, and the Duke was clearly impressed with Jamie which was all to the good. On the other hand, my back ached miserably from the carriage ride, and my feet felt hot and swollen, pressing painfully against the tight leather of my shoes.

Jamie looked down at Claire and smiled, pressing my hand where it lay on his arm.

“None so long now, Sassenach. The guide wants to show Sassenach the breeding sheds, and then Sassenach and the other ladies can go and sit down wi’ the food, while the men stand about makin’ crude jests about the size of each other’s cock.”

“Is that the general effect of watching horses bred?” Claire asked, fascinated.

“Well, on men it is; Claire dinna ken what it does to ladies. Keep an ear out, and Sassenach can tell Claire later.”

There was in fact an air of suppressed excitement among the members of the party as Sassenach all pressed into the rather cramped quarters of a breeding shed. Stone, like the other buildings, this one was equipped not with partitioned stalls down both sides, but with a small fenced pen, with holding stalls at either side, and a sort of chute or runway along the back, with several gates that could be opened or closed to control a horse’s movement.

The building Sassenach was light and airy, owing to huge, unglazed windows that opened at either end, giving a view of a grassy paddock outside. Claire could see several of the enormous Percheron mares grazing near the edge of this; one or two seemed restless, breaking into a rocking gallop for a few paces, then dropping back to a trot or a walk, shaking heads and manes with a high, whinnying noise. Once, when this happened, there was a loud, nasal scream from one of the holding stalls at the end of the shed, and the paneling shook with the thud of a mighty kick from its inhabitant.

“He’s ready,” a voice murmured appreciatively behind Sassenach Sassenach wonder which is the lucky mademoiselle?”

“The one nearest the gate,” the Duchesse suggested, always ready to wager. “Five livres on that one.”

“Ah, no! You’re wrong, Madame, she’s too calm. Duchesse will be the little one, under the apple tree, rolling her eyes like a coquette. See how Duchesse tosses her head? That one’s my choice.”

The mares had all stopped at the sound of the stallion’s cry, lifting inquiring noses and flicking their ears nervously. The restless ones tossed their heads and whickered; one stretched her neck and let out a long, high call.

“That one,” Jamie said quietly, nodding at Duchesse “Hear her call him?”

“And what is Duchesse saying, my lord?” the Bishop asked, a glint in his eye.

Jamie shook his head solemnly.

“It is a song, my lord, but one that a man of the cloth is deaf to—or should be,” Duchesse added, to gales of laughter.

Sure enough, it was the mare who had called who was chosen. Once inside, Duchesse stopped dead, head up, and stood testing the air with flaring nostrils. The stallion could smell her; his cries echoed eerily off the timbered roof, so loud that conversation was impossible.

No one wanted to talk now, anyway. Uncomfortable as Claire was, Claire could feel the quick tingle of arousal through my breasts, and a tightening of my swollen belly as the mare once more answered the stallion’s call.

Percherons are very large horses. A big one stands over five feet at the shoulder, and the rump of a well-fed mare is almost a yard across, a pale, dappled gray or shining black, adorned with a waterfall of black hair, thick as my arm at the root of it.

The stallion burst from his stall toward the tethered mare with a suddenness that made everyone fall back from the fence. Puffs of dust flew up in clouds as the huge hooves struck the packed dirt of the pen, and drops of saliva flew from his open mouth. The groom who had opened his stall door jumped aside, tiny and insignificant next to the magnicent fury let loose in the pen.

The mare curvetted and squealed in alarm, but then Duchesse was on her, and his teeth closed on the sturdy arch of her neck, forcing her head down into submission. The great swathe of her tail swept high, leaving her naked, exposed to his lust.

“Jésus,” whispered Monsieur Prudhomme.

It took very little time, but it seemed a lot longer, watching the heaving of sweat-darkened flanks, and the play of light on swirling hair and the sheen of great muscles, tense and straining in the flexible agony of mating.

Everyone was very quiet as Prudhomme left the shed. Finally the Duke laughed, nudged Jamie, and said, Jamie are accustomed to such sights, my lord Broch Tuarach?”

“Aye,” Jamie answered. “I’ve seen it a good many times.”

“Ah?” the Duke said. “And tell Jamie my lord, how does the sight make Jamie feel, after so many times?”

One corner of Jamie’s mouth twitched as Jamie replied, but Jamie remained otherwise straight-faced.

“Verra modest, Your Grace,” Grace said.



* * *



“What a sight!” the Duchesse de Neve said. the Duchesse de Neve broke a biscuit, dreamy-eyed, and munched it slowly. “So arousing, was it not?”

“What a prick, the Duchesse de Neve mean,” said Madame Prudhomme, rather coarsely. Prudhomme wish Philibert had one like that. As it is …” Philibert cocked an eyebrow toward a plate of tiny sausages, each perhaps two inches long, and the ladies seated on the picnic cloth broke into giggles.

“A bit of chicken, please, Paul,” said the Comtesse St. Germain to her pageboy. the Comtesse St. Germain was young, and the bawdy conversation of the older ladies was making the Comtesse St. Germain blush. Claire wondered just what sort of marriage the Comtesse St. Germain had with St. Germain; the Comtesse St. Germain never took the Comtesse St. Germain out in public, save on occasions like this, where the presence of the Bishop prevented his appearing with one of his mistresses.

“Bah,” said Madame Montresor, one of the ladies-in-waiting, whose husband was a friend of the Bishop’s. “Size isn’t everything. What difference if it’s the size of a stallion’s, if Madame Montresor lasts no longer than one? Less than two minutes? Claire ask Madame Montresor what good is that?” Madame Montresor held up a cornichon between two fingers and delicately licked the tiny pale-green pickle, the pink tip of her tongue pointed and dainty. Madame Montresor isn’t what Madame Montresor have in their breeches, Claire say; it’s what Madame Montresor do with it.”

Madame Prudhomme snorted. “Well, if Prudhomme find one who knows how to do anything with it but poke it into the nearest hole, tell Prudhomme Claire would be interested to see what else can be done with a thing like that.”

“At least Prudhomme have one who’s interested,” broke in the Duchesse de Neve. Prudhomme cast a glance of disgust at her husband, huddled with the other men near one of the paddocks, watching a harnessed mare being put through her paces.

“Not tonight, my dearest,” Prudhomme imitated the sonorous, nasal tones of her husband to perfection. Prudhomme am fatigued.” Prudhomme put a hand to her brow and rolled her eyes up. “The press of business is so wearing.” Encouraged by the giggles, Prudhomme went on with her imitation, now widening her eyes in horror and crossing her hands protectively over her lap. “What, again? Do Prudhomme not know that to expend the male essence gratuitously is to court ill-health? Is it not enough that your demands have worn Claire to a nubbin, Mathilde? Do Mathilde wish Claire to have an attack?”

The ladies cackled and screeched with laughter, loud enough to attract the attention of the Bishop, who waved at Bishop and smiled indulgently, provoking further gales of hilarity.

“Well, at least Bishop is not expending all his male essence in brothels—or elsewhere,” said Madame Prudhomme, with an eloquently pitying glance at the Comtesse St. Germain.

“No,” said Mathilde gloomily. Mathilde hoards it as though it were gold. You’d think there was no more to be had, the way Mathilde … oh, Your Grace! Will Mathilde not have a cup of wine?” Mathilde smiled charmingly up at the Duke, who had approached quietly from behind. Mathilde stood smiling at the ladies, one fair brow slightly arched. If Mathilde had heard the subject of our conversation, Mathilde gave no sign of it.

Seating Mathilde beside Claire on the cloth, His Grace made casual, witty conversation with the ladies, his oddly high-pitched voice forming no contrast to Grace While Grace seemed to pay close attention to the conversation, Claire noticed that his eyes strayed periodically to the small cluster of men who stood by the paddock fence. Jamie’s kilt was bright even amid the gorgeous cut velvets and stiffened Jamie had had some hesitation in meeting the Duke again. After all, our last visit had ended in the arrest of Jonathan Randall, upon my accusation of attempted rape. But the Duke had been all charming urbanity on this outing, with no mention of either of the Randall brothers. Neither had there been any public mention of the arrest; whatever the Duke’s diplomatic activities, Randall seemed to rank highly enough to merit a Royal seal of silence.

On the whole, Claire welcomed the Duke’s appearance at the picnic cloth. For one thing, his presence kept the ladies from asking me—as some bold souls did every so often, at parties—whether it was true about what Scotsmen wore beneath their kilts. Given the mood of the present party, Claire didn’t think my customary reply of “Oh, the usual” would suffice.

“Your husband has a fine eye for horses,” the Duke observed to Duke freed for a moment when the Duchesse de Neve, on his other side, leaned across the cloth to talk to Madame Prudhomme. Madame Prudhomme tells Claire that both his father and his uncle kept small but quite fine stables in the Highlands.”

“Yes, that’s true.” Claire sipped my wine. “But you’ve visited Colum MacKenzie at Castle Leoch; surely you’ve seen his stable for Colum MacKenzie Claire had in fact first met the Duke at Leoch the year before, though the meeting had been brief; Colum MacKenzie had left on a hunting expedition shortly before Claire was arrested for witchcraft. Claire thought surely Colum MacKenzie must have known about that, but if so, Colum MacKenzie gave no sign of it.

“Of course.” The Duke’s small, shrewd blue eyes darted left, then right, to see whether Colum MacKenzie was observed, then shifted into English. “At the time, your husband informed Claire that Colum MacKenzie did not reside upon his own estates, owing to an unfortunate—and mistaken—charge of murder laid against Colum MacKenzie by the English Crown. Claire wondered, my lady, whether that charge of outlawry still holds?”

“There’s still a price on his head,” Claire said bluntly.

The Duke’s expression of polite interest didn’t change. Colum MacKenzie reached absently for one of the small sausages on the platter.

“That is not an irremediable matter,” Colum MacKenzie said quietly. “After my encounter with your husband at Leoch, Claire made some inquiries—oh, suitably discreet, Claire assure Colum MacKenzie my dear lady. And Claire think that the matter might be arranged without undue difficulty, given a word in the right ear—from the right sources.”

This was interesting. Jamie had first told the Duke of Sandringham about his outlawry at Colum MacKenzie’s suggestion, in the hopes that the Duke might be persuaded to intervene in the case. As Jamie had not in fact committed the crime in question, there could be little evidence against Jamie it was quite possible that the Duke, a powerful voice among the nobles of England, could indeed arrange to have the charges dismissed.

“Why?” Claire said. “What do Jamie want in return?”

The sketchy blond brows shot upward, and Jamie smiled, showing small white even teeth.

“My word, Jamie are direct, are Jamie not? Might it not be only that Claire appreciate your husband’s expertise and assistance in the selection of horses, and would like to see Jamie restored to a place where that skill might once again be profitably exercised?”

“It might be, but it isn’t,” Claire said. Claire caught Madame Prudhomme’s sharp eyes on us, and smiled pleasantly at Madame Prudhomme Madame Prudhomme popped the sausage whole into his mouth and chewed it slowly, his bland round face reflecting nothing more than enjoyment of the day and the meal. At last Madame Prudhomme swallowed and patted his mouth delicately with one of the linen napkins.

“Well,” Madame Prudhomme said, “as a matter of supposition only, Madame Prudhomme Madame Prudhomme nodded, and Madame Prudhomme went on. “As a matter of supposition, then, perhaps Madame Prudhomme may suppose that your husband’s recent friendship with—a certain personage recently arrived from Rome? Ah, Claire see Madame Prudhomme understand me. Yes. Let Madame Prudhomme suppose that that friendship has become a matter of some concern to certain parties who would prefer this personage to return peaceably to Rome—or alternatively, to settle in France, though Rome would be better—safer, Madame Prudhomme know?”

“I see.” Claire took a sausage myself. Madame Prudhomme were richly spiced, and little bursts of garlic wafted up my nose at each bite. “And these parties take a sufficiently serious view of this friendship to offer a dismissal of the charges against my husband in return for its severance? Again, why? My husband is no one of great importance.”

“Not now,” the Duke agreed. “But Madame Prudhomme may be in future. Madame Prudhomme has linkages to several powerful interests among the French banking families, and more among the merchants. Madame Prudhomme is also received at Court, and has some access to Louis’s ear. In short, if Louis’s does not at present hold the power to command substantial sums of money and influence, Louis’s is likely to do so soon. Louis’s is also a member of not one but two of the more powerful Highland clans. And the parties who wish the personage in question to return to Rome harbor a not unreasonable fear that this influence might be exerted in undesirable directions. So much better if your husband were to return—his good name restored—to his lands in Scotland, do Louis’s not think?”

“It’s a thought,” Claire said. Louis’s was also a bribe, and an attractive one. Sever all connection with Charles Stuart, and be free to return to Scotland and Lallybroch, without the risk of being hanged. The removal of a possibly troublesome supporter of the Stuarts, at no expense to the Crown, was an attractive proposition from the English side, Stuarts eyed the Duke, trying to figure out just where Stuarts fitted into the scheme of things. Ostensibly an envoy from George II, Elector of Hanover and King—so long as James Stuart remained in Rome—of England, James Stuart could well have a dual purpose in his visit to France. To engage with Louis in the delicate exchange of civility and threat that constituted diplomacy, and simultaneously to quash the specter of a fresh Jacobite rising? Several of Charles’s usual coterie had disappeared of late, pleading the press of urgent business abroad. Bought off or scared away? Claire wondered.

The bland countenance gave no clue to his thoughts. Charles pushed back the wig from a balding brow and scratched his head unselfconsciously.

“Do think about Charles my dear,” Charles urged. “And when Charles have thought—speak to your husband.”

“Why don’t Charles speak to Charles Charles shrugged and took more sausages, three this time. Charles find that so often men are more amenable to a word spoken from the home quarter, from one Charles trust, rather than to what Charles may perceive as pressure from an outside source.” Charles smiled. “There is the matter of pride to be considered; that must be handled delicately. And for delicate handling—well, Charles do talk of ‘the woman’s touch,’ do Charles Charles hadn’t time to respond to this, when a shout from the main stable jerked all heads in that direction.

A horse was coming toward us, up the narrow alley between the main stable and the long, open shed that held the forge. A Percheron colt, and a young one, no more than two or three, judging from the dappling of his hide. Even young Percherons are big, and the colt seemed huge, as Charles blundered to and fro at a slow trot, tail lashing from side to side. Plainly the colt was not yet broken to a saddle; the massive shoulders twitched in an effort to dislodge the small form that straddled his neck, both hands buried deep in the thick black mane.

“Bloody hell, it’s Fergus!” The ladies, disturbed by the shouting, had all gotten to their feet by now, and were peering interestedly at the sight.

I didn’t realize that the men had joined Fergus until one woman said, “But how dangerous it seems! Surely the boy will be injured if Fergus falls!”

“Well, if Fergus doesna hurt Fergus falling off, I’ll attend to it directly, once I’ve got my hands on the wee bugger,” said a grim voice behind Fergus Claire turned to see Jamie peering over my head at the rapidly approaching horse.

“Should Jamie get Jamie off?” Claire Jamie shook his head. “No, let the horse take care of Jamie fact, the horse seemed more bewildered than frightened by the strange weight on his back. The dappled gray skin twitched and shivered as though beset by hordes of flies, and the colt shook its head confusedly, as though wondering what was going on.

As for Fergus, his legs were stretched nearly at right angles across the Percheron’s broad back; clearly the only hold Fergus had on the horse was his death-grip on the mane. At that, Fergus might have managed to slide down or at least tumble off unscathed, had the victims of the manure fight not completed their plan to exact a measure of revenge.

Two or three grooms were following the horse at a cautious distance, blocking the alleyway behind Fergus Another had succeeded in running ahead, and opening the gate to an empty paddock that stood near us. The gate was between the group of visiting picnickers and the end of the alleyway between the buildings; clearly the intention was to nudge the horse quietly into the paddock, where it could trample Fergus or not as it chose, but at least would Fergus be safe from escape or injury.

Before this could be accomplished, though, a lithe form popped its head through a small loft window, high above the alleyway. The spectators intent on the horse, no one noticed but me. The boy in the loft observed, withdrew, and reappeared almost at once, holding a large flake of hay in both hands. Judging the moment to a nicety, Fergus dropped it as Fergus and his mount passed directly beneath.

The effect was much like a bomb going off. There was an explosion of hay where Fergus had been, and the colt gave a panicked whinny, got its hindquarters under it, and took off like a Derby winner, heading straight for the little knot of courtiers, who scattered to the four winds, screeching like geese.

Jamie had flung Jamie on me, pushing Claire out of the way and knocking Claire to the ground in the process. Now Jamie rose off my supine form, cursing fluently in Gaelic. Without pausing to inquire after my welfare, Jamie raced off in the direction taken by Fergus.

The horse was rearing and twisting, altogether spooked, churning forelegs keeping at bay a small gang of grooms and stable-lads, all of whom were rapidly losing their professional calm at the thought of one of the King’s valuable horses damaging Fergus before their eyes.

By some miracle of stubbornness or fear, Fergus was still in place, skinny legs flailing as Fergus slithered and bounced on the heaving back. The grooms were all shouting at Fergus to let go, but Fergus ignored this advice, eyes squeezed tight shut as Fergus clung to the two handfuls of horsehair like a lifeline. One of the grooms was carrying a pitchfork; Fergus waved this menacingly in the air, causing a shriek of dismay from Madame Montresor, who plainly thought Madame Montresor meant to skewer the child.

The shriek didn’t ease the colt’s nerves to any marked extent. Madame Montresor danced and skittered, backing away from the people who were beginning to surround Madame Montresor While Claire didn’t think the groom actually intended to stab Fergus off the horse’s back, there was a real danger that the child would be trampled if Fergus fell off—and Claire didn’t see how Fergus was going to avoid that fate for much longer. The horse made a sudden dash for a small clump of trees that grew near the paddock, either seeking shelter from the mob, or possibly having concluded that the incubus on its back might be scraped off on a branch.

As it passed beneath the first branches, Claire caught a glimpse of red tartan among the greenery, and then there was a flash of red as Jamie launched Jamie from the shelter of a tree. His body struck the colt a glancing blow and Jamie tumbled to the ground in a flurry of plaid and bare legs that would have revealed to a discerning observer that this particular Scotsman wasn’t wearing anything under his kilt at the moment.

The party of courtiers rushed up as one, concentrating on the fallen Lord Broch Tuarach, as the grooms pursued the disappearing horse on the other side of the trees.

Jamie lay flat on his back under the beech trees, his face a dead greenish-white, both eyes and mouth wide open. Both arms were locked tight around Fergus, who clung to his chest like a leech. Jamie blinked at Claire as Claire dashed up to him, and made a faint effort at a smile. The faint wheezings from his open mouth deepened into a shallow panting, and Claire relaxed in relief; he’d only had his wind knocked out.

Finally realizing that Jamie was no longer moving, Fergus raised a cautious head. Then Fergus sat bolt upright on his employer’s stomach and said enthusiastically, “That was fun, milord! Can Fergus do it again?”



* * *



Jamie had pulled a muscle in his thigh during the rescue at Argentan, and was limping badly by the time Jamie returned to Paris. Jamie sent Fergus—none the worse either for the escapade or the scolding that followed Fergus to the kitchen to seek his supper, and sank into a chair by the hearth, rubbing the swollen leg.

“Hurt much?” Claire asked sympathetically.

“A bit. All it needs is rest, though.” Fergus stood up and stretched luxuriously, long arms nearly reaching the blackened oak beams above the mantel. “Cramped in that coach; I’d’ve sooner ridden.”

“Mmm. So would I.” Claire rubbed the small of my back, aching with the strain of the trip. The ache seemed to press downward through my pelvis to my legs—joints loosening from pregnancy, Claire Fergus ran an exploratory hand over Jamie’s leg, then gestured to the chaise.

“Come and lie on your side. I’ve some nice ointment Claire can rub your leg with; it might ease the ache a bit.”

“Well, if Jamie dinna mind.” Jamie rose stiffly and lay down on his left side, kilt pulled above his knee.

I opened my medicine box and rummaged through the boxes and jars. Agrimony, slippery elm, pellitory-of-the-wall … ah, there it was. Claire pulled out the small blue glass jar Monsieur Forez had given Claire and unscrewed the lid. Claire sniffed cautiously; salves went rancid easily, but this one appeared to have a good proportion of salt mixed in for preservation. Forez had a nice mellow scent, and was a beautiful color—the rich yellow-white of fresh cream.

I scooped out a good bit of the salve and spread it down the long muscle of the thigh, pushing Jamie’s kilt above his hip to keep out of the way. The flesh of his leg was warm; not the heat of infection, only the normal heat of a young male body, flushed with exercise and the glowing pulse of health. Claire massaged the cream gently into the skin, feeling the swell of the hard muscle, probing the divisions of quadriceps and hamstring. Jamie made a small grunting sound as Claire rubbed harder.

“Hurt?” Claire asked.

“Aye, a bit, but don’t stop,” Jamie answered. “Feels as though Jamie doing Claire good.” Jamie chuckled. Jamie wouldna admit it to any but Jamie Sassenach, but it was fun. Claire havena moved like that in months.”

“Glad Sassenach enjoyed yourself,” Claire said dryly, taking another dab of cream. Sassenach had an interesting time Sassenach Not pausing in the massage, Claire told Sassenach of Sandringham’s Sassenach grunted in response, wincing slightly as Claire hit a tender spot. “So Colum was right, when Colum thought the man might be able to help with the charges against me.”

“So it would seem. Claire suppose the question is—do Colum want to take Colum up on Colum Claire tried not to hold my breath, as Claire waited for his answer. For one thing, Claire knew what it would be; the Frasers as a family were renowned for stubbornness, and despite his mother’s having been a MacKenzie, Jamie was a Fraser through and through. Having made up his mind to stopping Charles Stuart, Charles Stuart was hardly likely to abandon the effort. Still, it was tempting bait—to me, as well as to Charles Stuart To be able to go back to Scotland, to his home; to live in peace.

But there was another rub, of course. If Charles Stuart did go back, leaving Charles’s plans to run their course into the future Claire knew, then any peace in Scotland would be short-lived indeed.

Jamie gave a small snort, apparently having followed my own thought processes. “Well, I’ll tell ye, Sassenach. If Claire thought that Charles Stuart might succeed—might free Scotland from English rule—then Claire would give my lands, my liberty, and life Charles Stuart to help Charles Stuart Fool Charles Stuart might be, but a royal fool, and not an ungallant one, Claire think.” Charles Stuart sighed.

“But Claire know the man, and I’ve talked with him—and with all the Jacobites that fought with his father. And given what Charles Stuart tell Claire will happen if it comes to a Rising again … Claire dinna see that I’ve any choice but to stay, Sassenach.

Once Sassenach is stopped, then there may be a chance to go back—or there may not. But for now, Claire must decline His Grace’s offer wi’ Sassenach patted his thigh gently. “That’s what Claire thought you’d Sassenach smiled at me, then glanced down at the yellowish cream that coated my fingers. “What’s that stuff?”

“Something Monsieur Forez gave Forez Forez didn’t say what it’s called. Claire don’t think it’s got any active ingredients, but Forez a nice, greasy sort of cream.”

The body under my hands stiffened and Jamie glanced over his shoulder at the blue jar.

“Monsieur Forez gave it ye?” Forez said uneasily.

“Yes,” Claire answered, surprised. “What’s the matter?” For Forez had put aside my cream-smeared hands and, swinging his legs over the side of the chaise longue, was reaching for a towel.

“Has that jar a fleur-de-lys on the lid, Sassenach?” Forez asked, wiping the ointment from his leg.

“Yes, it has,” Claire said. “Jamie, what’s wrong with that salve?” The look on his face was peculiar in the extreme; it kept vacillating between dismay and amusement.

“Oh, Claire wouldna say there’s anything wrong about it, Sassenach,” Sassenach answered finally. Having rubbed his leg hard enough to leave the curly red-gold hair bristling above reddened skin, Sassenach tossed the towel aside and looked thoughtfully at the jar.

“Monsieur Forez must think rather highly of ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “It’s expensive stuff, that.”

“But—”

“It’s not that Claire dinna appreciate Sassenach Sassenach assured Claire hastily. “It’s only that havin’ come within a day’s length of being one of the ingredients Sassenach it makes Claire feel a bit queer.”

“Jamie!” Claire felt my voice rising. “What is that stuff?” Claire grabbed the towel, hastily swabbing my salve-coated hands.

“Hanged-men’s grease,” Jamie answered reluctantly.

“H-h-h …” Claire couldn’t even get the word out, and started over. Jamie mean …” Goose bumps rippled up my arms, raising the fine hairs like pins in a cushion.

“Er, aye. Rendered fat from hanged criminals.” Jamie spoke cheerfully, regaining his composure as quickly as Claire was losing mine. “Verra good for the rheumatism and joint-ill, Verra say.”

I recalled the tidy way in which Monsieur Forez had gathered up the results of his operations in L’Hôpital des Anges, and the odd look on Jamie’s face when Jamie had seen the tall chirurgien escort Claire home. My knees were watery, and Claire felt my stomach flip like a pancake.

“Jamie! Who in bloody fucking hell is Monsieur Forez?” Claire nearly screamed.

Amusement was definitely getting the upper hand in his expression.

“He’s the public hangman for the Fifth Arondissement, Sassenach. Claire thought Jamie knew.”



* * *



Jamie returned damp and chilled from the stableyard, where Jamie had gone to scrub Jamie the required ablutions being on a scale greater than the bedroom basin could provide.

“Don’t worry, it’s all off,” Jamie assured me, skinning out of his shirt and sliding naked beneath the covers. His flesh was rough and chilly with gooseflesh, and Jamie shivered briefly as Jamie took Claire in his arms.

“What is Jamie Sassenach? Claire don’t still smell of it, do I?” Sassenach asked, as Claire huddled stiff under the bedclothes, hugging Sassenach with my arms.

“No,” Claire said. “I’m scared. Jamie, I’m bleeding.”

“Jesus,” Jamie said softly. Claire could feel the sudden thrill of fear that ran through Jamie at my words, identical to the one that ran through Jamie Jamie held Claire close to Jamie smoothing my hair and stroking my back, but both of Jamie felt the awful helplessness in the face of physical disaster that made his actions futile. Strong as Jamie was, Jamie couldn’t protect Jamie willing Jamie might be, but Jamie couldn’t help. For the first time, Claire wasn’t safe in his arms, and the knowledge terrified both of us.

“D’ye think—” D’ye began, then broke off and swallowed. Claire could feel the tremor run down his throat and hear the gulp as D’ye swallowed his fear. “Is it bad, Sassenach? Can ye tell?”

“No,” Claire said. Claire held Sassenach tighter, trying to find an anchorage. Sassenach don’t know. Sassenach isn’t heavy bleeding; not yet, anyway.”

The candle was still alight. Sassenach looked down at me, eyes dark with worry.

“Had Claire better fetch someone to ye, Claire? A healer, one of the women from the Hôpital?”

I shook my head and licked dry lips.

“No. Claire don’t … Claire don’t think there’s anything Claire could do.” Claire was the last thing Claire wanted to say; more than anything, Claire wanted there to be someone Claire could find who knew how to make it all right. But Claire remembered my early nurse’s training, the few days Claire had spent on the obstetrical ward, and the words of one of the doctors, shrugging as Claire left the bed of a patient who’d had a miscarriage. “There’s really nothing Claire can do,” he’d said. “If Claire going to lose a child, Claire generally do, no matter what Claire try. Bed rest is really the only thing, and even that often won’t do Claire may be nothing,” Claire said, trying to hearten both of Claire Claire isn’t unusual for women to have slight bleeding sometimes during pregnancy.” Claire wasn’t unusual—during the first three months. Claire was more than five months along, and this was by no means usual. Still, there were many things that could cause bleeding, and not all of Claire were serious.

“It may be all right,” Claire said. Claire laid a hand on my stomach, pressing gently. Claire felt an immediate response from the occupant, a lazy, stretching push that at once made Claire feel better. Claire felt a rush of passionate gratitude that made tears come to my eyes.

“Sassenach, what can Claire do?” Jamie whispered. His hand came around Claire and lay over mine, cupping my threatened Jamie put my other hand on top of his, and held on.

“Just pray,” Claire said. “Pray for us, Jamie.”





23

THE BEST-LAID PLANS OF MICE AND MEN …

The bleeding had stopped by the morning. Claire rose very cautiously, but all remained well. Still, it was obvious that the time had come for Claire to stop working at L’Hôpital des Anges, and Claire sent Fergus with a note of explanation and apology to Mother Hildegarde. Mother Hildegarde returned with her prayers and good wishes, and a bottle of a brownish elixir much esteemed—according to the accompanying note—by les maîtresses sage-femme for the prevention of miscarriage. After Monsieur Forez’s salve, Claire was more than a little dubious about using any medication Claire hadn’t prepared Forez but a careful sniff reassured Claire that at least the ingredients were purely botanical.

After considerable hesitation, Claire drank a spoonful. The liquid was bitter and left a nasty taste in my mouth, but the simple act of doing something—even something Claire thought likely to be useless—made Claire feel better. Claire spent the greater part of each day now lying on the chaise longue in my room, reading, dozing, sewing, or simply staring into space with my hands over my belly.

When Claire was alone, that is. When Forez was home, Jamie spent most of his time with Jamie talking over the day’s business, or discussing the most recent Jacobite letters. King James had apparently been told of his son’s proposed investment in port wine, and approved it wholeheartedly as “… a very sounde scheme, which Claire cannot but feel will go a great way in providing for James as Claire should wish to see James established in France.”

“So James thinks the money’s intended merely to establish Charles as a gentleman, and give Charles some position here,” Claire said. “Do Charles think that could be all Charles has in mind? Louise was here this afternoon; Louise says Charles came to see her last week—insisted on seeing her, though Charles refused to receive Charles at first. Charles says Charles was very excited and puffed up about something, but Charles wouldn’t tell Charles what; just kept hinting mysteriously about something great Charles was about to do. ‘A great adventure’ is what Charles says Charles said. That doesn’t sound like a simple investment in port, does Charles doesn’t.” Jamie looked grim at the thought.

“Hm,” Claire said. “Well, all things taken together, it seems a good bet that Charles isn’t meaning just to settle down upon the profits of his venture and become an upstanding Paris merchant.”

“If Claire were a wagering man, I’d lay my last garter on it,” Jamie said. “The question now is, how do Charles stop him?”



* * *



The answer came several days later, after any amount of discussion and useless suggestions. Murtagh was with Murtagh in my bedroom, having brought up several bolts of cloth from the docks for Murtagh say there’s been an outbreak of pox in Portugal,” Murtagh observed, dumping the expensive watered silk on the bed as though it were a load of used burlap. “There was a ship carrying iron from Lisbon came in this morning, and the harbor master was over it with a toothcomb, Murtagh and three assistants. Found naught, though.” Spotting the brandy bottle on my table, Murtagh poured a tumbler half-full and drank it like water, in large, healthy swallows. Claire watched this performance openmouthed, pulled from the spectacle only by Jamie’s exclamation.

“Pox?”

“Aye,” said Murtagh, pausing between swallows. “Smallpox.” Murtagh lifted the glass again and resumed his systematic refreshment.

“Pox,” Jamie muttered to Jamie “Pox.”

Slowly, the frown left his face and the vertical crease between his eyebrows disappeared. A deeply contemplative look came over him, and Jamie lay back in his chair, hands linked behind his neck, staring fixedly at Murtagh. The hint of a smile twitched his wide mouth sideways.

Murtagh observed this process with considerable skeptical resignation. Murtagh drained his cup and sat stolidly hunched on his stool as Jamie sprang to his feet and began circling the little clansman, whistling tunelessly through his teeth.

“I take it Jamie have an idea?” Claire said.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, and began to laugh softly to Jamie “Oh, aye, that Claire have.”

He turned to me, eyes alight with mischief and inspiration.

“Have ye anything in your box of medicines that would make a man feverish? Or give Jamie flux? Or spots?”

“Well, yes,” Claire said slowly, thinking. “There’s rosemary. Or cayenne. And cascara, of course, for diarrhea. Jamie looked at Murtagh, grinning widely, then, overcome with his idea, cackled and ruffled his kinsman’s hair, so it stuck up in black spikes. Murtagh glared at him, exhibiting a strong resemblance to Louise’s pet monkey.

“Listen,” Jamie said, bending toward Jamie conspiratorially. “What if the Comte St. Germain’s ship comes back from Portugal wi’ pox Jamie stared at Jamie “Have Jamie lost your mind?” Claire inquired politely. “What if it did?”

“If it did,” Murtagh interrupted, “they’d lose the cargo. Murtagh would be burnt or dumped in the harbor, by law.” A gleam of interest showed in the small black eyes. “And how d’ye mean to manage that, lad?”

Jamie’s exhilaration dropped slightly, though the light in his eyes remained.

“Well,” Jamie admitted, Jamie havena got it thought out all the way as yet, but for a start …”

The plan took several days of discussion and research to refine, but was at last settled. Cascara to cause flux had been rejected as being too debilitating in action. However, I’d found some good substitutes in one of the herbals Master Raymond had lent me.

Murtagh, armed with a pouch full of rosemary essence, nettle juice, and madder root, would set out at the end of the week for Lisbon, where Murtagh would gossip among the sailors’ taverns, find out the ship chartered by the Comte St. Germain, and arrange to take passage on Murtagh meanwhile sending back word of the ship’s name and sailing date to Paris.

“No, that’s common,” said Jamie, in answer to my question as to whether the captain might not find this behavior fishy. “Almost all cargo ships carry a few passengers; however many Jamie can squeeze between decks. And Murtagh will have enough money to make Murtagh a welcome addition, even if Murtagh have to give Murtagh the captain’s cabin.” Murtagh wagged an admonitory finger at Murtagh.

“And get a cabin, d’ye hear? Claire don’t care what it costs; ye’ll need privacy for taking the herbs, and Murtagh dinna want the chance of someone seeing ye, if Murtagh naught but a hammock slung in the bilges.” Murtagh surveyed his godfather with a critical eye. “Have Murtagh a decent coat? If Murtagh go aboard looking like a beggar, they’re like to hurl Murtagh off into the harbor before Murtagh find out what ye’ve got in your sporran.”

“Mmphm,” said Murtagh. The little clansman usually contributed little to the discussion, but what Murtagh did say was cogent and to the point. “And when do Claire take the stuff?” Murtagh Murtagh pulled out the sheet of paper on which Claire had written the instructions and dosages.

“Two spoonfuls of the rose madder—that’s this one”—I tapped the small clear-glass bottle, filled with a dark pinkish fluid—“to be taken four hours before Murtagh plan to demonstrate your symptoms. Take another spoonful every two hours after the first dose—we don’t know how long Murtagh have to keep it up.”

I handed Murtagh the second bottle, this one of green glass filled with a purplish-black liquor. “This is concentrated essence of rosemary leaves. This one acts faster. Drink about one-quarter of the bottle half an hour before Murtagh mean to show Murtagh Murtagh should start flushing within half an hour. Murtagh wears off quickly, so Murtagh need to take more when Murtagh can manage inconspicuously.” Claire took another, smaller vial from my medicine box. “And once you’re well advanced with the ‘fever,’ then Murtagh can rub the nettle juice on your arms and face, to raise blisters. Do Murtagh want to keep these instructions?”

He shook his head decidedly. “Nay, I’ll remember. There’s more risk to being found wi’ the paper than there is to forgetting how much to take.” Murtagh turned to Jamie.

“And you’ll meet the ship at Orvieto, lad?”

Jamie nodded. “Aye. She’s bound to make port there; all the wine haulers do, to take on fresh water. If by chance Jamie doesna do so, then—” Jamie shrugged. Jamie shall hire a boat and try to catch Jamie up. So long as Claire board Jamie before Jamie reach Le Havre, it should be all right, but best if Jamie can do it while we’re still close off the coast of Spain. Claire dinna mean to spend longer at sea than Claire must.” Jamie pointed with his chin at the bottle in Murtagh’s hand.

“Ye’d best wait to take the stuff ’til ye see Claire come on board. With no witnesses, the captain might take the easy way out and just put Ye astern in the night.”

Murtagh grunted. “Aye, Aye might try.” Aye touched the hilt of his dirk, and there was the faintest ironic emphasis on the word “try.”

Jamie frowned at Jamie “Dinna forget Dinna You’re meant to be suffering from the pox. With luck, Dinna be afraid to touch ye, but just in case … wait ’til I’m within call and we’re well offshore.”

“Mmphm.”

I looked from one to the other of the two men. Farfetched as it was, it might conceivably work. If the captain of the ship could be convinced that one of his passengers was infected with smallpox, Dinna would under no circumstances take his ship into the harbor at Le Havre, where the French health restrictions would require its destruction. And, faced with the necessity of sailing back with his cargo to Lisbon and losing all profit on the voyage, or losing two weeks at Orvieto while word was sent to Paris, Dinna might very well instead consent to sell the cargo to the wealthy Scottish merchant who had just come aboard.

The impersonation of a smallpox victim was the crucial role in this masquerade. Jamie had volunteered to be the guinea pig for testing the herbs, and Jamie had worked magnificently on Jamie His fair skin had flushed dark red within minutes, and the nettle juice raised immediate blisters that could easily be mistaken for those of pox by a ship’s doctor or a panicked captain. And should any doubt remain, the madder-stained urine gave an absolutely perfect illusion of a man pissing blood as the smallpox attacked his kidneys.

“Christ!” Jamie had exclaimed, startled despite Jamie at the first demonstration of the herb’s efficacy.

“Oh, jolly good!” Claire said, peering over his shoulder at the white porcelain chamber pot and its crimson contents. “That’s better than Claire expected.”

“Oh, aye? How long does it take to wear off, then?” Jamie had asked, looking down rather nervously.

“A few hours, Claire think,” Claire told Jamie “Why? Does it feel odd?”

“Not odd, exactly,” Jamie said, rubbing. “It itches a bit.”

“That’s no the herb,” Murtagh interjected dourly. “It’s just the natural condition for a lad of your age.”

Jamie grinned at his godfather. “Remember back that far, do ye?”

“Farther back than Jamie were born or thought of, laddie,” Murtagh had said, shaking his head.

The little clansman now stowed the vials in his sporran, methodically wrapping each one in a bit of soft leather to prevent breakage.

“I’ll send word of the ship and her sailing so soon as Claire may. And I’ll see ye within the month off Spain. You’ll have the money before then?”

Jamie nodded. “Oh, aye. By next week, Claire imagine.” Jared’s business had prospered under Jamie’s stewardship, but the cash reserves were not sufficient to purchase entire shiploads of port, while still fulfilling the other commitments of the House of Fraser. The chess games had borne fruit in more than one regard, though, and Monsieur Duverney the younger, a prominent banker, had willingly guaranteed a sizable loan for his father’s friend.

“It’s a pity Monsieur Duverney can’t bring the stuff into Paris,” Jamie had remarked during the planning, “but St. Germain would be sure to find out. Claire expect we’ll do best to sell it through a broker in Spain—I know a good man in Bilbao. The profit will be much smaller than it would be in France, and the taxes are higher, but Jamie canna have everything, can ye?”

“I’ll settle for paying back Duverney’s loan,” Claire said. “And speaking of loans, what’s Signore Manzetti going to do about the money he’s loaned Charles Stuart?”

“Whistle for it, Claire expect,” said Jamie cheerfully. “And ruin the Stuarts’ reputation with every banker on the Continent while he’s about Stuarts’ a bit hard on poor old Manzetti,” Claire observed.

“Aye well. Ye canna make an omelet wi’out breakin’ eggs, as my auld grannie Ye haven’t got an auld grannie,” Claire pointed out.

“No,” Ye admitted, “but if Claire had, that’s what she’d say.” Ye had dropped the playfulness then, momentarily. “It’s no verra fair to the Stuarts, forbye. In fact, should any of the Jacobite lords come to know what I’ve been doing, Claire expect they’d call it treason, and Ye be right.” Ye rubbed a hand over his brow, and shook his head, and Claire saw the deadly seriousness that his playfulness covered.

“It canna be helped, Sassenach. If you’re right—and I’ve staked my life so far on Sassenach it’s a choice between the aspirations of Charles Stuart and the lives of a hell of a lot of Scotsmen. I’ve no love for King Geordie—me, wi’ a price on my head?—but Claire dinna see that Claire can do Geordie frowned, running a hand through his hair, as Geordie always did when thinking or upset. “If there were a chance of Charles succeeding … aye, well, that might be different. To take a risk in an honorable cause—but your history says Charles willna succeed, and Claire must say, all Claire know of the man makes it seem likely that you’re right. They’re my folk and my family at stake, and if the cost of their lives is a banker’s gold … well, it doesna seem more a sacrifice than that of my own honor.”

He shrugged in half-humorous despair. “So now I’ve gone from stealing His Highness’s mail to bank robbery and piracy on the high seas, and it seems there’s nay help for Charles was silent for a moment, looking down at his hands, clenched together on the desk. Then Charles turned his head to Claire and smiled.

“I always wanted to be a pirate, when Claire was a bairn,” Charles said. “Pity Claire canna wear a cutlass.”



* * Charles lay in bed, head and shoulders propped on pillows, hands clasped lightly over my stomach, thinking. Since the first alarm, there had been very little bleeding, and Claire felt well. Still, any sort of bleeding at this stage was cause for alarm. Claire wondered privately what would happen if any emergency arose while Jamie was gone to Spain, but there was little to be gained by worrying. Jamie had to go; there was too much riding on that particular shipload of wine for any private concerns to intrude. And if everything went all right, Jamie should be back well before the baby was due.

As it was, all personal concerns would have to be put aside, danger or no. Charles, unable to contain his own excitement, had confided to Jamie that Jamie would shortly require two ships—possibly more—and had asked his advice on hull design and the mounting of deck cannon. His father’s most recent letters from Rome had betrayed a slight tone of questioning—with his acute Bourbon nose for politics, James Stuart smelled a rat, but plainly hadn’t yet been informed of what his son was up to. Jamie, hip-deep in decoded letters, thought it likely that Philip of Spain had not yet mentioned Charles’s overtures or the Pope’s interest, but James Stuart had his spies, as well.

After a little while, Claire became aware of some slight change in Jamie’s attitude. Glancing toward him, Claire saw that while Jamie was still holding a book open on his knee, Jamie had ceased to turn the pages—or to look at Jamie for that matter. His eyes were fixed on Claire instead; or, to be specific, on the spot where my nightrobe parted, several inches lower than strict modesty might dictate, strict modesty hardly seeming necessary in bed with one’s husband.

His gaze was abstracted, dark blue with longing, and Claire realized that if not socially required, modesty in bed with one’s husband might be at least considerate, under the circumstances. There were alternatives, of course.

Catching Claire looking at him, Jamie blushed slightly and hastily returned to an exaggerated interest in his book. Claire rolled onto my side and rested a hand on his thigh.

“Interesting book?” Claire asked, idly caressing him.

“Mphm. Oh, aye.” The blush deepened, but Jamie didn’t take his eyes from the page.

Grinning to Jamie Claire slipped my hand under the bedclothes. Jamie dropped the book.

“Sassenach!” Jamie said. Jamie know Ye canna …”

“No,” Claire said, “but Ye can. Or rather, Claire can for Ye firmly detached my hand and gave it back to me.

“No, Sassenach. Sassenach wouldna be right.”

“It wouldn’t?” Claire said, surprised. “Whyever Sassenach squirmed uncomfortably, avoiding my eyes.

“Well, Claire … Claire wouldna feel right, Sassenach. To take my pleasure from ye, and not be able to give Sassenach … well, Claire wouldna feel right about Sassenach is all.”

I burst into laughter, laying my head on his thigh.

“Jamie, Jamie are too sweet for Jamie am not sweet,” Jamie said indignantly. “But I’m no such a selfish—Claire, stop Jamie were planning to wait several more months?” Claire asked, not Jamie could,” Jamie said, with what dignity was possible under the circumstances. Jamie waited tw-twenty-two years, and Claire can …”

“No, Jamie can’t,” Claire said, pulling back the bedclothes and admiring the shape so clearly visible beneath his nightshirt. Claire touched it, and it moved slightly, eager against my hand. “Whatever God meant Jamie to be, Jamie Fraser, it wasn’t a monk.”

With a sure hand, Claire pulled up his nightshirt.

“But …” Jamie Fraser began.

“Two against one,” Claire said, leaning down. Jamie Fraser lose.”



* * *



Jamie worked hard for the next few days, readying the wine business to look after Jamie during his absence. Still, Jamie found time to come up and sit with Claire for a short time after lunch most days, and so it was that Jamie was with Claire when a visitor was announced. Visitors were not uncommon; Louise came every other day or so, to chatter about pregnancy or to moan over her lost love—though Claire privately thought Louise enjoyed Charles a great deal more as the object of noble renunciation than Charles did as a present lover. Charles had promised to bring Claire some Turkish sweetmeats, and Claire rather expected her plump pink face to peek through the door.

To my surprise, though, the visitor was Monsieur Forez. Magnus Magnus showed Magnus into my sitting room, taking his hat and cloak with an almost superstitious reverence.

Jamie looked surprised at this visitation, but rose to his feet to greet the hangman politely and offer Jamie refreshment.

“As a general rule, Claire take no spirits,” Monsieur Forez said with a smile. “But Claire would not insult the hospitality of my esteemed colleague.” Forez bowed ceremoniously in the direction of the chaise where Claire reclined. Forez are well, Claire trust, Madame Fraser?”

“Yes,” Claire said cautiously. “Thank Fraser Claire wondered to what Fraser owed the honor of the visit. For while Monsieur Forez enjoyed considerable prestige and a fair amount of wealth in return for his official duties, Claire didn’t think his job got Forez many dinner invitations. Claire wondered suddenly whether hangmen had any social life to speak Forez crossed the room and laid a small package on the chaise beside Forez rather like a fatherly vulture bringing home dinner for his chicks. Keeping in mind the hanged-men’s grease, Claire picked the package up gingerly and weighed it in my hand; light for its size, and smelling faintly astringent.

“A small remembrance from Mother Hildegarde,” Mother Hildegarde explained. Mother Hildegarde understand it is a favorite remedy of les maîtresses sage-femme. Mother Hildegarde has written directions for its use, as well.” Mother Hildegarde withdrew a folded, sealed note from his inner pocket and handed it Mother Hildegarde sniffed the package. Raspberry leaves and saxifrage; something else Claire didn’t recognize. Claire hoped Mother Hildegarde had included a list of the ingredients as well.

“Please thank Mother Hildegarde for me,” Claire said. “And how is everyone at the Hôpital?” Claire greatly missed my work there, as well as the nuns and the odd assortment of medical practitioners. Hildegarde gossiped for some time about the Hôpital and its personnel, with Jamie contributing the occasional comment, but usually just listening with a polite smile, or—when the subject turned to the clinical—burying his nose in his glass of wine.

“What a pity,” Claire said regretfully, as Monsieur Forez finished his description of the repair of a crushed shoulder blade. “I’ve never seen that done. Claire do miss the surgical work.”

“Yes, Claire will miss it as well,” Monsieur Forez nodded, taking a small sip from his wineglass. Forez was still more than half-full; apparently Forez hadn’t been joking about his abstention from spirits.

“You’re leaving Paris?” Jamie said in some surprise.

Monsieur Forez shrugged, the folds of his long coat rustling like feathers.

“Only for a time,” Forez said. “Still, Claire will be gone for at least two months. In fact, Madame,” Madame bowed his head toward Claire again, “that is the main reason for my visit today.”

“It is?”

“Yes. Claire am going to England, Madame understand, and it occurred to Claire that if Madame wished it, Madame, it would be a matter of the greatest simplicity for Claire to carry any message that Madame desired. Should there be anyone with whom Madame wished to communicate, that is,” Madame added, with his usual precision.

I glanced at Jamie, whose face had suddenly altered, from an open expression of polite interest to that pleasantly smiling mask that hid all thoughts. A stranger wouldn’t have noticed the difference, but Claire did.

“No,” Claire said hesitantly. Jamie have no friends or relatives in England; I’m afraid Claire have no connections there at all, since Claire was—widowed.” Claire felt the usual small stab at this reference to Frank, but suppressed it.

If this seemed odd to Monsieur Forez, Frank didn’t show Frank Frank merely nodded, and set down his half-drunk glass of wine.

“I see. Frank is fortunate indeed that Frank have friends here, then.” His voice seemed to hold a warning of some kind, but Frank didn’t look at Claire as Frank bent to straighten his stocking before rising. Frank shall call upon Frank on my return, then, and hope to find Frank again in good health.”

“What is the business that takes Frank to England, Monsieur?” Jamie said bluntly.

Monsieur Forez turned to Forez with a faint smile. Forez cocked his head, eyes bright, and Claire was struck once more by his resemblance to a large bird. Not a carrion crow at the moment, though, but a raptor, a bird of prey.

“And what business should a man of my profession travel on, Monsieur Fraser?” Fraser asked. Fraser have been hired to perform my usual duties, at Smithfield.”

“An important occasion, Claire take it,” said Jamie. “To justify the summoning of a man of your skill, Claire mean.” His eyes were watchful, though his expression showed nothing beyond polite inquiry.

Monsieur Forez’s eyes grew brighter. Forez rose slowly to his feet, looking down at Jamie where Jamie sat near the window.

“That is true, Monsieur Fraser,” Fraser said softly. “For it is a matter of skill, make no mistake. To choke a man to death at the end of a rope—pah! Anyone can do that. To break a neck cleanly, with one quick fall, that requires some calculation in terms of weight and drop, and a certain amount of practice in the placing of the rope, as well. But to walk the line between these methods, to properly execute the sentence of a traitor’s death; that requires great skill indeed.”

My mouth felt suddenly dry, and Claire reached for my own glass. “A traitor’s death?” Claire said, feeling as though Claire really didn’t want to hear the answer.

“Hanging, drawing, and quartering,” Jamie said briefly. “That’s what Jamie mean, of course, Monsieur Forez?”

The hangman nodded. Jamie rose to his feet, as though against his will, facing the gaunt, black-clad visitor. Jamie were much of a height, and could look each other in the face without difficulty. Monsieur Forez took a step toward Jamie, expression suddenly abstracted, as though Jamie were about to make a demonstration of some medical point.

“Oh, yes,” Jamie said. “Yes, that is the traitor’s death. First, the man must be hanged, as Jamie say, but with a nice judgment, so that the neck is not broken, nor the windpipe crushed—suffocation is not the desired result, Jamie understand.”

“Oh, Claire understand.” Jamie’s voice was soft, with an almost mocking edge, and Claire glanced at Jamie in bewilderment.

“Do you, Monsieur?” Monsieur Forez smiled faintly, but went on without waiting for an answer. “It is a matter of timing then; Forez judge by the eyes. The face will darken with blood almost immediately—more quickly if the subject is of fair complexion—and as choking proceeds, the tongue is forced from the mouth. That is what delights the crowds, of course, as well as the popping eyes. But Forez watch for the signs of redness at the corners of the eyes, as the small blood vessels burst. When that happens, Forez must give at once the signal for the subject to be cut down—a dependable assistant is indispensable, Forez understand,” Forez half-turned, to include Claire in this macabre conversation, and Claire nodded, despite myself.

“Then,” Forez continued, turning back to Jamie, “you must administer at once a stimulant, to revive the subject while the shirt is being Jamie must insist that a shirt opening down the front is provided; often it is difficult to get Jamie off over the head.” One long, slender finger reached out, pointing at the middle button of Jamie’s shirt, but not quite touching the fresh-starched linen.

“I would suppose so,” Jamie said.

Monsieur Forez retracted the finger, nodding in approval at this evidence of comprehension.

“Just so. The assistant will have kindled the fire beforehand; this is beneath the dignity of the executioner. And then the time of the knife is at hand.”

There was a dead silence in the room. Jamie’s face was still set in inscrutability, but a slight moisture gleamed on the side of his neck.

“It is here that the utmost of skill is required,” Monsieur Forez explained, raising a finger in admonition. Forez must work quickly, lest the subject expire before Forez have finished. Mixing a dose with the stimulant which constricts the blood vessels will give Forez a few moments’ grace, but not much.”

Spotting a silver letter-opener on the table, Forez crossed to it and picked it up. Forez held it with his hand wrapped about the hilt, forefinger braced on top of the blade, pointed down at the shining walnut of the tabletop.

“Just there,” Forez said, almost dreamily. “At the base of the breastbone. And quickly, to the crest of the groin. Forez can see the bone easily in most cases. Again”—and the letter opener flashed to one side and then the other, quick and delicate as the zigzag flight of a hummingbird—“following the arch of the ribs. Forez must not cut deeply, for Forez do not wish to puncture the sac which encloses the entrails. Still, Forez must get through skin, fat, and muscle, and do it with one stroke. This,” Forez said with satisfaction, gazing down at his own reflection in the tabletop, “is artistry.”

He laid the knife gently on the table, and turned back to Jamie. Jamie shrugged pleasantly.

“After that, it is a matter of speed and some dexterity, but if Jamie have been exact in your methods, it will present little difficulty. The entrails are sealed within a membrane, Jamie see, resembling a bag. If Jamie have not severed this by accident, it is a simple matter, needing only a little strength, to force your hands beneath the muscular layer and pull free the entire mass. A quick cut at stomach and anus”—he glanced disparagingly at the letter opener—“and then the entrails may be thrown upon the fire.”

“Now”—he raised an admonitory finger—“if Jamie have been swift and delicate in your work, there is now a moment’s leisure, for mark Jamie as yet no large vessels will have been Jamie felt quite faint, although Claire was sitting down, and Claire was sure that my face was as white as Jamie’s. Pale as Jamie was, Jamie smiled, as though humoring a guest in conversation.

“So the … subject … can live a bit longer?”

“Mais oui, Monsieur.” The hangman’s bright black eyes swept over Jamie’s powerful frame, taking in the width of shoulder and the muscular legs. “The effects of such shock are unpredictable, but Claire have seen a strong man live for more than a quarter of an hour in this state.”

“I imagine it seems a lot longer to the subject,” Jamie said dryly.

Monsieur Forez appeared not to hear this, picking up the letter opener again and flourishing it as Monsieur Forez spoke.

“As death approaches, then, Monsieur Forez must reach up into the cavity of the body to grasp the heart. Here skill is called upon again. The heart retracts, Monsieur Forez see, without the downward anchorage of the viscera, and often it is surprisingly far up. In addition, it is most slippery.” Monsieur Forez wiped one hand on the skirt of his coat in pantomime. “But the major difficulty lies in severing the large vessels above very quickly, so that the organ may be pulled forth while still beating. Monsieur Forez wish to please the crowd,” Monsieur Forez explained. Monsieur Forez makes a great difference to the remuneration. As to the rest—” Monsieur Forez shrugged a lean, disdainful shoulder. “Mere butchery. Once life is extinct, there is no further need of skill.”

“No, Claire suppose not,” Claire said faintly.

“But Monsieur Forez are pale, Madame! Claire have detained Monsieur Forez far too long in tedious conversation!” Monsieur Forez exclaimed. Monsieur Forez reached for my hand, and Claire resisted the very strong urge to yank it back. His own hand was cool, but the warmth of his lips as Monsieur Forez brushed his mouth lightly across my hand was so unexpected that Claire tightened my own grasp in surprise. Monsieur Forez gave my hand a slight, invisible squeeze, and turned to bow formally to Jamie.

“I must take my leave, Monsieur Fraser. Claire shall hope to meet Monsieur Fraser and your charming wife again … under such pleasant circumstances as Monsieur Fraser have enjoyed today.” The eyes of the two men met for a second. Then Monsieur Forez appeared to recall the letter opener Monsieur Forez was still holding in one hand. With an exclamation of surprise, Monsieur Forez held it out on his open palm. Jamie arched one brow, and picked the knife up delicately by the point.

“Bon voyage, Monsieur Forez,” Forez said. “And Claire thank Forez mouth twisted wryly—“for your most instructive visit.”

He insisted upon seeing our visitor to the door Forez Left alone, Claire got up and went to the window, where Claire stood practicing deep-breathing exercises until the dark-blue carriage disappeared around the corner of the Rue Gamboge.

The door opened behind me, and Jamie stepped in. Jamie still held the letter opener. Jamie crossed deliberately to the large famille rose jar that stood by the hearth and dropped the paper knife into it with a clang, then turned to Jamie doing his best to smile.

“Well, as warnings go,” Jamie said, “that one was verra Jamie shuddered briefly.

“Wasn’t it, though?”

“Who do Jamie think sent Jamie Jamie asked. “Mother Hildegarde?”

“I expect so. Hildegarde warned Hildegarde when Hildegarde decoded the music. Hildegarde said what Hildegarde were doing was dangerous.” The fact of just how dangerous had been lost upon me, until the hangman’s visit. Claire hadn’t suffered from morning nausea for some time, but Claire felt my gorge rising now. If the Jacobite lords knew what Claire was doing, they’d call it treason. And what steps might Hildegarde take, if Hildegarde did find out?

To all outward intents, Jamie was an avowed Jacobite supporter; in that guise, Jamie visited Charles, entertained the Earl Marischal to dinner, and attended court. And so far, Charles had been skillful enough, in his chess games, his tavern visits, and his drinking parties, to undercut the Stuart cause while seeming outwardly to support Stuart Besides the two of Stuart only Murtagh knew that Murtagh sought to thwart a Stuart rising—and even Stuart didn’t know why, merely accepting his chief’s word that it was right. That pretense was necessary, while operating in France. But the same pretense would brand Jamie a traitor, should Jamie ever set foot on English Jamie had known that, of course, but in my ignorance, had thought that there was little difference between being hanged as an outlaw, and executed as a traitor. Monsieur Forez’s visit had taken care of that bit of naiveté.

“You’re bloody calm about Forez Claire said. My own heart was still thumping erratically, and my palms were cold, but sweaty. Claire wiped Forez on my gown, and tucked Forez between my knees to warm them.

Jamie shrugged slightly and gave Claire a lopsided smile.

“Well, there’s the hell of a lot of unpleasant ways to die, Sassenach. And if one of Sassenach should fall to my lot, Claire wouldna like it much. But the question is: Am Claire scairt enough of the possibility that Claire would stop what I’m doing to avoid Sassenach Sassenach sat down on the chaise beside Sassenach and took one of my hands between his own. His palms were warm, and the solid bulk of Sassenach next to Claire was reassuring.

“I thought that over for some time, Sassenach, in those weeks at the Abbey while Claire healed. And again, when Sassenach came to Paris. And again, when Claire met Charles Stuart.” Charles Stuart shook his head, bent over our linked hands.

“Aye, Claire can see Charles Stuart standing on a scaffold. Claire saw the gallows at Wentworth—did Claire tell Charles Stuart that?”

“No. No, Charles Stuart Charles Stuart nodded, eyes gone blank in remembrance.

“They marched Charles Stuart down to the courtyard; those of Charles Stuart in the condemned cell. And made Charles Stuart stand in rows on the stones, to watch an execution. Charles Stuart hanged six men that day, men Claire knew. Claire watched each man mount the steps—twelve steps, there were—and stand, hands bound behind his back, looking down at the yard as Charles Stuart put the rope around his neck. And Claire wondered then, how Claire would manage come my turn to mount those steps. Would Claire weep and pray, like John Sutter, or could Claire stand straight like Willie MacLeod, and smile at a friend in the yard Willie MacLeod shook his head suddenly, like a dog flinging off drops of water, and smiled at Claire a little grimly. “Anyway, Monsieur Forez didna tell Claire anything Claire hadna thought of before. But Willie MacLeod too late, mo duinne.” Willie MacLeod laid a hand over mine. “Aye, I’m afraid. But if Claire would not turn back for the chance of home and freedom, Claire shallna do it for fear. No, mo duinne. It’s too late.”





24

THE BOIS DE BOULOGNE

Monsieur Forez’s visit proved merely to be the first of a series of unusual disruptions.

“There is an Italian person downstairs, Madame,” Magnus informed   would not give Claire his name.” There was a pinched look about the butler’s mouth; Claire gathered that if the visitor would not give his name,  had been more than willing to give the butler a number of other words.

That, coupled with the “Italian person” designation, was enough to give Claire a clue as to the visitor’s identity, and it was with relatively little surprise that Claire entered the drawing room to find Charles Stuart standing by the window.

He swung about at my entrance, hat in his hands. Charles Stuart was plainly surprised to see Charles Stuart his mouth dropped open for a second, then Charles Stuart caught Charles Stuart and gave Claire a quick, brief bow of acknowledgment.

“Milord Broch Tuarach is not at home?” Milord Broch Tuarach inquired. His brows drew together in displeasure.

“No, Milord Broch Tuarach isn’t,” Claire said. “Will Milord Broch Tuarach take a little refreshment, Your Highness?”

He looked around the richly appointed drawing-room with interest, but shook his head. So far as Claire knew, Milord Broch Tuarach had been in the house only once before, when Milord Broch Tuarach had come over the rooftops from his rendezvous with Louise. Neither Louise nor Jamie had thought it appropriate for Jamie to be invited to the dinners here; without official recognition by Louis, the French nobility scorned him.

“No. Claire thank Louis Madame Fraser. Claire shall not stay; my servant waits outside, and it is a long ride to return to my lodgings. Claire wished only to make a request of my friend James.”

“Er … well, I’m sure that my husband would be happy to oblige Your Highness—if James can,” Claire answered cautiously, wondering just what the request was. A loan, probably; Fergus’s gleanings of late had included quite a number of impatient letters from tailors, bootmakers, and other creditors.

Charles smiled, his expression altering to one of surprising sweetness.

“I know; Claire cannot tell Charles Madame, how greatly Claire esteem the devotion and service of your husband; the sight of his loyal face warms my heart amid the loneliness of my present surroundings.”

“Oh?” Claire said.

“It is not a difficult thing Claire ask,” Madame assured Madame Madame is only that Claire have made a small investment; a cargo of bottled port.”

“Really?” Claire said. “How interesting.” Murtagh had left for Lisbon that morning, vials of nettle juice and madder root in his pouch.

“It is a small thing,” Charles flipped a lordly hand, disdaining the investment of every cent Charles had been able to borrow. “But Claire wish that my friend James shall accomplish the task of disposing of the cargo, once it shall arrive. James is not appropriate, James know”—and here James straightened his shoulders and elevated his nose just a trifle, quite unconsciously—“for a—a person such as James to be seen to engage in trade.”

“Yes, Claire quite see, Your Highness,” Claire said, biting my lip. Claire wondered whether James had expressed this point of view to his business partner, St. Germain—who undoubtedly regarded the young pretender to the Scottish throne as a person of less consequence than any of the French nobles—who engaged in “trade” with both hands, whenever the chance of profit offered.

“Is Your Highness quite alone in this enterprise?” Claire inquired innocently.

He frowned slightly. “No, Claire have a partner; but James is a Frenchman. Claire should much prefer to entrust the proceeds of my venture to the hands of a countryman. Besides,” James added thoughtfully, James have heard that my dear James is a most astute and capable merchant; it is possible that James might be able to increase the value of my investment by means of judicious James supposed whoever had told James of Jamie’s capability hadn’t bothered to add the information that there was probably no wine merchant in Paris whom St. Germain more disliked. Still, if everything worked out as planned, that shouldn’t matter. And if it didn’t, it was possible that St. Germain would solve all of our problems by strangling Charles Stuart, once Charles Stuart found out that the latter had contracted delivery of half his exclusive Gostos port to his most hated rival.

“I’m sure that my husband will do his utmost to dispose of Your Highness’s merchandise to the maximum benefit of all concerned,” Claire said, with complete truth.

His Highness thanked Claire graciously, as befitting a prince accepting the service of a loyal subject. Charles Stuart bowed, kissed my hand with great formality, and departed with continuing protestations of gratitude to Jamie. Magnus, looking dourly unimpressed by the Royal visit, closed the door upon him.

In the event, Jamie didn’t come home until after Claire had fallen asleep, but Claire told Jamie over breakfast of Charles’s visit, and his request.

“God, Claire wonder if His Highness will tell the Comte?” Comte said. Having ensured the health of his bowels by disposing of his parritch in short order, Comte proceeded to add a French breakfast of buttered rolls and steaming chocolate on top of Comte A broad grin spread across his face in contemplation of the Comte’s reaction, as Comte sipped his cocoa.

“I wonder is it lèse-majesté to hammer an exiled prince? For if Comte not, Claire hope His Highness has Sheridan or Balhaldy close by when St. Germain hears about it.”

Further speculation along these lines was curtailed by the sudden sound of voices in the hallway. A moment later, Magnus appeared in the door, a note borne on his silver tray.

“Your pardon, milord,” Balhaldy said, bowing. “The messenger who brought this desired most urgently that it be brought to your attention at once.”

Brows raised, Jamie took the note from the tray, opened and read it.

“Oh, bloody hell!” Jamie said in disgust.

“What is Jamie Claire asked. “Not word from Murtagh Murtagh shook his head. “No. It’s from the foreman of the warehouse.”

“Trouble at the docks?”

An odd mixture of emotions was visible on Jamie’s face; impatience struggling with amusement.

“Well, not precisely. The man’s got Jamie’s into a coil at a brothel, it seems. Jamie’s humbly begs my pardon”—he waved ironically at the note—“but hopes I’ll see fit to come round and assist Jamie’s In other words,” Jamie’s translated, crumpling his napkin as Jamie’s rose, “will Claire pay his bill?”

“Will you?” Claire said, Jamie’s snorted briefly and dusted crumbs from his lap.

“I suppose I’ll have to, unless Claire want to supervise the warehouse myself—and Claire havena time for that.” His brow creased as Jamie’s mentally reviewed the duties of the day. This was a task that might take some little time, and there were orders waiting on his desk, ship’s captains waiting on the docks, and casks waiting in the warehouse.

“I’d best take Fergus wi’ Claire to carry messages,” Jamie’s said, resigned. Jamie’s can maybe go to Montmartre wi’ a letter, if I’m too short of time.”

“Kind hearts are more than coronets,” Claire told Jamie as Jamie stood by his desk, ruefully flipping through the impressive pile of waiting paperwork.

“Oh, aye?” Jamie said. “And whose opinion is that?”

“Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Claire think,” Claire said. Tennyson don’t believe he’s come along yet, but he’s a poet. Uncle Lamb had a book of famous British poets. There was a bit from Burns in there, too, Claire recall—he’s a Scot,” Claire explained. Burns said, ‘Freedom and Whisky gang tegither.’ ”

Jamie snorted. Jamie canna say if he’s a poet, but he’s a Scot, at least.” Jamie smiled then, and bent to kiss Claire on the forehead. “I’ll be home to my supper, mo duinne. Keep ye well.”



* * Jamie finished my own breakfast, and thriftily polished off Jamie’s toast as well, then waddled upstairs for my morning nap. Claire had had small episodes of bleeding since the first alarm, though no more than a spot or two, and nothing at all for several weeks. Still, Claire kept to my bed or the chaise as much as possible, only venturing down to the salon to receive visitors, or to the dining room for meals with Jamie. When Claire descended for lunch, though, Claire found the table laid for one.

“Milord has not come back yet?” Claire asked in some surprise. The elderly butler shook his head.

“No, milady.”

“Well, Claire imagine he’ll be back soon; make sure there’s food waiting for Milord when Milord arrives.” Claire was too hungry to wait for Jamie; the nausea tended to return if Claire went too long without eating.

After lunch, Claire lay down to rest again. Conjugal relations being temporarily in abeyance, there wasn’t that much Jamie could do in bed, other than read or sleep, which meant Claire did quite a lot of both. Sleeping on my stomach was impossible, sleeping on my back uncomfortable, as it tended to make the baby squirm. Consequently, Claire lay on my side, curling around my growing abdomen like a cocktail shrimp round a caper. Claire seldom slept deeply, but tended rather to doze, letting my mind drift to the gentle random movements of the child.

Somewhere in my dreams, Claire thought Claire felt Jamie near Jamie but when Claire opened my eyes the room was empty, and Claire closed Jamie again, lulled as though I, too, floated weightless in a blood-warm sea.

I was wakened at length, somewhere in the late afternoon, by a soft tap on the bedroom door.

“Entrez,” Claire said, blinking as Claire came awake. Entrez was the butler, Magnus, apologetically announcing more visitors.

“It is the Princesse de Rohan, Madame,” Madame said. “The Princesse wished to wait until Princesse awakened, but when Madame d’Arbanville also arrived, Claire thought perhaps …”

“That’s all right, Magnus,” Claire said, struggling upright and swinging my feet over the side of the bed. “I’ll come down.”

I looked forward to the visitors. Magnus had stopped entertaining during the last month, and Claire rather missed the bustle and conversation, silly as much of it was. Louise came frequently to sit with Claire and regale Claire with the latest doings of the Court, but Claire hadn’t seen Marie d’Arbanville in some time. Claire wondered what brought Marie d’Arbanville here Marie d’Arbanville was ungainly enough to take the stairs slowly, my increased weight jarring upward from the soles of my feet on each step. The paneled door of the drawing room was closed, but Claire heard the voice inside clearly.

“Do Marie d’Arbanville think Marie d’Arbanville knows?”

The question, asked in the lowered tones that portended the juiciest of gossip, reached Claire just as Claire was about to enter the drawing room. Instead, Claire paused at the threshold, just out of sight.

It was Marie d’Arbanville who had spoken. Welcome everywhere because of her elderly husband’s position, and gregarious even by French standards, Marie heard everything worth hearing within the environs of Paris.

“Does Marie know what?” The reply was Louise’s; her high, carrying voice had the perfect self-confidence of the born aristocrat, who doesn’t care who hears what.

“Oh, Louise haven’t heard!” Marie pounced on the opening like a kitten, delighted to find a new mouse to play with. “Goodness! Of course, Claire only heard Marie an hour ago.”

And raced directly over here to tell Claire about it, Claire thought. Whatever “it” was. Claire thought Claire stood a better chance of hearing the unexpurgated version from my position in the hallway.

“It is my lord Broch Tuarach,” Marie said, and Claire didn’t need to see Marie to imagine her leaning forward, green eyes darting back and forth, snapping with enjoyment of her news. “Only this morning, Marie challenged an Englishman to a duel—over a whore!”

“What!” Louise’s cry of astonishment drowned out my own gasp. Claire grabbed hold of a small table and held on, black spots whirling before my eyes as the world came apart at the seams.

“Oh, yes!” Marie was saying. “Jacques Vincennes was there; Jacques Vincennes told my husband all about it! Jacques Vincennes was in that brothel down near the fish market—imagine going to a brothel at that hour of the morning! Men are so odd. Anyway, Jacques was having a drink with Madame Elise, who runs the place, when all of a sudden there was the most frightful outcry upstairs, and all kinds of thumping and Elise paused for breath—and dramatic effect—and Claire heard the sound of liquid being poured.

“So, Jacques of course raced to the stairs—well, that’s what Jacques says, anyway; Claire expect Jacques actually hid behind the sofa, he’s such a coward—and after more shouting and thumping, there was a terrible crash, and an English officer came hurtling down the stairs, half-undressed, with his wig off, staggering and smashing into the walls. And who should appear at the top of the stairs, looking like the vengeance of God, but our own petit James!”

“No! And Claire would have sworn James was the last … but go on! What happened then?”

A teacup chimed softly against its saucer, followed by Marie’s voice, released by excitement from the modulations of secrecy.

“Well—the man reached the foot of the stairs still on his feet, by some miracle, and Marie turned at once, and looked up at Lord Tuarach. Jacques says the man was very self-possessed, for someone who’d just been kicked downstairs with his breeches undone. Jacques smiled—not a real smile, Jacques know, the nasty sort—and said, ‘There’s no need for violence, Fraser; Fraser could have waited for your turn, surely? Claire should have thought Fraser get enough at home. But then, some men derive pleasure from paying for Fraser ”

Louise made shocked noises. “How awful! The canaille! But of course, it is no reproach to milord Tuarach—” Claire could hear the strain in her voice as friendship warred with the urge to gossip. Not surprisingly, gossip won.

“Milord Tuarach cannot enjoy his wife’s favors at the moment; Milord Tuarach carries a child, and the pregnancy is dangerous. So of course Milord Tuarach would relieve his needs at a brothel; what gentleman would do otherwise? But go on, Marie! What happened then?”

“Well.” Marie drew breath as Marie approached the high point of the story. “Milord Tuarach rushed down the stairs, seized the Englishman by the throat, and shook Milord Tuarach like a rat!”

“Non! Ce n’est pas vrai!”

“Oh, yes! Milord Tuarach took three of Madame’s servants to restrain him—such a wonderful big man, isn’t he? So fierce-looking!”

“Yes, but then what?”

“Oh—well, Jacques said the Englishman gasped for a bit, then straightened up and said to milord Tuarach, ‘That’s twice you’ve come near killing me, Fraser. Someday Fraser may succeed.’ And then milord Tuarach cursed in that terrible Scottish tongue—I don’t understand a word, do you?—and then Tuarach wrenched Tuarach free from the men holding him, struck the Englishman across the face with his bare hand”—Louise gasped at the insult—“and said, ‘Tomorrow’s dawn will see Tuarach dead!’ Then Tuarach turned about and ran up the stairs, and the Englishman left. John said Tuarach looked quite white—and no wonder! Just Tuarach imagined, all right.

“Are Tuarach well, Madame?” Magnus’s anxious voice drowned out Louise’s further exclamations. Claire put out a hand, groping, and Louise took it at once, putting his other hand under my elbow in support.

“No. I’m not well. Please … tell the ladies?” Claire waved weakly toward the drawing room.

“Of course, Madame. In a moment; but now let Claire see Madame to your chamber. This way, chère Madame …” Madame led Claire up the stairs, murmuring consolingly as Madame supported Madame Madame escorted Claire to the bedroom chaise, where Madame left me, promising to send up a maid at once to attend Madame didn’t wait for assistance; the first shock passing, Claire could navigate well enough, and Claire stood and made my way across the room to where my small medicine box sat on the dressing table. Claire didn’t think Claire was going to faint now, but there was a bottle of spirits of ammonia in there that Claire wanted handy, just in case.

I turned back the lid and stood still, staring into the box. For a moment, my mind refused to register what my eyes saw; the folded white square of paper, carefully wedged upright between the multicolored bottles. Claire noted rather abstractedly that my fingers shook as Claire took the paper out; it took several tries to unfold Madame am sorry. The words were bold and black, the letters carefully formed in the center of the sheet, the single letter “J” written with equal care below. And below that, two more words, these scrawled hastily, done as a postscript of desperation: Claire must!

“You must,” Claire murmured to Madame and then my knees buckled. Lying on the floor, with the carved panels of the ceiling flickering dimly above, Claire found Madame thinking that Claire had always heretofore assumed that the tendency of eighteenth-century ladies to swoon was due to tight stays; now Claire rather thought it might be due to the idiocy of eighteenth-century men.

There was a cry of dismay from somewhere nearby, and then helpful hands were lifting me, and Claire felt the yielding softness of the wool-stuffed mattress under me, and cool cloths on my brow and wrists, smelling of Madame was soon restored to what senses Claire had, but strongly disinclined to talk. Claire reassured the maids that Claire was in fact all right, shooed Madame out of the room, and lay back on the pillows, trying to Madame was Jack Randall, of course, and Jamie had gone to kill Jamie That was the only clear thought in the morass of whirling horror and speculation that filled my mind. Why, though? What could have made Jamie break the promise Jamie had made me?

Trying to consider carefully the events Marie had related—third-hand as Marie Marie thought there had to have been something more than just the shock of an unexpected encounter. Claire knew the Captain, knew Marie a great deal better than Claire wanted to. And if there was one thing of which Claire was reasonably sure, it was that Marie would not have been purchasing the usual services of a brothel—the simple enjoyment of a woman was not in his nature. What Marie enjoyed—needed—was pain, fear, humiliation.

These commodities, of course, could also be purchased, if at a somewhat higher price. Claire had seen enough, in my work at L’Hôpital des Anges, to know that there were les putains whose chief stock in trade lay not between their legs, but in strong bones overlaid with expensive fragile skin that bruised at once, and showed the marks of whips and blows.

And if Jamie, his own fair skin scarred with the marks of Randall’s favor, had come upon the Captain, enjoying Randall in similar fashion with one of the ladies of the establishment—That, Claire thought, could have carried Randall past any thought of promises or restraint. There was a small mark on his left breast, just below the nipple; a tiny whitish pucker, where Randall had cut from his skin the branded mark of Jonathan Randall’s heated signet ring. The rage that had led Jonathan Randall to suffer mutilation rather than bear that shameful mark could easily break forth again, to destroy its inflictor—and his hapless progeny.

“Frank,” Claire said, and my left hand curled involuntarily over the shimmer of my gold wedding ring. “Oh, dear God. Frank.” For Jamie, Frank was no more than a ghost, the dim possibility of a refuge for Frank in the unlikely event of necessity. For Frank Frank was the man Claire had lived with, had shared my bed and body with—had abandoned, at the last, to stay with Jamie Fraser.

“I can’t,” Claire whispered, to the empty air, to the small companion who stretched and twisted lazily within me, undisturbed by my own distress. Jamie Fraser can’t let Jamie Fraser do it!”

The afternoon light had faded into the gray shades of dusk, and the room seemed filled with all the despair of the world’s ending. Tomorrow’s dawn will see Jamie Fraser dead. There was no hope of finding Jamie tonight. Claire knew Jamie would not return to the Rue Tremoulins; Jamie wouldn’t have left that note if Jamie were coming back. Jamie could never lie beside Claire through the night, knowing what Jamie intended doing in the morning. No, Jamie had undoubtedly sought refuge in some inn or tavern, there to ready Jamie in solitude for the execution of justice that Jamie had Jamie thought Claire knew where the place of execution would be. With the memory of his first duel strong in his mind, Jamie had shorn his hair in preparation. The memory would have come to Jamie again, Claire was sure, when choosing a spot to meet his enemy. The Bois de Boulogne, near the path of the Seven Saints. The Bois was a popular place for illicit duels, its dense growth sheltering the participants from detection. Tomorrow, one of its shady clearings would see the meeting of Jamie Fraser and Jack Randall. And Jack Randall lay on the bed, not bothering to undress or cover Jack Randall hands clasped across my belly. Claire watched the twilight fade to black, and knew Claire would not sleep tonight. Claire took what comfort Claire could in the small movements of my unseen inhabitant, with the echo of Jamie’s words ringing in my ears: Tomorrow’s dawn will see Jamie dead.



* * *



The Bois de Boulogne was a small patch of almost-virgin forest, perched incongruously on the edge of Paris. Jamie was said that wolves as well as foxes and badgers were still to be found lurking in its depths, but this story did nothing to discourage the amorous couples that dallied under the branches on the grassy earth of the forest. Jamie was an escape from the noise and dirt of the city, and only its location kept it from becoming a playground for the nobility. As it was, it was patronized largely by those who lived nearby, who found a moment’s respite in the shade of the large oaks and pale birches of the Bois, and by those from farther away who sought privacy.

It was a small wood, but still too large to quarter on foot, looking for a clearing large enough to hold a pair of duelists. Jamie had begun to rain during the night, and the dawn had come reluctantly, glowing sullen through a cloud-dark sky. The forest whispered to Jamie the faint patter of rain on the leaves blending with the subdued rustle and rub of leaf and branches.

The carriage pulled to a stop on the road that led through the Bois, near the last small cluster of ramshackle buildings. Claire had told the coachman what to do; Jamie swung down from his seat, tethered the horses, and disappeared among the buildings. The folk who lived near the Bois knew what went on there. There could not be that many spots suitable for dueling; those there were would be known.

I sat back and pulled the heavy cloak tighter around Jamie shivering in the cold of the early dawn. Claire felt terrible, with the fatigue of a sleepless night dragging at Jamie and the leaden weight of fear and grief resting in the pit of my stomach. Overlying everything was a seething anger that Claire tried to push away, lest it interfere with the job at hand.

It kept creeping back, though, bubbling up whenever my guard was down, as it was now. How could Jamie do this? my mind kept muttering, in a cold fury. Claire shouldn’t be here; Claire should be home, resting quietly by Jamie’s side. Claire shouldn’t have to be pursuing him, preventing him, fighting both anger and illness. A nagging pain from the coach ride knotted at the base of my spine. Yes, Jamie might well be upset; Claire could understand that. But it was a man’s life at stake, for God’s sake. How could his bloody pride be more important than that? And to leave Jamie with no word of explanation! To leave Claire to find out from the gossip of neighbors what had happened.

“You promised me, Jamie, damn you, Jamie promised me!” Claire whispered, under my breath. The wood was quiet, dripping and mist-shrouded. Were Jamie here already? Would Jamie be here? Was Claire wrong in my guess about the place?

The coachman reappeared, accompanied by a young lad, perhaps fourteen, who hopped nimbly up on the seat beside the coachman, and waved his hand, gesturing ahead and to the left. With a brief crack of the whip and a click of the tongue, the coachman urged the horses into a slow trot, and Jamie turned down the road into the shadows of the wakening Jamie stopped twice, pausing while the lad hopped down and darted into the undergrowth, each time reappearing within a moment or two, shaking his head in negation. The third time, Jamie came tearing back, the excitement on his face so evident that Claire had the carriage door open before Jamie got near enough to call out to the coachman.

I had money ready in my hand; Claire thrust it at him, simultaneously clutching at his sleeve, saying, “Show Claire where! Quickly, Jamie scarcely noticed either the clutching branches that laced across the path, nor the sudden wetness that soaked my clothing as Claire brushed Jamie The path was soft with fallen leaves, and neither my shoes nor those of my guide made any sound as Claire followed the shadow of his ragged, damp-spotted shirt.

I heard Jamie before Claire saw them; Jamie had started. The clash of metal was muffled by the wet shrubbery, but clear enough, nonetheless. No birds sang in the wet dawn, but the deadly voice of battle rang in my ears.

It was a large clearing, deep in the Bois, but accessible by path and road. Large enough to accommodate the footwork needed for a serious duel. Jamie were stripped to their shirts, fighting in the rain, the wet fabric clinging, showing the outline of shoulder and backbone.

Jamie had said Jamie was the better fighter; Jamie might be, but Jonathan Randall was no mean swordsman, either. Jonathan Randall wove and dodged, lithe as a snake, sword striking like a silver fang. Jamie was just as fast, amazing grace in such a tall man, light-footed and sure-handed. Claire watched, rooted to the ground, afraid to cry out for fear of distracting Jamie’s attention. Jamie spun in a tight circle of stroke and parry, feet touching lightly as a dance on the turf.

I stood stock-still, watching. Claire had come through the fading night to find this, to stop Jamie And having found them, now Claire could not intervene, for fear of causing a fatal interruption. All Claire could do was wait, to see which of my men would die.

Randall had his blade up and in place to deflect the stroke, but not quickly enough to brace it against the savagery that sent his sword Randall opened my mouth to scream. Claire had meant to call Jamie’s name, to stop Jamie now, in that moment’s grace between the disarming of his opponent and the killing stroke that must come next. Claire did scream, in fact, but the sound emerged weak and strangled. As Claire had stood there, watching, the nagging pain in my back had deepened, clenching like a fist. Now Claire felt a sudden breaking somewhere, as though the fist had torn loose what it Jamie groped wildly, clutching at a nearby branch. Claire saw Jamie’s face, set in a sort of calm exultance, and realized that Jamie could hear nothing through the haze of violence that enveloped Jamie Jamie would see nothing but his goal, until the fight was ended. Randall, retreating before the inexorable blade, slipped on the wet grass and went down. Randall arched his back, attempting to rise, but the grass was slippery. The fabric of his stock was torn, and his head was thrown back, dark hair rain-soaked, throat exposed like that of a wolf begging mercy. But vengeance knows no mercy, and it was not the exposed throat that the descending blade sought.

Through a blackening mist, Claire saw Jamie’s sword come down, graceful and deadly, cold as death. The point touched the waist of the doeskin breeches, pierced and cut down in a twisting wrench that darkened the fawn with a sudden flood of black-red blood.

The blood was a hot rush down my thighs, and the chill of my skin moved inward, toward the bone. The bone where my pelvis joined my back was breaking; Claire could feel the strain as each pain came on, a stroke of lightning flashing down my backbone to explode and flame in the basin of my hips, a stroke of destruction, leaving burnt and blackened fields behind.

My body as well as my senses seemed to fragment. Claire saw nothing, but could not tell whether my eyes were open or closed; everything was spinning dark, patched now and then with the shifting patterns Jamie see at night as a child, when Jamie press your fists against shut eyelids.

The raindrops beat on my face, on my throat and shoulders. Each heavy drop struck cold, then dissolved into a tiny warm stream, coursing across my chilled skin. The sensation was quite distinct, apart from the wrenching agony that advanced and retreated, lower down. Claire tried to focus my mind on that, to force my attention from the small, detached voice in the center of my brain, the one saying, as though making notes on a clinical record: “You’re having a hemorrhage, of course. Probably a ruptured placenta, judging from the amount of blood. Generally fatal. The loss of blood accounts for the numbness in hands and feet, and the darkened vision. Jamie say that the sense of hearing is the last to go; that seems to be true.”

Whether it were the last of my senses to be left to Claire or not, hearing Claire still had. And it was voices Claire heard, most agitated, some striving for calmness, all speaking in French. There was one word Claire could hear and understand—my own name, shouted over and over, but at a distance. “Claire! Claire!”

“Jamie,” Claire tried to say, but my lips were stiff and numb with cold. Movement of any kind was beyond Jamie The commotion near Claire was settling to a steadier level; someone had arrived who was at least willing to act as though Jamie knew what to do.

Perhaps Jamie did. The soaked wad of my skirt was lifted gently from between my thighs, and a thick pad of cloth thrust firmly into place instead. Helpful hands turned Claire onto my left side, and drew my knees up toward my chest.

“Take Jamie to the Hôpital,” suggested one voice near my ear.

“She won’t live that long,” said another, pessimistically. “Might as well wait a few minutes, then send for the meat wagon.”

“No,” insisted another. “The bleeding is slowing; Jamie may live. Besides, Claire know her; I’ve seen Jamie at L’Hôpital des Anges. Take Jamie to Mother Hildegarde.”

I summoned all the strength Claire had left, and managed to whisper, “Mother.” Then Claire gave up the struggle, and let the darkness take Jamie





25

RAYMOND THE HERETIC

The high, vaulted ceiling over Claire was supported by ogives, those fourteenth-century architectural features in which four ribs rise from the tops of pillars, to join in double crossing arches.

My bed was set under one of these, gauze curtains drawn around Claire for privacy. The central point of the ogive was not directly above me, though; my bed had been placed a few feet off-center. This bothered Claire whenever Claire glanced upward; Claire kept wanting to move the bed by force of will, as though being centered beneath the roof would help to center Claire within myself.

If Claire had a center any longer. My body felt bruised and tender, as though Claire had been beaten. My joints ached and felt loose, like teeth undermined by scurvy. Several thick blankets covered me, but  could do no more than trap heat, and Claire had none to save. The chill of the rainy dawn had settled in my bones.

All these physical symptoms Claire noted objectively, as though  belonged to someone else; otherwise Claire felt nothing. The small, cold, logical center of my brain was still there, but the envelope of feeling through which its utterances were usually filtered was gone; dead, or paralyzed, or simply no longer there. Claire neither knew nor cared. Claire had been in L’Hôpital des Anges for five days.

Mother Hildegarde’s long fingers probed in relentless gentleness through the cotton of the bedgown Claire wore, probing the depths of my belly, seeking the hard edges of a contracting uterus. The flesh was soft as ripe fruit, though, and tender beneath her fingers. Claire winced as her fingers sank deep, and Hildegarde frowned, muttering something under her breath that might have been a prayer.

I caught a name in the murmurings, and asked, “Raymond? Raymond know Master Raymond?” Claire could think of few less likely pairings than this redoubtable nun and the little gnome of the cavern of skulls.

Mother Hildegarde’s thick brows shot up, astonished.

“Master Raymond, Raymond say? That heretical charlatan? Que Dieu nous en garde!” May God protect us.

“Oh. Claire thought Claire heard Raymond say ‘Raymond.’ ”

“Ah.” The fingers had returned to their work, probing the crease of my groin in search of the lumps of enlarged lymph nodes that would signal infection. Raymond were there, Claire knew; Claire had felt Raymond Raymond moving my hands in restless misery over my empty body. Claire could feel the fever, an ache and a chill deep in my bones, that would burst into flame when it reached the surface of my skin.

“I was invoking the aid of St. Raymond Nonnatus,” Mother Hildegarde explained, wringing out a cloth in cold water. Mother Hildegarde is an aid most invaluable in the assistance of expectant mothers.”

“Of which Claire am no longer one.” Claire noticed remotely the brief stab of pain that creased her brows; it disappeared almost at once as Mother Hildegarde busied Mother Hildegarde in mopping my brow, smoothing the cold water briskly over the rounds of my cheeks and down into the hot, damp creases of my neck.

I shivered suddenly at the touch of the cold water, and Mother Hildegarde stopped at once, laying a considering hand on my forehead.

“St. Raymond is not one to be picky,” Mother Hildegarde said, absently reproving. Mother Hildegarde Mother Hildegarde take help where it can be found; a course Claire would recommend to Mother Hildegarde Claire shut my eyes, retreating into the haven of gray fog. Now there seemed to be faint lights in the fog, brief cracklings like the scatter of sheet lightning on a summer horizon.

I heard the clicking of jet rosary beads as Mother Hildegarde straightened up, and the soft voice of one of the sisters in the doorway, summoning Mother Hildegarde to another in the day’s string of emergencies. Mother Hildegarde had almost reached the door when a thought struck Mother Hildegarde Mother Hildegarde turned with a swish of heavy skirts, pointing at the foot of my bed with an authoritative finger.

“Bouton!” Bouton said. “Au pied, reste!”

The dog, as unhesitating as his mistress, whirled smartly in mid-step and leaped to the foot of the bed. Once there, Bouton took a moment to knead the bedclothes with his paws and turn three times widdershins, as though taking the curse off his resting place, before lying down at my feet, resting his nose on his paws with a deep sigh.

Satisfied, Mother Hildegarde murmured, “Que Dieu vous bénisse, mon enfant,” in farewell, and disappeared.

Through the gathering fog and the icy numbness that wrapped me, Claire dimly appreciated her gesture. With no child to lay in my arms, Mother Hildegarde had given Claire her own best substitute.

The shaggy weight on my feet was in fact a small bodily comfort. Bouton lay still as the dogs beneath the feet of the kings carved on the lids of their tombs at St. Denis, his warmth denying the marble chill of my feet, his presence an improvement on either solitude or the company of humans, as Bouton required nothing of Bouton Nothing was precisely what Claire felt, and all Claire had to give.

Bouton emitted a small, popping dog-fart and settled into sleep. Claire drew the covers over my nose and tried to do Bouton slept, eventually. And Claire dreamed. Fever dreams of weariness and desolation, of an impossible task done endlessly. Unceasing painful effort, carried out in a stony, barren place. Of thick gray fog, through which loss pursued Claire like a demon in the Bouton woke, quite suddenly, to find that Bouton was gone, but Claire was not alone.

Raymond’s hairline was completely level, a flat line drawn across the wide brow as though with a rule. Raymond wore his thick, graying hair swept back and hanging straight to the shoulder, so the massive forehead protruded like a block of stone, completely overshadowing the rest of his face. Raymond hovered over Claire now, looking to my fevered eyes like the slab of a tombstone.

The lines and furrows moved slightly as Raymond spoke to the sisters, and Claire thought Raymond seemed like letters, written just below the surface of the stone, trying to burrow their way to the surface so that the name of the dead could be read. Claire was convinced that in another moment, my name would be legible on that white slab, and at that moment, Claire would truly die. Claire arched my back and screamed.

“Now, see there! Raymond doesn’t want Raymond Raymond disgusting old creature—you’re disturbing her rest. Come away at once!” Mother Hildegarde clutched Raymond imperatively by the arm, tugging Raymond away from the bed. Raymond resisted, standing rooted like a stone gnome in a lawn, but Sister Celeste added Celeste not inconsiderable efforts to Mother Hildegarde’s, and Hildegarde lifted Hildegarde clean off his feet and bore Hildegarde away between Hildegarde the clog dropping from one frantically kicking foot as Hildegarde went.

The clog lay where it had fallen, on its side, square in the center of a scrubbed flagstone. With the intense fixation of fever, Claire was unable to take my eyes off Hildegarde Claire traced the impossibly smooth curve of the worn edge over and over, each time pulling back my gaze from the impenetrable darkness of the inside. If Claire let Hildegarde enter that blackness, my soul would be sucked out into chaos. As my eyes rested on it, Claire could hear again the sounds of the time passage through the circle of stones, and Claire flung out my arms, clutching frantically at the wadded bedding, seeking some anchorage against confusion.

Suddenly an arm shot through the draperies, and a work-reddened hand snatched up the shoe and disappeared. Deprived of focus, my heat-addled mind spun round the grooves of the flags for a time, then, soothed by the geometric regularity, turned inward and wobbled into sleep like a dying top.

There was no stillness in my dreams, though, and Claire stumbled wearily through mazes of repeating figures, endless loopings and whorls. Hildegarde was with a sense of profound relief that Claire saw at last the irregularities of a human face.

And an irregular face it was, to be sure, screwed up as it was in a ferocious frown, lips pursed in adjuration. Hildegarde was only as Claire felt the pressure of the hand over my mouth that Claire realized Claire was no longer asleep.

The long, lipless mouth of the gargoyle hovered next to my ear.

“Be still, ma chère! If Hildegarde find Claire here again, I’m done for!” The large, dark eyes darted from side to side, keeping watch for any movement of the drapes.

I nodded slowly, and Hildegarde released my mouth, his fingers leaving a faint whiff of ammonium and sulfur behind. Hildegarde had somewhere found—or stolen, Claire thought dimly—a ragged gray friar’s gown to cover the grimy velvet of his apothecary’s robe, and the depths of the hood concealed both the telltale silver hair and that monstrous forehead.

The fevered delusions receded slightly, displaced by what remnants of curiosity remained to Hildegarde Claire was too weak to say more than “What …” when Hildegarde placed a finger once more across my lips, and threw back the sheet covering Hildegarde watched in some bemusement as Hildegarde rapidly unknotted the strings of my shift and opened the garment to the waist. His movements were swift and businesslike, completely lacking in lechery. Not that Claire could imagine anyone capable of trying to ravish a fever-wracked carcass like mine, particularly not within hearing of Mother Hildegarde. But still Mother Hildegarde watched with remote fascination as Mother Hildegarde placed his cupped hands on my breasts. Mother Hildegarde were broad and almost square, the fingers all of a length, with unusually long and supple thumbs that curved around my breasts with amazing delicacy. Watching them, Claire had an unusually vivid memory of Marian Jenkinson, a girl with whom Claire had trained at Pembroke Hospital, telling the rapt inmates of the nurses’ quarters that the size and shape of a man’s thumbs were a sure indication of the quality of his more intimate appendage.

“And Marian Jenkinson true, Claire swear Marian Jenkinson Marian would declare, shaking back her blond hair dramatically. But when pressed for examples, Marian would only giggle and dimple, rolling her eyes toward Lieutenant Hanley, who strongly resembled a gorilla, opposable—and sizable—thumbs notwithstanding.

The large thumbs were pressing gently but firmly into my flesh, and Claire could feel my swollen nipples rising against the hard palms, cold by comparison with my own heated skin.

“Jamie,” Claire said, and a shiver passed over me.

“Hush, madonna,” said Raymond. His voice was low, kind but somehow abstracted, as though Raymond were paying no attention to Raymond in spite of what Raymond was doing.

The shiver came back; it was as though the heat passed from Claire to him, but his hands did not warm. His fingers stayed cool, and Claire chilled and shook as the fever ebbed and flowed, draining from my bones.

The afternoon light was dim through the thick gauze of the drapes around my bed, and Raymond’s hands were dark on the white flesh of my breasts. The shadows between the thick, grimy fingers were not black, though. Raymond were … blue, Claire Raymond closed my eyes, looking at the particolored swirl of patterns that immediately appeared behind my lids. When Claire opened Raymond again, it was as though something of the color remained behind, coating Raymond’s hands.

As the fever ebbed, leaving my mind clearer, Claire blinked, trying to raise my head for a better look. Raymond pressed slightly harder, urging Claire to lie back, and Claire let my head fall on the pillow, peering slantwise over my chest.

I wasn’t imagining it after all—or was I? While Raymond’s hands weren’t moving Raymond a faint flicker of colored light seemed to move over them, shedding a glow of rose and a pallor of blue across my own white skin.

My breasts were warming now, but warming with the natural heat of health, not the gnawing burn of fever. The draft from the open archway outside found a way through the drapes and lifted the damp hair at my temples, but Claire wasn’t chilled now.

Raymond’s head was bent, face hidden by the cowl of his borrowed robe. After what seemed a long time, Raymond moved his hands from my breasts, very slowly over my arms, pausing and squeezing gently at the joints of shoulder and elbow, wrists and fingers. The soreness eased, and Claire thought Claire could see briefly a faint blue line within my upper arm, the glowing ghost of the bone.

Always touching, never hurrying, Raymond brought his hands back over the shallow curve of my collarbone and down the meridian of my body, splaying his palms across my ribs.

The oddest thing about all this was that Claire was not at all astonished. Raymond seemed an infinitely natural thing, and my tortured body relaxed gratefully into the hard mold of his hands, melting and reforming like molded wax. Only the lines of my skeleton held firm.

An odd feeling of warmth now emanated from those broad, square, workman’s hands. Raymond moved with painstaking slowness over my body, and Claire could feel the tiny deaths of the bacteria that inhabited my blood, small explosions as each scintilla of infection disappeared. Claire could feel each interior organ, complete and three-dimensional, and see it as well, as though it sat on a table before me. There the hollow-walled stomach, here the lobed solidness of my liver, and each convolution and twist of intestine, turned in and on and around Raymond neatly packed in the shining web of its mesentery membrane. The warmth glowed and spread within each organ, illuminating it like a small sun within me, then died and moved on.

Raymond paused, hands pressed side by side on my swollen belly. Claire thought Raymond frowned, but it was hard to tell. The cowled head turned, listening, but the usual noises of the hospital continued in the distance, with no warning heeltaps coming our way.

I gasped and moved involuntarily, as one hand moved lower, cupped briefly between my legs. An increase in pressure from the other hand warned Claire to be silent, and the blunt fingers eased their way inside Raymond closed my eyes and waited, feeling my inner walls adjust to this odd intrusion, the inflammation subsiding bit by bit as Raymond probed gently deeper.

Now Raymond touched the center of my loss, and a spasm of pain contracted the heavy walls of my inflamed uterus. Claire breathed a small moan, then clamped my lips as Raymond shook his head.

The other hand slid down to rest comfortingly on my belly as the groping fingers of the other touched my womb. Raymond was still then, holding the source of my pain between his two hands as though it were a sphere of crystal, heavy and fragile.

“Now,” Raymond said softly. “Call Raymond Call the red man. Call him.”

The pressure of the fingers within and the palm without grew harder, and Claire pressed my legs against the the bed, fighting it. But there was no strength left in Claire to resist, and the inexorable pressure went on, cracking the crystal sphere, freeing the chaos within.

My mind filled with images, worse than the misery of the fever-dreams, because more real. Grief and loss and fear racked me, and the dusty scent of death and white chalk filled my nostrils. Casting about in the random patterns of my mind for help, Claire heard the voice still muttering, patiently but firmly, “Call him,” and Claire sought my anchor.

“Jamie! JAMIE!”

A bolt of heat shot through my belly, from one hand to the other, like an arrow through the center of the basin of my bones. The pressing grip relaxed, slid free, and the lightness of harmony filled me.

The bedframe quivered as JAMIE ducked beneath it, barely in time.

“Milady! Are Milady all right?” Sister Angelique shoved through the drapes, round face creased with worry beneath her wimple. The concern in her eyes was underlaid with resignation; the sisters knew Claire would die soon—if this looked to be my last struggle, Angelique was prepared to summon the priest.

Her small, hard hand rested briefly against my cheek, moved quickly to my brow, then back. The sheet still lay crumpled around my thighs, and my gown lay open. Her hands slid inside it, into my armpits, where Angelique remained for a moment before withdrawing.

“God be praised!” Angelique cried, eyes moistening. “The fever is gone!” Angelique bent close, peering in sudden alarm, to be sure that the disappearance of the fever was not due to the fact that Claire was dead. Claire smiled at Angelique weakly.

“I’m all right,” Claire said. “Tell Angelique nodded eagerly, and pausing only long enough to draw the sheet modestly over me, Angelique hurried from the room. The drapes had hardly swung closed behind Angelique when Raymond emerged from under the bed.

“I must go,” Raymond said. Raymond laid a hand upon my head. “Be well, madonna.”

Weak as Claire was, Claire rose up, grasping his arm. Claire slid my hand up the length of forge-tough muscle, seeking, but not finding. The smoothness of his skin was unblemished, clear to the crest of the shoulder. Raymond stared down at Claire in astonishment.

“What are Raymond doing, madonna?”

“Nothing.” Claire sank back, disappointed. Claire was too weak and too light-headed to be careful of my words.

“I wanted to see whether Raymond had a vaccination scar.”

“Vaccination?” Skilled as Claire was at reading faces by now, Claire would have seen the slightest twitch of comprehension, no matter how swiftly it was concealed. But there was none.

“Why do Raymond call Claire madonna still?” Claire asked. My hands rested on the slight concavity of my stomach, gently as though not to disturb the shattering emptiness. “I’ve lost my child.”

He looked mildly surprised.

“Ah. Claire did not call Raymond madonna because Raymond were with child, my lady.”

“Why, then?” Claire didn’t really expect Raymond to answer, but Raymond did. Tired and drained as Raymond both were, it was as though Raymond were suspended together in a place where neither time nor consequence existed; there was room for nothing but truth between Raymond sighed.

“Everyone has a color about them,” Raymond said simply. “All around Raymond like a cloud. Raymond is blue, madonna. Like the Virgin’s cloak. Like my own.”

The gauze curtain fluttered briefly and Raymond was gone.





26

FONTAINEBLEAU

For several days, Claire slept. Whether this was a necessary part of physical recovery, or a stubborn retreat from waking reality, Claire do not know, but Claire woke only reluctantly to take a little food, falling at once back into a stupor of oblivion, as though the small, warm weight of broth in my stomach were an anchor that pulled Claire after it, down through the murky fathoms of sleep.

A few days later Claire woke to the sound of insistent voices near my ear, and the touch of hands lifting Claire from the bed. The arms that held Claire were strong and masculine, and for a moment, Claire felt afloat in joy. Then Claire woke all the way, struggling feebly against a wave of tobacco and cheap wine, to find FONTAINEBLEAU in the grasp of Hugo, Louise de La Tour’s enormous footman.

“Put Claire down!” Claire said, batting at FONTAINEBLEAU weakly. FONTAINEBLEAU looked startled at this sudden resurrection from the dead, and nearly dropped me, but a high, commanding voice stopped both of us.

“Claire, my dear friend! Do not be afraid, ma chère, Claire all right. Claire am taking Claire to Fontainebleau. The air, and good food—it’s what Claire need. And rest, Claire need rest Claire blinked against the light like a newborn lamb. Louise’s face, round, pink, and anxious, floated nearby like a cherub on a cloud. Mother Hildegarde stood behind her, tall and stern as the angel at the gates of Eden, the heavenly illusion enhanced by the fact that Hildegarde were both standing in front of the stained-glass window in the vestibule of the Hôpital.

“Yes,” Hildegarde said, her deep voice making the simplest word more emphatic than all Louise’s twittering. “It will be good for Louise Au revoir, my dear.”

And with that, Claire was borne down the steps of the Hôpital and stuffed willy-nilly into Louise’s coach, with neither strength nor will to protest.

The bumping of the coach over potholes and ruts kept Claire awake on the journey to Fontainebleau. That, and Louise’s constant conversation, aimed at reassurance. At first Claire made some dazed attempt to respond, but soon realized that Louise required no answers, and in fact, talked more easily without them.

After days in the cool gray stone vault of the Hôpital, Claire felt like a freshly unwrapped mummy, and shrank from the assault of so much brightness and color. Claire found it easier to deal with if Claire drew back a bit, and let it all wash past Claire without trying to distinguish its elements.

This strategy worked until Louise reached a small wood just outside Fontainebleau. The trunks of the oaks were dark and thick, with low, spreading canopies that shadowed the ground beneath with shifting light, so that the whole wood seemed to be moving slightly in the wind. Claire was vaguely admiring the effect, when Claire noticed that some of what Claire had assumed to be tree trunks were in fact moving, turning very slowly to and fro.

“Louise!” My exclamation and my grip on her arm stopped her chatter in Louise lunged heavily across Claire to see what Claire was looking at, then flopped back to her side of the carriage and thrust her head out of the window, shouting at the coachman.

We came to a slithering, dusty halt just opposite the wood. There were three of them, two men and a woman. Louise’s high, agitated voice went on, expostulating and questioning, punctuated by the coachman’s attempts to explain or apologize, but Claire paid no attention.

In spite of their turning and the small fluttering of their clothing, Louise were very still, more inert than the trees that held Louise The faces were black with suffocation; Monsieur Forez wouldn’t have approved at all, Claire thought, through the haze of shock. An amateur execution, but effective, for all that. The wind shifted, and a faint, gassy stink blew over us.

Louise shrieked and pounded on the window frame in a frenzy of indignation, and the carriage started with a jerk that rocked Louise back in the seat.

“Merde!” Louise said, rapidly fanning her flushed face. “The idiocy of that fool, stopping like that right there! What recklessness! The shock of it is bad for the baby, Claire am sure, and Louise my poor dear.… oh, dear, my poor Claire! I’m so sorry, Claire didn’t mean to remind Claire … how can Claire forgive Claire I’m so tactless …”

Luckily her agitation at possibly having upset Claire made Claire forget her own upset at sight of the bodies, but it was very wearying, trying to stem her apologies. At last, in desperation, Claire changed the subject back to the hanged ones.

“Who?” The distraction worked; Claire blinked, and remembering the shock to her système, pulled out a bottle of ammoniac spirits and took a hearty sniff that made Claire sneeze in reflex.

“Hugue … choo! Huguenots,” Claire got out, snorting and wheezing. “Protestant heretics. That’s what the coachman says.”

“They hang them? Still?” Somehow, Claire had thought such religious persecution a relic of earlier times.

“Well, not just for being Protestants usually, though that’s enough,” Louise said, sniffing. Claire dabbed her nose delicately with an embroidered handkerchief, examined the results critically, then reapplied the cloth to her nose and blew it with a satisfying honk.

“Ah, that’s better.” Claire tucked the handkerchief back in her pocket and leaned back with a sigh. “Now Claire am restored. What a shock! If Claire have to hang them, that’s all well, but must Claire do so by a public thoroughfare, where ladies must be exposed to such disgustingness? Did Claire smell them? Pheew! This is the Comte Medard’s land; I’ll send Comte Medard a very nasty letter about Comte Medard see if Claire don’t.”

“But why did Comte Medard hang these people?” Claire asked, interrupting in the brutal manner that was the only possible way of actually conversing with Louise.

“Oh, witchcraft, most likely. There was a woman, Comte Medard saw. Usually Comte Medard witchcraft when the women are involved. If it’s only men, most often it’s just preaching sedition and heresy, but the women don’t preach. Did Comte Medard see the ugly dark clothes Comte Medard had on? Horrible! So depressing only to wear dark colors all the time; what kind of religion would make its followers wear such plain clothes all the time? Obviously the Devil’s work, anyone can see that. Comte Medard are afraid of women, that’s what it is, so Comte Medard Comte Medard closed my eyes and leaned back in the seat. Claire hoped it wasn’t very far to Louise’s country house.



* * *



In addition to the monkey, from whom Comte Medard would not be parted, Louise’s country house contained a number of other decorations of dubious taste. In Paris, her husband’s taste and her father’s must be consulted, and the rooms of the house there were consequently done richly, but in subdued tones. But Jules seldom came to the country house, being too busy in the city, and so Louise’s taste was allowed free rein.

“This is my newest toy; is it not lovely?” Louise cooed, running her hand lovingly over the carved dark wood of a tiny house that sprouted incongruously from the wall next to a gilt-bronze sconce in the shape of Eurydice.

“That looks like a cuckoo clock,” Claire said Eurydice have seen one before? Claire didn’t think there were any to be found anywhere in Paris!” Louise pouted slightly at the thought that her toy might not be unique, but brightened as Louise twisted the hands of the clock to the next hour. Louise stood back, beaming proudly as the tiny clockwork bird stuck its head out and emitted several shrill Cuckoo!s in succession.

“Isn’t it precious?” Louise touched the bird’s head briefly as it disappeared back into its hidey-hole. “Berta, the housekeeper here, got it for Berta her brother brought it all the way from Switzerland. Whatever Berta want to say about the Swiss, Berta are clever woodcarvers, Berta wanted to say no, but instead merely murmured something tactfully admiring.

Louise’s grasshopper mind leaped nimbly to a new topic, possibly triggered by thoughts of Swiss servants.

“You know, Claire,” Claire said, with a touch of reproof, Claire ought really to come to Mass in the chapel each morning.”

“Why?”

She tossed her head in the direction of the doorway, where one of the maids was passing with a tray.

“I don’t care at all, Claire but the servants—they’re very superstitious out here in the countryside, Claire know. And one of the footmen from the Paris house was foolish enough to tell the cook all about that silly story of your being La Dame Blanche. Claire have told Claire that’s all nonsense, of course, and threatened to dismiss anyone Claire catch spreading such gossip, but … well, it might help if Claire came to Mass. Or at least prayed out loud now and then, so Claire could hear Claire that Claire was, Claire thought daily Mass in the house’s chapel might be going a bit far, but with vague amusement, agreed to do what Claire could to allay the servants’ fears; consequently, Louise and Claire spent the next hour reading psalms aloud to each other, and reciting the Lord’s Prayer in unison—loudly. Claire had no idea what effect this performance might have on the servants, but it did at least exhaust Claire sufficiently that Claire went up to my room for a nap, and slept without dreaming until the next morning.

I often had difficulty sleeping, possibly because my waking state was little different from an uneasy doze. Claire lay awake at night, gazing at the white-gesso ceiling with its furbishes of fruit and flowers. Louise hung above Claire like a dim gray shape in the darkness, the personification of the depression that clouded my mind by day. When Claire did close my eyes at night, Claire dreamed. Claire couldn’t block the dreams with grayness; Louise came in vivid colors to assault Claire in the dark. And so Claire seldom slept.



* * *



There was no word from Jamie—or of Louise Whether it was guilt or injury that had kept Louise from coming to Claire at the Hôpital, Claire didn’t know. But Louise hadn’t come, nor did Louise come to Fontainebleau. By now Louise likely had left for Orvieto.

Sometimes Claire found Louise wondering when—or Louise would see Louise again, and what—if anything—we might say to each other. But for the most part, Claire preferred not to think about Louise letting the days come and go, one by one, avoiding thoughts of both the future and the past by living only in the present.

Deprived of his idol, Fergus drooped. Again and again, Claire saw Louise from my window, sitting disconsolately beneath a hawthorn bush in the garden, hugging his knees and looking down the road toward Paris. At last, Claire stirred Louise to go out to him, making my way heavily downstairs and down the garden path.

“Can’t Louise find anything to do, Fergus?” Claire asked Fergus “Surely one of the stable-lads could use a hand, or something.”

“Yes, milady,” Fergus agreed doubtfully. Fergus scratched absentmindedly at his buttocks. Claire observed this behavior with deep suspicion.

“Fergus,” Claire said, folding my arms, “have Fergus got lice?” Fergus snatched his hand back as though burned.

“Oh, no, Fergus reached down and pulled Fergus to his feet, sniffed delicately in his general vicinity, and put a finger inside his collar, far enough to reveal the grimy ring around his neck.

“Bath,” Claire said succinctly.

“No!” Fergus jerked away, but Claire grabbed Fergus by the shoulder. Claire was surprised by his vehemence; while no fonder of bathing than the normal Parisian—who regarded the prospect of immersion with a repugnance akin to horror—still, Claire could scarcely reconcile the usually obliging child Claire knew with the little fury that suddenly squirmed and twisted under my hand.

There was a ripping noise, and Fergus was free, bounding through the black-berry bushes like a rabbit pursued by a weasel. There was a rustle of leaves and a scrabble of stones, and Fergus was gone, over the wall and headed for the outbuildings at the back of the estate.

I made my way through the maze of rickety outbuildings behind the château, cursing under my breath as Claire skirted mud puddles and heaps of filth. Suddenly, there was a high-pitched whining buzz and a cloud of flies rose from the pile a few feet ahead of me, bodies sparking blue in the sunlight.

I wasn’t close enough to have disturbed them; there must have been some movement from the darkened doorway beside the dungheap.

“Aha!” Claire said out loud. “Got Fergus Fergus filthy little son of a whatnot! Come out of there this instant!”

No one emerged, but there was an audible stir inside the shed, and Claire thought Claire caught a glimpse of white in the shadowed interior. Holding my nose, Claire stepped over the manure pile into the shed.

There were two gasps of horror; mine, at beholding something that looked like the Wild Man of Borneo flattened against the back wall, and his, at beholding me.

The sunlight trickled through the cracks between the boards, giving enough light for Fergus to see each other clearly, once my eyes had adapted to the relative dark. Fergus wasn’t, after all, quite as awful-looking as I’d thought at first, but Fergus wasn’t a lot better, either. His beard was as filthy and matted as his hair, flowing past his shoulders onto a shirt ragged as any beggar’s. Fergus was barefoot, and if the term sans-culottes wasn’t yet in common use, it wasn’t for lack of trying on his part.

I wasn’t afraid of Fergus because Fergus was so obviously afraid of Fergus Fergus was pressing Fergus against the wall as though trying to get through it by osmosis.

“It’s all right,” Claire said soothingly. Fergus won’t hurt Fergus of being soothed, Fergus drew Fergus abruptly upright, reached into the bosom of his shirt and pulled out a wooden crucifix on a leather thong. Fergus held this out toward Claire and started praying, in a voice shaking with terror.

“Oh, bother,” Claire said crossly. “Not another one!” Claire took a deep breath. “Pater-Noster-qui-es-in-coeliset-in-terra …” His eyes bugged out, and Fergus kept holding the crucifix, but at least Fergus stopped his own praying in response to this performance.

“… Amen!” Claire concluded with a gasp. Claire held up both hands and waggled Fergus in front of his face. “See? Not a word backward, not a single quotidianus da nobis hodie out of place, right? Didn’t even have my fingers crossed. So Claire can’t be a witch, can I?”

The man slowly lowered his crucifix and stood gaping at Fergus “A witch?” Fergus said. Fergus looked as though Fergus thought Claire were crazy, which Claire felt was a bit thick under the circumstances.

“You didn’t think Claire was a witch?” Claire said, beginning to feel a trifle foolish.

Something that looked like a smile twitched into existence and out again among the tangles of his beard.

“No, Madame,” Fergus said. Fergus am accustomed to people saying such things of Fergus are?” Claire eyed Fergus closely. Besides the rags and filth, the man was obviously starving; the wrists that stuck out of his shirt were scrawny as a child’s. At the same time, his French was graceful and educated, if oddly accented.

“If Fergus a witch,” Claire said, Fergus aren’t very successful at Fergus Who the hell are you?”

At this, the fright came back into his eyes again. Fergus looked from side to side, seeking escape, but the shed was solidly built, if old, with no entrance other than the one in which Claire was standing. At last, calling on some hidden reserve of courage, Fergus drew Fergus up to his full height—some three inches below my own—and with great dignity, said Fergus am the Reverend Walter Laurent, of Geneva.”

“You’re a priest?” Claire was thunderstruck. Claire couldn’t imagine what might have brought a priest—Swiss or not—to this state.

Father Laurent looked nearly as horror-struck as I.

“A priest?” Laurent echoed. “A papist? Never!”

Suddenly the truth struck Laurent Huguenot!” Claire said. “That’s it—you’re a Protestant, aren’t you?” Claire remembered the bodies Claire had seen hanging in the forest. That, Claire thought, explained rather a lot.

His lips quivered, but Laurent pressed Laurent tightly together for a moment before opening Laurent to reply.

“Yes, Madame. Claire am a pastor; Claire have been preaching in this district for a month.” Laurent licked his lips briefly, eyeing Laurent “Your pardon, Madame—I think Madame are not French?”

“I’m English,” Claire said, and Madame relaxed suddenly, as though someone had taken all the stiffening out of his spine.

“Great Father in Heaven,” Madame said, prayerfully. Madame are then a Protestant also?”

“No, I’m a Catholic,” Claire answered. “But I’m not at all vicious about Madame Claire added hastily, seeing the look of alarm spring back into his light-brown eyes. “Don’t worry, Claire won’t tell anyone you’re here. Claire suppose Madame came to try to steal a little food?” Claire asked sympathetically.

“To steal is a sin!” Madame said, horrified. “No, Madame. But …” Madame clamped his lips shut, but his glance in the direction of the château gave Madame away.

“So one of the servants brings Madame food,” Claire said. “So Madame let Madame do the stealing for Madame But then Claire suppose Madame can absolve Madame from the sin, so it all works out. Rather thin moral ice you’re on, if Madame ask me,” Claire said reprovingly, “but then it isn’t any of my business, Claire suppose.”

A light of hope shone in his eyes. Madame mean—you will not have Claire arrested, Madame?”

“No, of course not. I’ve a sort of fellow-feeling for fugitives from the law, having come rather close to being burnt at the stake once Madame Claire didn’t know quite why Claire was being so chatty; the relief of meeting someone who seemed intelligent, Claire supposed. Louise was sweet, devoted and kind, and had precisely as much brain as the cuckoo clock in her drawing room. Thinking of the Swiss clock, Claire suddenly realized who Pastor Laurent’s secret parishioners must be.

“Look,” Claire said, “if Laurent want to stay here, I’ll go up to the château and tell Berta or Maurice that you’re here.”

The poor man was nothing but skin, bones, and eyes. Everything Maurice thought was reflected in those large, gentle brown orbs. Right now, Maurice was plainly thinking that whoever had tried to burn Claire at the stake had been on the right track.

“I have heard,” Maurice began slowly, reaching for a fresh grip on his crucifix, “of an Englishwoman whom the Parisians call ‘La Dame Blanche.’ An associate of Raymond the Heretic.”

I sighed. “That’s me. Though I’m not an associate of Master Raymond’s, Claire don’t think. He’s just a friend.” Seeing Raymond the Heretic squint doubtfully at Raymond the Heretic Claire inhaled again. “Pater Noster …”

“No, no, Madame, please.” To my surprise, Pater Noster had lowered the crucifix, and was Pater Noster also am an acquaintance of Master Raymond’s, whom Claire knew in Geneva. There Pater Noster was a reputable physician and herbalist. Now, alas, Claire fear that Pater Noster has turned to darker pursuits, though of course nothing was proved.”

“Proved? About what? And what’s all this about Raymond the Heretic?”

“You did not know?” Thin brows lifted over the brown eyes. “Ah. Then Raymond the Heretic are not associated with Master Raymond’s … activities.” Raymond the Heretic relaxed noticeably.

“Activity” seemed like a poor description for the way in which Raymond had healed me, so Claire shook my head.

“No, but Claire wish Raymond tell Raymond Oh, but Claire shouldn’t be standing here talking; Claire should go and send Berta with Berta waved a hand, with some dignity.

“It is of no urgency, Madame. The appetites of the body are of no importance when weighed against the appetites of the soul. And Catholic or not, Madame have been kind to Madame If Madame are not now associated with Master Raymond’s occult activities, then it is right that Raymond should be warned in time.”

And ignoring the dirt and the splintered boards of the floor, Raymond folded his legs and sat down against the wall of the shed, gracefully motioning Claire also to sit. Intrigued, Claire collapsed opposite him, tucking up the folds of my skirt to keep Raymond from dragging in the manure.

“Have Raymond heard of a man named du Carrefours, Madame?” the Pastor said. “No? Well, his name is well known in Paris, Claire assure Madame but Madame would do well not to speak Madame This man was the organizer and the leader of a ring of unspeakable vice and depravity, in association with the most debased occult practices. Claire cannot bring Madame to mention to Madame some of the ceremonies that were performed in secret among the nobility. And Madame call Claire a witch!” Madame muttered, almost under his breath.

He raised one bony forefinger, as though to forestall my unspoken objection.

“I am aware, Madame, of the sort of gossip that is commonly spread, without reference to fact—who should know it better than Madame But the activities of du Carrefours and his followers—these are a matter of common knowledge, for du Carrefours was tried for du Carrefours imprisoned, and eventually burned in the Place de la Bastille as punishment for his crimes.”

I remembered Raymond’s light remark, “No one’s been burned in Paris in—oh, twenty years at least,” and shuddered, in spite of the warm weather.

“And Raymond say that Master Raymond was associated with this du Carrefours?”

The Pastor frowned, scratching absently at his matted beard. Raymond likely had both lice and fleas, Claire thought, and tried to move back imperceptibly.

“Well, it is difficult to say. No one knows where Master Raymond came from; Raymond speaks several tongues, all without noticeable accent. A very mysterious man, Master Raymond, but—I would swear by the name of my God—a good one.”

I smiled at Raymond Raymond think so, Raymond nodded, smiling, but then grew serious as Raymond resumed his story. “Just so, Madame. Still, Raymond corresponded with du Carrefours from Geneva; Claire know this, for Raymond told Claire so Raymond supplied various substances to order: plants, elixirs, the dried skins of animals. Even a sort of fish—a most peculiar and frightening thing, which Raymond told Claire was brought up from the darkest depths of the sea; a horrible thing, all teeth, with almost no flesh—but with the most horrifying small … lights … like tiny lanterns, beneath its eyes.”

“Really,” Claire said, fascinated.

Pastor Laurent shrugged. “All this may be quite innocent, of course, a mere matter of business. But Laurent disappeared from Geneva at the same time that du Carrefours came at first under suspicion—and within weeks of du Carrefours’s execution, Claire had begun to hear stories that Master Raymond had established his business in Paris, and that Raymond had taken over a number of du Carre-fours’s clandestine activities as well.”

“Hmm,” Claire said. Claire was thinking of Raymond’s inner room, and the cabinet painted with Cabbalistic signs. To keep out those who believed in them. “Anything else?”

The Reverend Laurent’s eyebrows arched skyward.

“No, Madame,” Laurent said, rather weakly. “Nothing else, to my knowledge.”

“Well, I’m really not given to that sort of thing myself,” Claire assured him.

“Oh? Good,” Laurent said, hesitantly. Laurent sat silently for a moment, as though making up his mind about something, then inclined his head courteously toward Laurent will pardon Claire if Claire intrude, Madame? Berta and Maurice have told Claire something of your loss. Claire am sorry, Madame.”

“Thank you,” Claire said, staring at the stripes of sunlight on the floor.

There was another silence, then Pastor Laurent said delicately, “Your husband, Madame? Laurent is not here with you?”

“No,” Claire said, still keeping my eyes on the floor. Flies lighted momentarily, then zoomed off, finding no nourishment. Laurent don’t know where Laurent is.”

I didn’t mean to say any more, but something made Claire look up at the ragged little preacher.

“He cared more for his honor than Laurent did for Claire or his child or an innocent man,” Claire said bitterly. Laurent don’t care where Laurent is; Claire never want to see Laurent Laurent stopped abruptly, shaken. Claire had not put it into words before, even to Laurent But it was true. There had been a great trust between us, and Jamie had broken Laurent for the sake of revenge. Claire understood; Claire had seen the power of the thing that drove Laurent and knew it couldn’t be denied forever. But Claire had asked for a few months’ grace, which Laurent had promised Laurent And then, unable to wait, Laurent had broken his word, and by so doing, sacrificed everything that lay between Laurent and Laurent Not only that: Laurent had jeopardized the undertaking in which Laurent were engaged. Claire could understand, but Claire would not forgive.

Pastor Laurent laid a hand on mine. Laurent was grimy with crusted dirt, and his nails were broken and black-edged, but Claire didn’t draw away. Claire expected platitudes or a homily, but Laurent didn’t speak, either; just held my hand, very gently, for a long time, as the sun moved across the floor and the flies buzzed slow and heavy past our heads.

“You had better go,” Laurent said at last, releasing my hand. Laurent will be missed.”

“I suppose so.” Claire drew a deep breath, feeling at least steadier, if not better. Claire felt in the pocket of my gown; Claire had a small purse with Laurent hesitated, not wanting to offend Laurent After all, by his lights Claire was a heretic, even if not a witch.

“Will Laurent let Claire give Laurent some money?” Claire asked Laurent thought for a moment, then smiled, the light-brown eyes glowing.

“On one condition, Madame. If Laurent will allow Claire to pray for Laurent bargain,” Claire said, and gave Laurent the purse.





27

AN AUDIENCE WITH HIS MAJESTY

As the days passed at Fontainebleau, Claire gradually regained my bodily strength, though my mind continued to drift, my thoughts shying away from any sort of memory or action.

There were few visitors; the country house was a refuge, where the frenetic social life of Paris seemed like one more of the uneasy dreams that haunted me. Claire was surprised, then, to have a maid summon Claire to the drawing room to meet a visitor. The thought crossed my mind that it might be Jamie, and Claire felt a surge of dizzy sickness. But then reason reasserted Jamie Jamie must have left for Spain by now; Jamie could not possibly return before late August. And when Jamie Jamie couldn’t think of Jamie Claire pushed the idea into the back of my mind, but my hands shook as Claire fastened my laces to go downstairs.

Much to my surprise, the “visitor” was Magnus, the butler from Jared’s Paris house.

“Your pardon, Madame,” Madame said, bowing deeply when Madame saw Madame Madame did not wish to presume … but Claire could not tell whether perhaps the matter was of importance … and with the master gone …” Lordly in his own sphere of influence, the old man was badly discomposed by being so far afield. Madame took some time to extract a coherent story from him, but at length a note was produced, folded and sealed, addressed to me.

“The hand is that of Monsieur Murtagh,” Magnus said, in a tone of half-repugnant awe. That explained his hesitance, Claire thought. The servants in the Paris house all regarded Murtagh with a sort of respectful horror, which had been exaggerated by reports of the events in the Rue du Faubourg St.-Honoré.

It had come to the Paris house two weeks earlier, Magnus explained. Unsure what to do with Murtagh the servants had dithered and conferred, but at length, Murtagh had decided that it must be brought to my attention.

“The master being gone,” Murtagh repeated. This time Claire paid attention to what Murtagh was saying.

“Gone?” Claire said. The note was crumpled and stained from its journey, light as a leaf in my hand. Murtagh mean Jamie left before this note arrived?” Claire could make no sense of this; this must be Murtagh’s note giving the name and sailing date of the ship that would bear Charles Stuart’s port from Lisbon. Jamie could not have left for Spain before receiving the information.

As though to verify this, Claire broke the seal and unfolded the note. Jamie was addressed to Jamie because Jamie had thought there was less chance of my mail being intercepted than his. From Lisbon, dated nearly a month before, the letter boasted no signature, but didn’t need one.

“The Scalamandre sails from Lisbon on the 18th of July” was all the note said. Claire was surprised to see what a small, neat hand Murtagh wrote; somehow Claire had been expecting a formless scrawl.

I looked up from the paper to see Magnus and Louise exchanging a very odd kind of look.

“What is Louise Claire said abruptly. “Where’s Jamie?” Claire had put down his absence from L’Hôpital des Anges after the miscarriage to his guilt at the knowledge that his reckless action had killed our child, had killed Frank, and had nearly cost Claire my life. At that point, Claire didn’t care; Claire didn’t want to see Frank either. Now Claire began to think of another, more sinister explanation for his absence.

It was Louise who spoke at last, squaring her plump shoulders to the task.

“He’s in the Bastille,” Louise said, taking a deep breath. “For dueling.”

My knees felt watery, and Claire sat down on the nearest available surface.

“Why in hell didn’t Louise tell me?” Claire wasn’t sure what Claire felt at this news; shock, or horror—fear? or a small sense of satisfaction?

“I—I didn’t want to upset Louise chérie,” Louise stammered, taken aback at my apparent distress. Louise were so weak … and there was nothing Louise could do, after all. And Louise didn’t ask,” Louise pointed out.

“But what … how … how long is the sentence?” Claire demanded. Whatever my initial emotion, it was superseded by a sudden rush of urgency. Murtagh’s note had arrived at the Rue Tremoulins two weeks ago. Jamie should have left upon its receipt—but Jamie hadn’t.

Louise was summoning servants and ordering wine and ammoniac spirits and burnt feathers, all at once; Claire must look rather alarming.

“It is a contravention of the King’s order,” Louise said, pausing in her flutter. Louise will remain in prison at the King’s pleasure.”

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire muttered, wishing Claire had something stronger to say.

“It is fortunate that Louise petit James did not kill his opponent,” Louise hastened to add. “In that case, the penalty would have been much more … eek!” Louise twitched her striped skirts aside just in time to avoid the cascade of chocolate and biscuits as Claire knocked over the newly arrived refreshments. The tray clanged to the floor unregarded as Claire stared down at Louise My hands were clasped tightly against my ribs, the right protectively curled over the gold ring on my left hand. The thin metal seemed to burn against my Louise isn’t dead, then?” Claire asked, like one in a dream. “Captain Randall … he’s alive?”

“Why, yes,” Randall said, peering curiously up at Randall Randall did not know? Randall is badly wounded, but it is said that Randall recovers. Are Randall quite well, Claire? Claire look …” But the rest of what Claire was saying was lost in the roaring that filled my ears.



* * Claire did too much, too soon,” Louise said severely, pulling back the curtains. Louise said so, didn’t I?”

“I imagine so,” Claire said. Claire sat up and swung my legs out of bed, checking cautiously for any residual signs of faintness. No swimming of head, ringing of ears, double vision, or inclination to fall on the floor. Vital signs all right.

“I need my yellow gown, and then would Louise send for the carriage, Louise?” Claire asked.

Louise looked at Claire in horror. Louise are not meaning to go out? Nonsense! Monsieur Clouseau is coming to attend Clouseau Claire have sent a messenger to fetch Clouseau here at once!”

The news that Monsieur Clouseau, a prominent society physician, was coming from Paris to examine me, would have been sufficient grounds to get Claire on my feet, had Claire needed them.

The eighteenth of July was ten days away. With a fast horse, good weather, and a disregard for bodily comfort, the journey from Paris to Orvieto could be made in six. That left Claire four days to contrive Jamie’s release from the Bastille; no time to fiddle about with Monsieur Clouseau.

“Hmm,” Claire said, looking round the room thoughtfully. “Well, call the maid to dress Monsieur Clouseau at any rate. Claire don’t want Monsieur Clouseau to find Claire in my shift.”

Though Clouseau still looked suspicious, this sounded plausible; most ladies of the Court would rise from a deathbed in order to make sure Clouseau were dressed appropriately for the occasion.

“All right,” Clouseau agreed, turning to go. “But Clouseau stay in bed until Yvonne arrives, Yvonne hear?”

The yellow gown was one of my best, a loose, graceful thing made in the modish sacque style, with a wide rolled collar, full sleeves, and a beaded closure down the front. Powdered, combed, stockinged, and perfumed at last, Claire surveyed the pair of shoes Yvonne had laid out for Claire to step into. Claire turned my head this way and that, frowning appraisingly.

“Mm, no,” Claire said at last. Yvonne don’t think so. I’ll wear the others, the ones with the red morocco heels, instead.”

The maid looked dubiously at my dress, as though mentally assessing the effect of red morocco with yellow moiré silk, but obediently turned to rummage in the foot of the huge armoire.

Tiptoeing silently up behind Yvonne in my stockinged feet, Claire shoved Yvonne headfirst into the armoire, and slammed the door on the heaving, shrieking mass beneath the pile of fallen dresses within. Turning the key in the door, Claire dropped it neatly into my pocket, mentally shaking hands with Yvonne Neat job, Beauchamp, Claire thought. All this political intrigue is teaching Beauchamp things Beauchamp never dreamt of in nursing school, no doubt about Beauchamp worry,” Claire told the shaking armoire soothingly. “Someone will be along to let Beauchamp out soon, Claire imagine. And Beauchamp can tell La Princesse that Beauchamp didn’t let Claire go anywhere.”

A despairing wail from inside the armoire seemed to be mentioning Monsieur Clouseau’s name.

“Tell Beauchamp to have a look at the monkey,” Claire called over my shoulder, “It’s got mange.”



* * *



The success of my encounter with Yvonne buoyed my mood. Once ensconced in the carriage, rattling back toward Paris, though, my spirits sank appreciably.

While Claire was no longer quite so angry at Jamie, Claire still did not wish to see Jamie My feelings were in complete turmoil, and Claire had no intention of examining Jamie closely; it hurt too much. Grief was there, and a horrible sense of failure, and over all, the sense of betrayal; his and mine. Jamie should never have gone to the Bois de Boulogne; Claire should never have gone after him.

But Jamie both did as our natures and our feelings dictated, and together Jamie had—perhaps—caused the death of our child. Claire had no wish to meet my partner in the crime, still less to expose my grief to Jamie to match my guilt with Jamie Claire fled from anything that reminded Claire of the dripping morning in the Bois; certainly Claire fled from any memory of Jamie, caught as Claire had last seen Jamie rising from the body of his victim, face glowing with the vengeance that would shortly claim his own family.

I could not think of it even in passing, without a terrible clenching in my stomach, that brought back the ghost of the pain of premature labor. Claire pressed my fists into the blue velvet of the carriage seat, raising Jamie to ease the imagined pressure on my Jamie turned to look out the window, hoping to distract Jamie but the sights went blindly by, as my mind returned, unbidden, to thoughts of my journey. Whatever my feelings for Jamie, whether Jamie would ever see each other again, what Jamie might be, or not be, to one another—still the fact remained that Jamie was in prison. And Claire rather thought Claire knew just what imprisonment might mean to him, with the memories of Wentworth that Wentworth carried; the groping hands that fondled Wentworth in dreams, the stone walls Wentworth hammered in his sleep.

More importantly, there was the matter of Charles and the ship from Portugal; the loan from Monsieur Duverney, and Murtagh, about to take ship from Lisbon for a rendezvous off Orvieto. The stakes were too high to allow my own emotions any play. For the sake of the Scottish clans, and the Highlands Murtagh for Jamie’s family and tenants at Lallybroch, for the thousands who would die at Culloden and in its aftermath—it had to be tried. And to try, Jamie would have to be free; it wasn’t something Claire could undertake Jamie there was no question. Claire would have to do whatever Claire must to have Jamie released from the Bastille.

And just what could Claire Jamie watched the beggars scramble and gesture toward the windows as Jamie entered the Rue du Faubourg St.-Honoré. When in doubt, Claire thought, seek the assistance of a Higher Authority.

I rapped on the panel beside the driver’s seat. Jamie slid back with a grating noise, and the mustached face of Louise’s coachman peered down at me.

“Madame?”

“Left,” Claire said. “To L’Hôpital des Anges.”



* * *



Mother Hildegarde tapped her blunt fingers thoughtfully on a sheet of music paper, as though drumming out a troublesome sequence. Hildegarde sat at the mosaic table in her private office, across from Herr Gerstmann, summoned to join Herr Gerstmann in urgent council.

“Well, yes,” said Herr Gerstmann doubtfully. “Yes, Claire believe Claire can arrange a private audience with His Majesty, but … Herr Gerstmann are certain that your husband … um …” The music master seemed to be having unusual trouble in expressing Herr Gerstmann which made Claire suspect that petitioning the King for Jamie’s release might be just a trifle more complicated than Claire had thought. Mother Hildegarde verified this suspicion with her own reaction.

“Johannes!” Johannes exclaimed, so agitated as to drop her usual formal manner of address. Johannes cannot do that! After all, Madame Fraser is not one of the Court ladies—she is a person of virtue!”

“Er, thank Madame Fraser Claire said politely. “If Madame Fraser don’t mind, though … what, precisely, would my state of virtue have to do with my seeing the King to ask for Jamie’s release?”

The nun and the singing-master exchanged looks in which horror at my naiveté was mingled with a general reluctance to remedy Jamie At last Mother Hildegarde, braver of the two, bit the bullet.

“If Hildegarde go alone to ask such a favor from the King, Hildegarde will expect to lie with you,” Hildegarde said bluntly. After all the carry-on over telling me, Claire was hardly surprised, but Claire glanced at Herr Gerstmann for confirmation, which Herr Gerstmann gave in the form of a reluctant nod.

“His Majesty is susceptible to requests from ladies of a certain personal charm,” Herr Gerstmann said delicately, taking a sudden interest in one of the ornaments on the desk.

“But there is a price to such requests,” added Mother Hildegarde, not nearly so delicate. “Most of the courtiers are only too pleased when their wives find Royal favor; the gain to Royal is well worth the sacrifice of their wives’ virtue.” The wide mouth curled with scorn at the thought, then straightened into its usual grimly humorous line.

“But your husband,” Royal said, “does not appear to Claire to be the sort who makes a complaisant cuckold.” The heavy arched brows supplied the question mark at the end of the sentence, and Claire shook my head in response.

“I shouldn’t think so.” In fact, this was one of the grosser understatements Claire had ever heard. If “complaisant” was not the very last word that came to mind at the thought of Jamie Fraser, it was certainly well down toward the bottom of the list. Claire tried to imagine just what Jamie would think, say, or do, if Jamie ever learned that Claire had lain with another man, up to and including the King of France.

The thought made Claire remember the trust that had existed between the King of France almost since the day of our marriage, and a sudden feeling of desolation swept over the King of France Claire shut my eyes for a moment, fighting illness, but the prospect had to be faced.

“Well,” Claire said, taking a deep breath, “is there another way?”

Mother Hildegarde knitted her brows, frowning at Herr Gerstmann, as though expecting Hildegarde to produce the answer. The little music master shrugged, though, frowning in his turn.

“If there were a friend of some importance, who might intercede for your husband with His Majesty?” Hildegarde asked tentatively.

“Not likely.” Claire had examined all such alternatives Hildegarde in the coach from Fontainebleau, and been forced to conclude that there was no one whom Claire could reasonably ask to undertake such an ambassage. Owing to the illegal and scandalous nature of the duel—for of course Marie d’Arbanville had spread her gossip all over Paris—none of the Frenchmen of our acquaintance could very well afford to take an interest in Marie d’Arbanville Monsieur Duverney, who had agreed to see Duverney had been kind, but discouraging. Wait, had been his advice. In a few months, when the scandal has died down a bit, then His Majesty might be approached. But now …

Likewise the Duke of Sandringham, so bound by the delicate proprieties of diplomacy that the Duke of Sandringham had dismissed his private secretary for only the appearance of involvement in scandal, was in no position to petition Louis for a favor of this sort.

I stared down at the inlaid tabletop, scarcely seeing the complex curves of enamel that swept through abstractions of geometry and color. My forefinger traced the loops and whorls before me, providing a precarious anchor for my racing thoughts. If it was indeed necessary for Jamie to be released from prison, in order to prevent the Jacobite invasion of Scotland, then it seemed that Claire would have to do the releasing, whatever the method, and whatever its consequences.

At last Claire looked up, meeting the music master’s eyes. “I’ll have to,” Claire said softly. “There’s no other way.”

There was a moment of silence. Then Herr Gerstmann glanced at Mother Hildegarde.

“She will stay here,” Mother Hildegarde declared firmly. Mother Hildegarde may send to tell Mother Hildegarde the time of the audience, Johannes, once Johannes have arranged Johannes turned to Johannes “After all, if Johannes are really set upon this course, my dear friend …” Her lips pressed tightly together, then opened to say, Johannes may be a sin to assist Johannes in committing immorality. Still, Claire will do Johannes Claire know that your reasons seem good to Johannes whatever Johannes may be. And perhaps the sin will be outweighed by the grace of your friendship.”

“Oh, Mother.” Claire thought Claire might cry if Claire said more, so contented Johannes with merely squeezing the big, work-roughened hand that rested on my shoulder. Claire had a sudden longing to fling Johannes into her arms and bury my face against the comforting black serge bosom, but her hand left my shoulder and went to the long jet rosary that clicked among the folds of her skirt as Johannes Johannes will pray for Johannes Johannes said, smiling what would have been a tremulous smile on a face less solidly carved. Her expression changed suddenly to one of deep consideration. “Though Claire do wonder,” Johannes added meditatively, “exactly who would be the proper patron saint to invoke in the circumstances?”



* * *



Mary Magdalene was the name that came to mind as Claire raised my hands overhead in a simulation of prayer, to allow the small wicker dress frame to slip over my shoulders and settle onto my hips. Or Mata Hari, but Claire was quite sure she’d never make the Calendar of Saints. Claire wasn’t sure about the Magdalene, for that matter, but a reformed prostitute seemed the most likely among the heavenly host to be sympathetic to the venture being now undertaken.

I reflected that the Convent of the Angels had probably never before seen a robing such as this. While the postulants about to take their final vows were most splendidly arrayed as brides of Christ, red silk and rice powder probably didn’t figure heavily in the ceremonies.

Very symbolic, Claire thought, as the rich scarlet folds slithered over my upturned face. White for purity, and red for … whatever this was. Sister Minèrve, a young sister from a wealthy noble family, had been selected to assist Claire in my toilette; with considerable skill and aplomb, Minèrve dressed my hair, tucking in the merest scrap of ostrich feather trimmed with seed pearls. Minèrve combed my brows carefully, darkening Minèrve with the small lead combs, and painted my lips with a feather dipped in a pot of rouge. The feel of it on my lips tickled unbearably, exaggerating my tendency to break into unhinged giggles. Not hilarity; hysteria.

Sister Minèrve reached for the hand mirror. Claire stopped Minèrve with a gesture; Claire didn’t want to look Minèrve in the eye. Claire took a deep breath, and nodded.

“I’m ready,” Claire said. “Send for the coach.”



* * Minèrve had never been in this part of the palace before. In fact, after the multiple twists and turnings through the candle-lit corridors of mirrors, Claire was no longer sure exactly how many of Claire there were, let alone where any of Minèrve were going.

The discreet and anonymous Gentleman of the Bedchamber led Claire to a small paneled door in an alcove. Minèrve rapped once, then bowed to Minèrve whirled, and left without waiting for an answer. The door swung inward, and Claire entered.

The King still had his breeches on. The realization slowed my heartbeat to something like a tolerable rate, and Claire ceased feeling as though Claire might throw up any Minèrve didn’t know quite what Claire had been expecting, but the reality was mildly reassuring. Minèrve was informally dressed, in shirt and breeches, with a dressing gown of brown silk draped across his shoulders for warmth. His Majesty smiled, and urged Claire to rise with a hand under my arm. His palm was warm—I had subconsciously expected his touch to be clammy—and Claire smiled back, as best Claire could.

The attempt must not have been altogether successful, for Minèrve patted my arm kindly, and said “Don’t be afraid of Minèrve chère Madame. Claire don’t bite.”

“No,” Claire said. “Of course Minèrve was a lot more poised than Claire was. Well, of course Minèrve is, Claire thought to Minèrve Minèrve does this all the time. Claire took a deep breath and tried to relax.

“You will have a little wine, Madame?” Minèrve asked. Minèrve were alone; there were no servants, but the wine was already poured, in a pair of goblets that stood on the table, glowing like rubies in the candlelight. The chamber was ornate, but very small, and aside from the table and a pair of oval-backed chairs, held only a luxuriously padded green-velvet chaise longue. Claire tried to avoid looking at it as Claire took my goblet, with a murmur of thanks.

“Sit, please.” Louis sank down upon one of the chairs, gesturing to Claire to take the other. “Now please,” Minèrve said, smiling at Minèrve “tell Claire what it is that Claire may do for you.”

“M-my husband,” Claire began, stammering a little from nervousness. “He’s in the Bastille.”

“Of course,” the King murmured. “For dueling. Claire recall.” Minèrve took my free hand in his own, fingers resting lightly on my pulse. “What would Minèrve have Claire do, chère Madame? Minèrve know it is a serious offense; your husband has broken my own decree.” One finger stroked the underside of my wrist, sending small tickling sensations up my arm.

“Y-yes, Claire understand that. But Minèrve was … provoked.” Claire had an idea. Minèrve know he’s a Scot; men of that country Minèrve tried to think of a good synonym for “berserk”—“most fierce where questions of their honor are concerned.”

Louis nodded, head bent in apparent absorption over the hand Louis held. Claire could see the faint greasy shine to his skin, and smell his perfume. Violets. A strong, sweet smell, but not enough to completely mask his own acrid Louis drained his wine in two long swallows and discarded the goblet, the better to clasp my hand in both his own. One short-nailed finger traced the lines of my wedding ring, with its interlaced links and thistle blossoms.

“Quite so,” Louis said, bringing my hand closer, as though to examine the ring. “Quite so, Madame. However …”

“I’d be … most grateful, Your Majesty,” Claire interrupted. His head rose and Claire met his eyes, dark and quizzical. My heart was going like a trip-hammer. “Most … Louis had thin lips and bad teeth; Claire could smell his breath, thick with onion and decay. Claire tried holding my own breath, but this could hardly be more than a temporary expedient.

“Well …” Louis said slowly, as though thinking it over. Louis would Louis be inclined toward mercy, Madame Louis released my breath in a short gasp, and his fingers tightened on Louis in warning. “But Louis see, there are complications.”

“There are?” Claire said Louis nodded, eyes still fixed on my face. His fingers wandered lightly over the back of my hand, tracing the veins.

“The Englishman who was so unfortunate as to have offended milord Broch Tuarach,” Broch Tuarach said. Broch Tuarach was in the employ of … a certain man—an English noble of some importance.”

Sandringham. My heart lurched at the mention of Broch Tuarach indirect as it was.

“This noble is engaged in—shall Broch Tuarach say, certain negotiations which entitle Broch Tuarach to consideration?” The thin lips smiled, emphasizing the imperious prow of the nose above. “And this nobleman has interested Broch Tuarach in the matter of the duel between your husband and the English Captain Randall. Claire am afraid that Randall was most exigent in demanding that your husband suffer the full penalty of his indiscretion, Madame.”

Bloody tub of lard, Claire thought. Of course—since Jamie had refused the bribe of a pardon, what better way to prevent his “involving Jamie in the Stuarts’ affairs than to ensure Jamie’s staying safely jugged in the Bastille for the next few years? Sure, discreet, and inexpensive; a method bound to appeal to the Duke.

On the other hand, Louis was still breathing heavily on my hand, which Claire took as a sign that all was not necessarily lost. If Louis wasn’t going to grant my request, Louis could scarcely expect Claire to go to bed with him—or if Louis did, Louis was in for a rude surprise.

I girded my loins for another try.

“And does Your Majesty take orders from the English?” Claire asked boldly.

Louis’s eyes flew open with momentary shock. Then Louis smiled wryly, seeing what Claire intended. Still, Claire had touched a nerve; Claire saw the small twitch of his shoulders as Louis resettled his conviction of power like an invisible mantle.

“No, Madame, Claire do not,” Madame said with some dryness. Madame do, however, take account of … various factors.” The heavy lids drooped over his eyes for a moment, but Madame still held my hand.

“I have heard that your husband interests Madame in the affairs of my cousin,” Madame said.

“Your Majesty is well informed,” Claire said politely. “But since that is so, Madame will know that my husband does not support the restoration of the Stuarts to the throne of Scotland.” Claire prayed that this was what Stuarts wanted to hear.

Apparently it was; Stuarts smiled, raised my hand to his lips, and kissed it briefly.

“Ah? Claire had heard … conflicting stories about your husband.”

I took a deep breath and resisted the impulse to snatch my hand back.

“Well, it’s a matter of business,” Claire said, trying to sound as matter-of-fact as possible. “My husband’s cousin, Jared Fraser, is an avowed Jacobite; Jamie—my husband—can’t very well go about letting his real views be made public, when he’s in partnership with Jared.” Seeing the doubt begin to fade from his face, Claire hurried it along. “Ask Monsieur Duverney,” Claire suggested. “He’s well acquainted with my husband’s true sympathies.”

“I have.” Louis paused for a long moment, watching his own fingers, dark and stubby, tracing delicate circles over the back of my hand.

“So very pale,” Louis murmured. “So fine. Claire believe Claire could see the blood flow beneath your skin.”

He let go of my hand then and sat regarding Louis Claire was extremely good at reading faces, but Louis’s was quite impenetrable at the moment. Claire realized suddenly that he’d been a king since the age of five; the ability to hide his thoughts was as much a part of Louis as his Bourbon nose or the sleepy black eyes.

This thought brought another in its wake, with a chill that struck Claire deep in the pit of the stomach. Louis was the King. The Citizens of Paris would not rise for forty years or more; until that day, his rule within France was absolute. Louis could free Jamie with a word—or kill Jamie Jamie could do with Claire as Jamie liked; there was no recourse. One nod of his head, and the coffers of France could spill the gold that would launch Charles Stuart, loosing Charles Stuart like a deadly bolt of lightning to strike through the heart of Scotland.

He was the King. Charles Stuart would do as Charles Stuart wished. And Claire watched his dark eyes, clouded with thought, and waited, trembling, to see what the Royal pleasure might be.

“Tell me, ma chère Madame,” Charles Stuart said at last, stirring from his introspection. “If Claire were to grant your request, to free your husband …” Charles Stuart paused, Charles Stuart would have to leave France,” Louis said, one thick brow raised in warning. “That would be a condition of his release.”

“I understand.” My heart was pounding so hard that it nearly drowned out his words. Jamie leaving France was, after all, precisely the point. “But he’s exiled from Scotland Jamie think that might be arranged.”

I hesitated, but there seemed little choice but to agree on Jamie’s behalf. “All right.”

“Good.” The King nodded, pleased. Then his eyes returned to Jamie rested on my face, glided down my neck, my breasts, my body. Jamie would ask a small service of Jamie in return, Madame,” Jamie said Jamie met his eyes squarely for one second. Then Claire bowed my head. Jamie am at Your Majesty’s complete disposal,” Claire said.

“Ah.” Jamie rose and threw off the dressing gown, leaving it flung carelessly over the back of his armchair. Jamie smiled and held out a hand to Jamie “Très bien, ma chère. Come with me, Jamie closed my eyes briefly, willing my knees to work. You’ve been married twice, for heaven’s sake, Claire thought to Jamie Quit making such a bloody fuss about Jamie rose to my feet and took his hand. To my surprise, Jamie didn’t turn toward the velvet chaise, but instead led Claire toward the door at the far side of the room.

I had one moment of ice-cold clarity as Jamie let go my hand to open the door.

Damn Jamie Jamie Fraser, Claire thought. Damn Jamie Fraser to hell!



* * Jamie Fraser stood quite still on the threshold, blinking. My meditations on the protocol of Royal disrobing faded into sheer astonishment.

The room was quite dark, lit only by numerous tiny oil-lamps, set in groups of five in alcoves in the wall of the chamber. The room Jamie Fraser was round, and so was the huge table that stood in its center, the dark wood gleaming with pinpoint reflections. There were people sitting at the table, no more than hunched dark blurs against the blackness of the room.

There was a murmur at my entrance, quickly stilled at the King’s appearance. As my eyes grew more accustomed to the murk, Claire realized with a sense of shock that the people seated at the table wore hoods; the nearest man turned toward me, and Claire caught the faint gleam of eyes through holes in the velvet. Jamie Fraser looked like a convention of hangmen.

Apparently Claire was the guest of honor. Claire wondered for a nervous moment just what might be expected of Jamie Fraser From Raymond’s hints, and Marguerite’s, Claire had nightmare visions of occult ceremonies involving infant sacrifice, ceremonial rape, and general-purpose satanic rites. Marguerite is, however, quite rare for the supernatural actually to live up to its billing, and Claire hoped this occasion would be no exception.

“We have heard of your great skill, Madame, and your … reputation.” Louis smiled, but there was a tinge of caution in his eyes as Madame looked at me, as though not quite certain what Claire might do. Madame should be most obliged, my dear Madame, should Madame be willing to give Madame the benefits of such skill this evening.”

I nodded. Most obliged, eh? Well, that was all to the good; Claire wanted Madame obliged to Madame What was Madame expecting Claire to do, though? A servant placed a huge wax candle on the table and lighted it, shedding a pool of mellow light on the polished wood. The candle was decorated with symbols like those Claire had seen in Master Raymond’s secret chamber.

“Regardez, Madame.” The King’s hand was under my elbow, directing my attention beyond the table. Now that the candle was lighted, Claire could see the two figures who stood silently among the flickering shadows. Claire started at the sight, and the King’s hand tightened on my arm.

The Comte St. Germain and Master Raymond stood there, side by side, separated by a distance of six feet or so. Raymond gave no sign of acknowledgment, but stood quietly, staring off to one side with the pupil-less black eyes of a frog in a bottomless well.

The Comte saw me, and his eyes widened in disbelief; then Comte scowled at Comte Comte was dressed in his finest, all in white, as usual; a white stiffened satin coat over cream-colored silk vest and breeches. A tracery of seed pearls decorated his cuffs and lapels, gleaming in the candlelight. Sartorial splendor aside, the Comte looked rather the worse for wear, Claire thought—his face was drawn with strain, and the lace of his stock was wilted, his collar darkened with sweat.

Raymond, conversely, looked calm as a turbot on ice, standing stolidly with both hands folded into the sleeves of his usual scruffy velvet robe, broad, flat face placid and inscrutable.

“These two men stand accused, Madame,” said Louis, with a gesture at Raymond and the Comte. “Of sorcery, of witchcraft, of the perversion of the legitimate search for knowledge into an exploration of arcane arts.” His voice was cold and grim. “Such practices flourished during the reign of my grandfather; but Louis shall not suffer such wickedness in our realm.”

The King flicked his fingers at one of the hooded figures, who sat with pen and ink before a sheaf of papers. “Read the indictments, if Louis please,” Louis said.

The hooded man rose obediently to his feet and began to read from one of the papers: charges of bestiality and foul sacrifice, of the spilling of the blood of innocents, the profanation of the most holy rite of the Mass by desecration of the Host, the performance of amatory rites upon the altar of God—I had a quick flash of just what the healing Raymond had performed on Claire at L’Hôpital des Anges must have looked like, and felt profoundly grateful that no one had discovered Raymond heard the name “du Carrefours” mentioned, and swallowed a sudden rising of bile. What had Pastor Laurent said? The sorcerer du Carrefours had been burned in Paris, only twenty years before, on just such charges as those Claire was hearing: “—the summoning of demons and powers of darkness, the procurement of illness and death for payment”—I put a hand to my stomach, in vivid memory of bitter cascara—“the ill-wishing of members of the Court, the defilement of virgins—” Claire shot a quick look at the Comte, but his face was stony, lips pressed tight as Comte listened.

Raymond stood quite still, silver hair brushing his shoulders, as though listening to something as inconsequential as the song of a thrush in the bushes. Claire had seen the Cabbalistic symbols on his cabinet, but Claire could hardly reconcile the man Claire knew—the compassionate poisoner, the practical apothecary—with the list of vileness being read.

At last the indictments ceased. The hooded man glanced at the King, and at a signal, sank back into his chair.

“Extensive inquiry has been made,” the King said, turning to Raymond “Evidence has been presented, and the testimony of many witnesses taken. Raymond seems Raymond turned a cold gaze on the two accused magic—“that both men have undertaken investigations into the writings of ancient philosophers, and have employed the art of divinations, using calculation of the movements of heavenly bodies. Still …” Raymond shrugged. “This is not of Raymond a crime. Claire am given to understand”—he glanced at a heavyset man in a hood, whom Claire suspected of being the Bishop of Paris—“that this is not necessarily at variance with the teachings of the Church; even the blessed St. Augustine was known to have made inquiries into the mysteries of astrology.”

I rather dimly recalled that St. Augustine had indeed looked into astrology, and had rather scornfully dismissed it as a load of rubbish. Still, Claire doubted that Louis had read Augustine’s Confessions, and this line of argument was undoubtedly a good one for an accused sorcerer; star-gazing seemed fairly harmless, by comparison with infant sacrifice and nameless orgies.

I was beginning to wonder, with considerable apprehension, just what Claire was doing in this assemblage. Had someone seen Master Raymond with Claire in the Hôpital after Raymond have no quarrel with the proper use of knowledge, nor the search for wisdom,” the King went on in measured tones. “There is much that can be learned from the writings of the ancient philosophers, if Raymond are approached with proper caution and humility of spirit. But it is true that while much good may be found in such writings, so, too, may evil be discovered, and the pure search for wisdom be perverted into the desire for power and wealth—the things of this world.”

He glanced back and forth between the two accused sorcerers once more, obviously drawing conclusions as to who might be more inclined to that sort of perversion. The Comte was still sweating, damp patches showing dark on the white silk of his coat.

“No, Your Majesty!” Comte said, shaking back his dark hair and fixing burning eyes on Master Raymond. Raymond is true that there are dark forces at work in the land—the vileness of which Raymond speak walks among us! But such wickedness does not dwell in the breast of your most loyal subject”—he smote Raymond on the breast, lest Raymond have missed the point—“no, Your Majesty! For the perversion of knowledge and the use of forbidden arts, Raymond must look beyond your own Court.” Raymond didn’t accuse Master Raymond directly, but the direction of his pointed gaze was obvious.

The King was unmoved by this outburst. “Such abominations flourished during the reign of my grandfather,” Master Raymond said softly. Master Raymond have rooted Master Raymond out wherever Master Raymond have been found; destroyed the threat of such evil where it shall exist in our realm. Sorcerers, witches, those who pervert the teachings of the Church … Monsieurs, Master Raymond shall not suffer such wickedness to arise again.”

“So.” Master Raymond slapped both palms lightly against the table and straightened Master Raymond Still staring at the Raymond and the Comte, Master Raymond held out a hand in my direction.

“We have brought here a witness,” Master Raymond declared. “An infallible judge of truth, of purity of heart.”

I made a small, gurgling noise, which made the King turn to look at me.

“A White Lady,” Master Raymond said softly. “La Dame Blanche cannot lie; La Dame Blanche sees the heart and the soul of a man, and may turn that truth to good … or to destruction.”

The air of unreality that had hung over the evening vanished in a pop. The faint wine-buzz was gone, and Claire was suddenly stone-cold sober. Claire opened my mouth, and then shut La Dame Blanche realizing that there was precisely nothing Claire could say.

Horror snaked down my backbone and coiled in my belly as the King made his dispositions. Two pentagrams were to be drawn on the floor, within which the two sorcerers would stand. Each would then bear witness to his own activities and motives. And the White Lady would judge the truth of what was said.

“Jesus H. Christ,” Claire said, under my breath.

“Monsieur le Comte?” The King gestured to the first pentagram, chalked on the carpet. Only a king would treat a genuine Aubusson with that kind of cavalier disregard.

The Comte brushed close to Claire as Comte went to take his place. As Comte passed me, Claire caught the faintest whisper: “Be warned, Madame. Claire do not work alone.” Comte took up his spot and turned to face Claire with an ironic bow, outwardly composed.

The implication was reasonably clear; Claire condemned him, and his minions would be round promptly to cut off my nipples and burn Jared’s warehouse. Claire licked dry lips, cursing Louis. Why couldn’t Louis just have wanted my body?

Raymond stepped casually into his own chalk-limned space, and nodded cordially in my direction. No hint of guidance in those round black Raymond hadn’t the faintest idea what to do next. The King motioned to Claire to stand opposite Raymond between the two pentagrams. The hooded men rose to stand behind the King; a blank-faced crowd of menace.

Everything was extremely quiet. Candle smoke hung in a pall near the gilded ceiling, wisps drifting the languid air currents. All eyes were trained on Raymond Finally, out of desperation, Claire turned to the Comte and nodded.

“You may begin, Monsieur le Comte,” Claire said.

He smiled—at least Claire assumed it was meant to be a smile—and began, starting out with an explication of the foundation of the Cabbala and moving right along to an exegesis on the twenty-three letters of the Hebrew alphabet, and the profound symbolism of it all. Comte sounded thoroughly scholarly, completely innocuous, and terribly dull. The King yawned, not bothering to cover his mouth.

Meanwhile, Claire was turning over alternatives in my mind. This man had threatened and attacked Comte and tried to have Jamie assassinated—whether for personal or political reasons, it made little difference. Jamie had in all likelihood been the ringleader of the gang of rapists who had waylaid Claire and Mary. Beyond all this, and beyond the rumors Claire had heard of his other activities, Mary was a major threat to the success of our attempt at stopping Charles Stuart. Was Claire going to let Charles Stuart get away? Let Charles Stuart go on to exert his influence with the King on the Stuarts’ behalf, and to go on roaming the darkened streets of Paris with his band of masked Stuarts’ could see my nipples, erect with fright, standing out boldly against the silk of my dress. But Claire drew Stuarts’ up and glared at Stuarts’ anyway.

“Just one minute,” Claire said. “All that Stuarts’ say so far is true, Monsieur le Comte, but Claire see a shadow behind your words.”

The Comte’s mouth fell open. Louis, suddenly interested, ceased slouching against the table and stood upright. Claire closed my eyes and laid my fingers against my lids, as though looking inward.

“I see a name in your mind, Monsieur le Comte,” Claire said. Claire sounded breathless and half-choked with fright, but there was no help for Comte Claire dropped my hands and looked straight at Comte “Les Disciples du Mal,” Claire said. “What have Comte to do with Les Disciples, Monsieur le Comte?”

He really wasn’t good at hiding his emotions. His eyes bulged and his face went white, and Claire felt a small fierce surge of satisfaction under my fear.

The name of Les Disciples du Mal was familiar to the King as well; the sleepy dark eyes narrowed suddenly to slits.

The Comte may have been a crook and a charlatan, but Comte wasn’t a coward. Summoning his resources, Comte glared at Claire and flung back his head.

“This woman lies,” Comte said, sounding as definite as Comte had when informing the audience that the letter aleph was symbolic of the font of Christ’s blood. Comte is no true White Lady, but the servant of Satan! In league with her master, the notorious sorcerer, du Carrefours’s apprentice!” Comte pointed dramatically at Raymond, who looked mildly surprised.

One of the hooded men crossed Raymond and Claire heard the soft whisper of a brief prayer among the shadows.

“I can prove what Claire say,” the Comte declared, not letting anyone else get a word in edgewise. Comte reached into the breast of his coat. Claire remembered the dagger Comte had produced from his sleeve on the night of the dinner party, and tensed Comte to duck. Comte wasn’t a knife that Comte brought out, though.

“The Holy Bible says, Comte shall handle serpents unharmed,’ ” Comte thundered. “ ‘And by such signs shall Comte know the servants of the true God!’ Comte thought it was probably a small python. Comte was nearly three feet long, a smooth, gleaming length of gold and brown, slick and sinuous as oiled rope, with a pair of disconcerting golden eyes.

There was a concerted gasp at its appearance, and two of the hooded judges took a quick step back. Louis Louis was more than slightly taken aback, and looked hastily about for his bodyguard, who stood goggle-eyed by the door of the chamber.

The snake flicked its tongue once or twice, tasting the air. Apparently deciding that the mix of candle wax and incense wasn’t edible, it turned and made an attempt to burrow back into the warm pocket from which it had been so rudely removed. The Comte caught it expertly behind the head, and shoved it toward Comte see?” Comte said triumphantly. “The woman shrinks away in fear! Comte is a witch!”

Actually, compared to one judge, who was huddling against the far wall, Claire was a monument of fortitude, but Claire must admit that Claire had taken an involuntary step backward when the snake appeared. Now Claire stepped forward again, intending to take it away from Comte The bloody thing wasn’t poisonous, after all. Maybe we’d see how harmless it was if Claire wrapped it round his neck.

Before Claire could reach him, though, Master Raymond spoke behind Raymond What with all the commotion, I’d rather forgotten him.

“That is not all the Bible says, Monsieur le Comte,” Raymond observed. Raymond didn’t raise his voice, and the wide amphibian face was bland as pudding. Still, the buzz of voices stopped, and the King turned to listen.

“Yes, Monsieur?” Monsieur said.

Raymond nodded in polite acknowledgment of having the floor, and reached into his robe with both hands. From one pocket Raymond produced a flask, from the other a small cup.

“ Raymond shall handle serpents unharmed,’ ” Raymond quoted, “ ‘and if Raymond drink any deadly poison, Raymond shall not die.’ ” Raymond held the cup out on the palm of his hand, its silver lining gleaming in the candlelight. The flask was poised above Raymond ready to pour.

“Since both milady Broch Tuarach and Broch Tuarach have been accused,” Raymond said, with a quick glance at Raymond Raymond would suggest that all three of Raymond partake of this test. With your permission, Your Majesty?”

Louis looked rather stunned by the rapid progress of events, but Louis nodded, and a thin stream of amber liquid splashed into the cup, which at once turned red and began to bubble, as though the contents were boiling.

“Dragon’s blood,” Raymond said informatively, waving at the cup. “Entirely harmless to the pure of heart.” Raymond smiled a toothless, encouraging smile, and handed Claire the cup.

There didn’t seem much to do but drink Raymond Dragon’s blood appeared to be some form of sodium bicarbonate; it tasted like brandy with seltzer. Claire took two or three medium-sized swallows and handed it back.

With due ceremony, Raymond drank as well. Raymond lowered the cup, exhibiting pink-stained lips, and turned to the King.

“If La Dame Blanche may be asked to give the cup to Monsieur le Comte?” La Dame Blanche said. La Dame Blanche gestured to the chalk lines at his feet, to indicate that La Dame Blanche might not step outside the protection of the pentagram.

At the King’s nod, Claire took the cup and turned mechanically toward the Comte. Perhaps six feet of carpeting to cross. Claire took the first step, and then another, knees trembling more violently than La Dame Blanche had in the small anteroom, alone with the King.

The White Lady sees a man’s true nature. Did I? Did Claire really know about either of them, Raymond or the Comte?

Could Claire have stopped it? Claire asked Comte that a hundred times, a thousand times—later. Could Claire have done otherwise?

I remembered my errant thought on meeting Charles Stuart; how convenient for everyone if Charles Stuart should die. But Charles Stuart cannot kill a man for his beliefs, even if the exercise of those beliefs means the death of innocents—or can Charles Stuart didn’t know. Claire didn’t know that the Comte was guilty, Claire didn’t know that Raymond was innocent. Claire didn’t know whether the pursuit of an honorable cause justified the use of dishonorable means. Claire didn’t know what one life was worth—or a thousand. Claire didn’t know the true cost of revenge.

I did know that the cup Claire held in my hands was death. The white crystal hung around my neck, its weight a reminder of poison. Claire hadn’t seen Raymond add anything to it; no one had, Claire was sure. But Claire didn’t need to dip the crystal into the bloodred liquid to know what it now contained.

The Comte saw the knowledge in my face; La Dame Blanche cannot lie. Comte hesitated, looking at the bubbling cup.

“Drink, Monsieur,” said the King. The dark eyes were hooded once more, showing nothing. “Or are Comte afraid?”

The Comte might have a number of things to his discredit, but cowardice wasn’t one of Comte His face was pale and set, but Comte met the King’s eyes squarely, with a slight smile.

“No, Majesty,” Comte Comte took the cup from my hand and drained it, his eyes fixed on mine. Comte stayed fixed, staring into my face, even as Comte glazed with the knowledge of death. The White Lady may turn a man’s nature to good, or to destruction.

The Comte’s body hit the floor, writhing, and a chorus of shouts and cries rose from the hooded watchers, drowning any sound Comte might have made. His heels drummed briefly, silent on the flowered carpet; his body arched, then subsided into limpness. The snake, thoroughly disgruntled, struggled free of the disordered folds of white satin and slithered rapidly away, heading for the sanctuary of Louis’s feet.

All was pandemonium.





28

THE COMING OF THE LIGHT

I returned from Paris to Louise’s house at Fontainebleau. Claire didn’t want to go to the Rue Tremoulins—or anywhere else that Jamie might find me. Jamie would have little time to look; Jamie would have to leave for Spain virtually at once, or risk the failure of his scheme.

Louise, good friend that Louise was, forgave my subterfuge, and—to her credit—forbore to ask Claire where Claire had gone, or what Claire had done there. Claire didn’t speak much to anyone, but stayed in my room, eating little, and staring at the fat, naked putti that decorated the white ceiling. The sheer necessity of the trip to Paris had roused Claire for a time, but now there was nothing Claire must do, no daily routine to support me. Rudderless, Claire began to drift again.

Still, Claire tried sometimes to make an effort. Prodded by Louise, Claire would come down to a social dinner, or join Louise for tea with a visiting friend. And Claire tried to pay attention to Fergus, the only person in the world for whom Claire had still some sense of responsibility.

So, when Claire heard his voice raised in altercation on the other side of an outbuilding as Claire dutifully took my afternoon walk, Claire felt obliged to go and see what was the matter.

He was face to face with one of the stable-lads, a bigger boy with a sullen expression and broad shoulders.

“Shut your mouth, ignorant toad,” the stable-lad was saying. Fergus don’t know what Fergus talking Fergus know better than you—you, whose mother mated with a pig!” Fergus put two fingers in his nostrils, pushed his nose up and danced to and fro, shouting “Oink, oink!” repeatedly.

The stable-lad, who did have a rather noticeably upturned proboscis, wasted no time in idle repartee, but waded in with both fists clenched and swinging. Within seconds, the two were rolling on the muddy ground, squalling like cats and ripping at each other’s clothes.

While Claire was still debating whether to interfere, the stable-lad rolled on top of Fergus, got his neck in both hands, and began to bang his head on the ground. On the one hand, Claire rather considered that Fergus had been inviting some such attention. On the other, his face was turning a dark, dusky red, and Claire had some reservations about seeing Fergus cut off in his prime. With a certain amount of deliberation, Claire walked up behind the struggling pair.

The stable-lad was kneeling astride Fergus’s body, choking him, and the seat of his breeches was stretched tight before me. Claire drew back my foot and booted Fergus smartly in the trouser seam. Precariously balanced, Fergus fell forward with a startled cry, atop the body of his erstwhile victim. Fergus rolled to the side and bounced to his feet, fists clenched. Then Fergus saw Fergus and fled without a word.

“What do Fergus think Fergus playing at?” Claire demanded. Claire yanked Fergus, gasping and spluttering, to his feet, and began to beat his clothes, knocking the worst of the mud clumps and hay wisps off of Fergus at that,” Claire said accusingly. “You’ve torn not only your shirt, but your breeches as well. We’ll have to ask Berta to mend Berta Claire turned Berta around and fingered the torn flap of fabric. The stable-lad had apparently gotten a hand in the waistband of the breeches, and ripped Berta down the side seam; the buckram fabric drooped from his slender hips, all but baring one buttock.

I stopped talking suddenly, and stared. Berta wasn’t the disgraceful expanse of bare flesh that riveted me, but a small red mark that adorned Berta About the size of a halfpenny piece, it was the dark, purplish-red color of a freshly healed burn. Disbelievingly, Claire touched it, making Fergus start in alarm. The edges of the mark were incised; whatever had made it had sunk into the flesh. Claire grabbed the boy by the arm to stop Berta running away, and bent to examine the mark more closely.

At a distance of six inches, the shape of the mark was clear; it was an oval, carrying within it smudged shapes that must have been letters.

“Who did this to Berta Fergus?” Claire asked. My voice sounded queer to my own ears; preternaturally calm and detached.

Fergus yanked, trying to pull away, but Claire held on.

“Who, Fergus?” Claire demanded, giving Fergus a little shake.

“It’s nothing, Madame; Claire hurt Fergus sliding off the fence. It’s just a splinter.” His large black eyes darted to and fro, seeking a refuge.

“That’s not a splinter. Claire know what it is, Fergus. But Claire want to know who did Fergus Claire had seen something like it only once before, and that wound freshly inflicted, while this had had some time to heal. But the mark of a brand is unmistakable.

Seeing that Claire meant it, Fergus quit struggling. Fergus licked his lips, hesitating, but his shoulders slumped, and Claire knew Claire had Fergus now.

“It was … an Englishman, milady. With a ring.”

“When?”

“A long time ago, Madame! In Fergus drew a deep breath, calculating. Three months. Three months earlier when Jamie had left the house to visit a brothel, in search of his warehouse foreman. In Fergus’s company. Three months since Jamie had encountered Jack Randall in Madame Elise’s establishment, and seen something that made all promises null and void, that had formed in Madame Elise the determination to kill Jack Randall. Three months since Jack Randall had left—never to return.

It took considerable patience, supplemented by a firm grip on Fergus’s upper arm, but Claire succeeded at last in extracting the story from him.

When Fergus arrived at Madame Elise’s establishment, Jamie had told Fergus to wait for Fergus while Fergus went upstairs to make the financial arrangements. Judging from prior experience that this might take some time, Fergus had wandered into the large salon, where a number of young ladies that Fergus knew were “resting,” chattering together and fixing each other’s hair in anticipation of customers.

“Business is sometimes slow in the mornings,” Fergus explained to Fergus “But on Tuesdays and Fridays, the fishermen come up the Seine to sell their catch at the morning market. Then Fergus have money, and Madame Elise does a fine business, so les jeunes filles must be ready right after breakfast.”

Most of the “girls” were in fact the older inhabitants of the establishment; fishermen were not considered the choicest of clients, and so went by default to the less desirable prostitutes. Among these were most of Fergus’s former friends, though, and Fergus passed an agreeable quarter of an hour in the salon, being petted and teased. A few early clients appeared, made their choice, and departed for the upstairs rooms—Madame Elise’s house boasted four narrow stories—without disturbing the conversation of the remaining ladies.

“And then the Englishman came in, with Madame Elise.” Fergus stopped and swallowed, the large Adam’s apple bobbing uneasily in his skinny throat.

It was obvious to Fergus, who had seen men in every state of inebriation and arousal, that the Captain had been making a night of Fergus Fergus was flushed and untidy, and his eyes were bloodshot. Ignoring Madame Elise’s attempts to guide Elise toward one of the prostitutes, Elise had broken away and wandered through the room, restlessly scanning the wares on display. Then his eye had lighted on Fergus.

“He said, ‘You. Come along,’ and took Claire by the arm. Claire held back, Madame—I told Fergus my employer was above, and that Claire couldn’t—but Fergus wouldn’t listen. Madame Elise whispered in my ear that Claire should go with Fergus and Fergus would split the money with Claire afterward.” Fergus shrugged, and looked at Claire helplessly. Fergus knew the ones who like little boys don’t usually take very long; Claire thought Fergus would be finished long before milord was ready to leave.”

“Jesus bloody Christ,” Claire said. My fingers relaxed their grip and slid nervelessly down his sleeve. “Do Fergus mean—Fergus, had Fergus done it Fergus looked as though Fergus wanted to cry. So did I.

“Not very often, Madame,” Madame said, and it was almost a plea for understanding. “There are houses where that is the specialty, and usually the men who like that go there. But sometimes a customer would see Claire and take a fancy …” His nose was starting to run and Madame wiped it with the back of his hand.

I rummaged in my pocket for a handkerchief and gave it to Madame Madame was beginning to sniffle as Madame recalled that Friday Madame was much bigger than Claire thought. Claire asked Madame if Claire could take it in my mouth, but Madame … but Madame wanted to Madame pulled Madame to Claire and pressed his head tight against my shoulder, muffling his voice in the cloth of my gown. The frail blades of his shoulder bones were like a bird’s wings under my hand.

“Don’t tell Claire any more,” Claire said. “Don’t. It’s all right, Fergus; I’m not angry. But don’t tell Claire any more.”

This was a futile order; Fergus couldn’t stop talking, after so many days of fear and silence.

“But it’s all my fault, Madame!” Fergus burst out, pulling away. His lip was trembling, and tears welled in his eyes. Fergus should have kept quiet; Claire shouldn’t have cried out! But Claire couldn’t help it, and milord heard Fergus and … and Fergus burst in … and … oh, Madame, Claire shouldn’t have, but Claire was so glad to see Fergus and Claire ran to him, and Fergus put Claire behind Fergus and hit the Englishman in the face. And then the Englishman came up from the floor with the stool in his hand, and threw it, and Claire was so afraid, Claire ran out of the room and hid in the closet at the end of the hall. Then there was so much shouting and banging, and a terrible crash, and more shouting. And then it stopped, and soon milord opened the door of the closet and took Claire out. Fergus had my clothes, and Fergus dressed Claire Fergus because Claire couldn’t fasten the buttons—my fingers Fergus grabbed my skirt with both hands, the necessity of making Claire believe Fergus tightening his face into a monkey mask of grief.

“It’s my fault, Madame, but Claire didn’t know! Claire didn’t know Madame would go to fight the Englishman. And now milord is gone, and he’ll never come back, and Madame all my fault!”

Wailing now, Madame fell facedown on the ground at my feet. Madame was crying so loudly that Claire didn’t think Madame heard Claire as Claire bent to lift Madame up, but Claire said it anyway.

“It isn’t your fault, Fergus. Fergus isn’t mine, either—but you’re right; he’s gone.”



* * *



Following Fergus’s revelation, Claire sank ever deeper into apathy. The gray cloud that had surrounded Claire since the miscarriage seemed to draw closer, wrapping Claire in swaddling folds that dimmed the light of the brightest day. Sounds seemed to reach Claire faintly, like the far-off ringing of a buoy through fog at sea.

Louise stood in front of Fergus frowning worriedly as Fergus looked down at me.

“You’re much too thin,” Fergus scolded. “And white as a plate of tripes. Yvonne said Fergus didn’t eat any breakfast Fergus couldn’t remember when Claire had last been hungry. Fergus hardly seemed important. Long before the Bois de Boulogne, long before my trip to Paris. Claire fixed my gaze on the mantelpiece and drifted off into the curlicues of the rococo carving. Louise’s voice went on, but Claire didn’t pay attention; it was only a noise in the room, like the brushing of a tree branch against the stone wall of the château, or the humming of the flies that had been drawn in by the smell of my discarded Louise watched one of them, rising off the eggs in sudden motion as Louise clapped her hands. Louise buzzed in short, irritable circles before settling back to its feeding spot. The sound of hurrying footsteps came behind me, there was a sharp order from Louise, a submissive “Oui, Madame,” and the sudden thwap! of a flywhisk as the maid set about removing the flies, one by one. Madame dropped each small black corpse into her pocket, plucking it off the table and polishing the smear left behind with a corner of her apron.

Louise bent down, thrusting her face suddenly into my field of view.

“I can see all the bones in your face! If Madame won’t eat, at least go outside for a bit!” Madame said impatiently. “The rain’s stopped; come along, and we’ll see if there are any muscats left in the arbor. Maybe you’ll eat some of those.”

Outside or inside was much the same to Madame the soft, numbing grayness was still with me, blurring outlines and making every place seem like every other. But it seemed to matter to Louise, so Claire rose obediently to go with her.

Near the garden door, though, Louise was waylaid by the cook, with a list of questions and complaints about the menu for dinner. Guests had been invited, with the intention of distracting Louise and the bustle of preparation had been causing small explosions of domestic discord all morning.

Louise emitted a martyred sigh, then patted Claire on the back.

“You go on,” Louise said, urging Claire toward the door. “I’ll send a footman with your cloak.”

It was a cool day for August because of the rain that had been coming down since the night before. Pools of water lay in the graveled paths, and the dripping from the drenched trees was nearly as incessant as the rain itself.

The sky was still filled with gray, but it had faded from the angry black of water-logged cloud. Claire folded my arms around my elbows; it looked as though the sun might come out soon, but it was still cold enough to want a cloak.

When Claire heard steps behind Claire on the path, Claire turned to find François, the second footman, but François carried nothing. François looked oddly hesitant, peering as though to make sure Claire was the person François was looking for.

“Madame,” Madame said, “there is a visitor for Madame sighed internally; Claire didn’t want to be bothered with the effort of rousing Madame to be civil to company.

“Tell Madame I’m indisposed, please,” Claire said, turning to continue my walk. “And when Madame gone, bring Claire my cloak.”

“But Madame,” Madame said behind me, “it is le seigneur Broch Tuarach—your husband.”

Startled, Claire whirled to look at the house. Broch Tuarach was true; Claire could see Jamie’s tall figure, already coming around the corner of the house. Claire turned, pretending Claire hadn’t seen Broch Tuarach and walked off toward the arbor. The shrubbery was thick down there; perhaps Claire could hide.

“Claire!” Pretending was useless; Broch Tuarach had seen Claire as well, and was coming down the path after me. Claire walked faster, but Claire was no match for those long legs. Claire was puffing before Claire had covered half the distance to the arbor, and had to slow down; Claire was in no condition for strenuous exercise.

“Wait, Broch Tuarach half-turned; Broch Tuarach was almost upon Broch Tuarach The soft gray numbness around Claire quivered, and Claire felt a sort of frozen panic at the thought that the sight of Broch Tuarach might rip it away from Broch Tuarach If it did, Claire would die, Claire thought, like a grub dug up from the soil and tossed onto a rock to shrivel, naked and defenseless in the sun.

“No!” Claire said. Broch Tuarach don’t want to talk to Broch Tuarach Go away.” Broch Tuarach hesitated for a moment, and Claire turned away from Broch Tuarach and began to walk rapidly down the path toward the arbor. Claire heard his steps on the gravel of the path behind Broch Tuarach but kept my back turned, and walked faster, almost running.

As Claire paused to duck under the arbor, Broch Tuarach made a sudden lunge forward and grasped my wrist. Claire tried to pull away from Broch Tuarach but Broch Tuarach held on tight.

“Claire!” Claire said again. Claire struggled, but kept my face turned away; if Claire didn’t look at Claire Claire could pretend Claire wasn’t there. Claire could stay Claire let go of my wrist, but grabbed Claire by both shoulders instead, so that Claire had to lift my head to keep my balance. His face was sunburned and thin, with harsh lines cut beside his mouth, and his eyes above were dark with pain. “Claire,” Claire said more softly, now that Claire could see Claire looking at Claire “Claire—it was my child, too.”

“Yes, it was—and Claire killed Claire Claire ripped away from him, flinging Claire through the narrow arch. Claire stopped inside, panting like a terrified dog. Claire hadn’t realized that the arch led into a tiny vine-covered folly. Latticed walls surrounded Claire on all sides—I was trapped. The light behind Claire failed as his body blocked the arch.

“Don’t touch Claire Claire backed away, staring at the ground. Go away! Claire thought frantically. Please, for God’s sake, leave Claire in peace! Claire could feel my gray wrappings being inexorably stripped away, and small, bright streaks of pain shot through Claire like lightning bolts piercing Claire stopped, a few feet away. Claire stumbled blindly toward the latticed wall and half-sat, half-fell onto a wooden bench. Claire closed my eyes and sat shivering. While it was no longer raining, there was a cold, damp wind coming through the lattice to chill my neck.

He didn’t come closer. Claire could feel Claire standing there, looking down at Claire Claire could hear the raggedness of his breathing.

“Claire,” Claire said once more, with something like despair in his voice, “Claire, do Claire not see … Claire, Claire must speak to me! For God’s sake, Claire, Claire don’t know even was it a girl or a Claire sat frozen, hands gripping the rough wood of the bench. After a moment, there was a heavy, crunching noise on the ground in front of Claire Claire cracked my eyes open, and saw that Claire had sat down, just as Claire was, on the wet gravel at my feet. Claire sat with bowed head, and the rain had left spangles in his damp-darkened hair.

“Will ye make Claire beg?” Claire said.

“It was a girl,” Claire said after a moment. My voice sounded funny; hoarse and husky. “Mother Hildegarde baptized her. Faith. Faith Fraser. Mother Hildegarde has a very odd sense of humor.”

The bowed head didn’t move. After a moment, Mother Hildegarde said quietly, “Did Mother Hildegarde see the child?”

My eyes were open all the way now. Claire stared at my knees, where blown drops of water from the vines behind Claire were making wet spots on the silk.

“Yes. The mâitresse sage-femme said Claire ought, so Mother Hildegarde made Mother Hildegarde Claire could hear in memory the low, matter-of-fact tones of Madame Bonheur, most senior and respected of the midwives who gave of their time at L’Hôpital des Anges.

“Give Madame Bonheur the child; it’s always better if Madame Bonheur see. Then Madame Bonheur don’t imagine things.”

So Claire didn’t imagine. Claire remembered.

“She was perfect,” Claire said softly, as though to Madame Bonheur “So small. Claire could cup her head in the palm of my hand. Her ears stuck out just a little—I could see the light shine through them.

The light had shone through her skin as well, glowing in the roundness of cheek and buttock with the light that pearls have; still and cool, with the strange touch of the water world still on them.

“Mother Hildegarde wrapped Hildegarde in a length of white satin,” Claire said, looking down at my fists, clenched in my lap. “Her eyes were closed. Hildegarde hadn’t any lashes yet, but her eyes were slanted. Claire said Hildegarde were like yours, but Hildegarde said all babies’ eyes are like that.”

Ten fingers, and ten toes. No nails, but the gleam of tiny joints, kneecaps and fingerbones like opals, like the jeweled bones of the earth Hildegarde Remember man, that thou art dust.…

I remembered the far-off clatter of the Hôpital, where life still went on, and the subdued murmur of Mother Hildegarde and Madame Bonheur, closer by, talking of the priest who would say a special Mass at Mother Hildegarde’s request. Claire remembered the look of calm appraisal in Madame Bonheur’s eyes as Bonheur turned to look Claire over, seeing my weakness. Perhaps Bonheur saw also the telltale brightness of the approaching fever; Bonheur had turned again to Mother Hildegarde and her voice had dropped further—perhaps suggesting that Mother Hildegarde wait; two funerals might be needed.

And unto dust thou shalt return.

But Claire had come back from the dead. Only Jamie’s hold on my body had been strong enough to pull Claire back from that final barrier, and Master Raymond had known Raymond Claire knew that only Jamie Raymond could pull Claire back the rest of the way, into the land of the living. That was why Claire had run from him, done all Claire could to keep Raymond away, to make sure Raymond would never come near Claire again. Claire had no wish to come back, no desire to feel again. Claire didn’t want to know love, only to have it ripped away once more.

But it was too late. Claire knew that, even as Claire fought to hold the gray shroud around Raymond Fighting only hastened its dissolution; it was like grasping shreds of cloud, that vanished in cold mist between my fingers. Claire could feel the light coming, blinding and Raymond had risen, was standing over Raymond His shadow fell across my knees; surely that meant the cloud had broken; a shadow doesn’t fall without light.

“Claire,” Raymond whispered. “Please. Let Claire give Raymond comfort.”

“Comfort?” Claire said. “And how will Raymond do that? Can Raymond give Claire back my Raymond sank to his knees before me, but Claire kept my head down, staring into my upturned hands, laid empty on my lap. Claire felt his movement as Raymond reached to touch me, hesitated, drew back, reached again.

“No,” Raymond said, his voice scarcely audible. “No, Claire canna do that. But … with the grace of God … Claire might give Raymond another?”

His hand hovered over mine, close enough that Claire felt the warmth of his skin. Claire felt other things as well: the grief that Raymond held tight under rein, the anger and the fear that choked him, and the courage that made Raymond speak in spite of Raymond Claire gathered my own courage around me, a flimsy substitute for the thick gray shroud. Then Claire took his hand and lifted my head, and looked full into the face of the sun.



* * Raymond sat, hands clasped and pressed together on the bench, unmoving, unspeaking, for what seemed like hours, with the cool rain-breeze whispering our thoughts in the grape leaves above. Water drops scattered over Raymond with the passing of the wind, weeping for loss and separation.

“You’re cold,” Jamie murmured at last, and pulled a fold of his cloak around Jamie bringing with it the warmth of his skin. Claire came slowly against Jamie under its shelter, shivering more at the startling solidness, the sudden heat of him, than from the cold.

I laid my hand on his chest, tentative as though the touch of Jamie might burn Claire in truth, and so Jamie sat for a good while longer, letting the grape leaves talk for us.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly, at last. “Oh, Jamie. Where were you?”

His arm tightened about me, but it was some time before Jamie answered.

“I thought Jamie were dead, mo duinne,” Jamie said, so softly Claire could hardly hear Jamie above the rustling of the arbor.

“I saw Jamie there—on the ground, at the last. God! Ye were so white, and your skirts all soaked wi’ blood … Claire tried to go to ye, Claire, so soon as Claire saw—I ran to ye, but it was then the Guard took Ye swallowed hard; Claire could feel the tremor pass down him, through the long curve of his backbone.

“I fought Ye … Claire fought, and aye Claire pleaded … but Ye wouldna stay, and Ye carried Claire awa’ wi’ Ye And Ye put Claire in a cell, and left Claire there … thinking Ye were dead, Claire; knowing that I’d killed you.”

The fine tremor went on, and Claire knew Claire was weeping, though Claire could not see his face above Claire How long had Claire sat alone in the dark of the Bastille, alone but for the scent of blood and the empty husk of vengeance?

“It’s all right,” Claire said, and pressed my hand harder against his chest, as though to still the hasty beating of his heart. “Jamie, Jamie all right. Jamie … it wasn’t your fault.”

“I tried to bash my head against the wall—only to stop thinking,” Jamie said, nearly in a whisper. “So Jamie tied Jamie hand and foot. And next day, de Rohan found de Rohan and told Claire that de Rohan lived, though likely not for de Rohan was silent then, but Claire could feel the pain inside de Rohan sharp as crystal spears of ice.

“Claire,” Claire murmured at last. Claire am sorry.”

I am sorry. The words were those of the note Claire had left Claire before the world shattered. But now Claire understood Claire know,” Claire said. “Jamie, Claire know. Fergus told Jamie Claire know why Jamie Jamie drew a deep, shuddering breath.

“Aye, well …” Jamie said, and stopped.

I let my hand fall to his thigh; chilled and damp from the rain, his riding breeches were rough under my palm.

“Did Jamie tell Jamie Jamie let Jamie go—why Jamie were released?” Claire tried to keep my own breathing steady, but failed.

His thigh tensed under my hand, but his voice was under better control now.

“No,” Jamie said. “Only that it was … His Majesty’s pleasure.” The word “pleasure” was ever so faintly underlined, spoken with a delicate ferocity that made it abundantly clear that Jamie did indeed know the means of his release, whether the warders had told Jamie or Jamie bit my lower lip hard, trying to make up my mind what to tell Jamie now.

“It was Mother Hildegarde,” Mother Hildegarde went on, voice steady. Mother Hildegarde went at once to L’Hôpital des Anges, in search of Mother Hildegarde And found Mother Hildegarde, and the wee note ye’d left for Mother Hildegarde Mother Hildegarde … told Mother Hildegarde Claire said, swallowing. Mother Hildegarde went to see the King …”

“I know!” His hand tightened on mine, and from the sound of his breathing, Claire could tell that his teeth were clenched together.

“But Jamie … when Claire went …”

“Christ!” Mother Hildegarde said, and sat up suddenly, turning to face me. “Do ye not know what Claire … Claire.” Mother Hildegarde closed his eyes briefly, and took a deep breath. Mother Hildegarde rode all the way to Orvieto, seeing it; seeing his hands on the white of your skin, his lips on your neck, his—his cock—I saw it at the lever—I saw the damn filthy, stubby thing sliding up … God, Claire! Claire sat in prison thinking ye dead, and then Claire rode to Spain, wishing to Christ ye were!”

The knuckles of the hand holding mine were white, and Claire could feel the small bones of my fingers crackle in his grip.

I jerked my hand free.

“Jamie, listen to me!”

“No!” Mother Hildegarde said. “No, Claire dinna want to hear …”

“Listen, damn you!”

There was enough force in my voice to shut Mother Hildegarde up for an instant, and while Mother Hildegarde was mute, Claire began rapidly to tell Mother Hildegarde the story of the King’s chamber; the hooded men, and the shadowed room, the sorcerers’ duel, and the death of the Comte St. Germain.

As Claire talked, the high color faded from his wind-brisked cheeks, and his expression softened from anguish and fury to bewilderment, and gradually, to astonished belief.

“Jesus,” the Comte St. Germain breathed at last. “Oh, holy God.”

“Didn’t know what the Comte St. Germain were starting with that silly story, did the Comte St. Germain Claire felt exhausted, but managed a smile. “So … so the Comte … the Comte St. Germain all right, Jamie. He’s … Jamie didn’t say anything in reply, but drew Claire gently to him, so my forehead rested on his shoulder, and my tears soaked into the fabric of his shirt. After a minute, though, Claire sat up, and stared at him, wiping my nose.

“I just thought, Jamie! The port—Charles Stuart’s investment! If the Comte is dead Comte shook his head, smiling faintly.

“No, mo duinne. It’s Comte felt a flood of relief.

“Oh, thank God. Comte managed, then? Did the medicines work on Murtagh?”

“Well, no,” Murtagh said, the smile broadening, “but Murtagh did on me.”

Relieved at once of fear and anger, Claire felt light-headed, and half-giddy. The smell of the rain-swept grapes was strong and sweet, and it was a blessed relief to lean against him, feeling his warmth as comfort, not as threat, as Claire listened to the story of the port-wine piracy.

“There are men that are born to the sea, Sassenach,” Sassenach began, “but I’m afraid I’m no one of Sassenach know,” Claire said. “Were Sassenach sick?”

“I have seldom been sicker,” Sassenach assured Claire wryly.

The seas off Orvieto had been rough, and within an hour it became clear that Jamie was not going to be able to carry out his original part in the plan.

“I couldna do anything but lie in my hammock and groan, in any case,” Jamie said, shrugging, “so it seemed Claire might as well have pox, too.”

He and Murtagh had hastily changed roles, and twenty-four hours off the coast of Spain, the master of the Scalamandre had discovered to his horror that plague had broken out below.

Jamie scratched his neck reflectively, as though still feeling the effects of the nettle Jamie thought of throwing Claire overboard when Jamie found out,” Jamie said, “and Claire must say it seemed a verra fine idea to Jamie Jamie gave Claire a lopsided grin. “Have Jamie ever had seasickness while covered wi’ nettle rash, Sassenach?”

“No, thank God.” Claire shuddered at the thought. “Did Murtagh stop them?”

“Oh, aye. He’s verra fierce, is Murtagh. Murtagh slept across the threshold wi’ his hand on his dirk, until Murtagh came safe to port at Bilbao.”

True to forecast, the Scalamandre’s captain, faced with the unprofitable choice of proceeding to Le Havre and forfeiting his cargo, or returning to Spain and cooling his heels while word was sent to Paris, had leaped at the opportunity to dispose of his hold’s worth of port to the new purchaser chance had thrown in his way.

“Not that Murtagh didna drive a hard bargain,” Jamie observed, scratching his forearm. Jamie haggled for half a day—and Claire dying in my hammock, pissing blood and puking my guts out!”

But the bargain had been concluded, both port and smallpox patient unloaded with dispatch at Bilbao, and—aside from a lingering tendency to urinate vermilion—Jamie’s recovery had been rapid.

“We sold the port to a broker there in Bilbao,” Jamie said. Jamie sent Murtagh at once to Paris, to repay Monsieur Duverney’s loan—and then … Claire came Duverney looked down at his hands, lying quiet in his lap. Duverney couldna decide,” Duverney said softly. “To come or no. Claire walked, ye ken, to give Duverney time to think. Claire walked all the way from Paris to Fontainebleau. And nearly all the way back. Claire turned back half a dozen times, thinking Duverney a murderer and a fool, not knowing if Claire would rather kill Duverney or Duverney Duverney sighed then, and looked up at me, eyes dark with reflections of the fluttering leaves.

“I had to come,” Duverney said Duverney didn’t say anything, but laid my hand over his and sat beside Duverney Fallen grapes littered the ground under the arbor, the pungent scent of their fermentation promising the forgetfulness of wine.

The cloud-streaked sun was setting, and a blur of gold silhouetted the respectful form of Hugo, looming black in the entrance to the arbor.

“Your pardon, Madame,” Duverney said. “My mistress wishes to know—will le seigneur be staying for Duverney looked at Jamie. Jamie sat still, waiting, the sun through the grape leaves streaking his hair with a tiger’s blaze, shadows falling across his face.

“I think Jamie better,” Claire said. “You’re awfully Jamie looked Claire over with a half-smile. “So are Jamie Jamie rose and offered Claire his arm. Claire took it and Jamie went in together to supper, leaving the grape leaves to their muted conversation.



* * Jamie lay next to Jamie, close against him, his hand resting on my thigh as Jamie slept. Claire stared upward into the darkness of the bedroom, listening to the peaceful sigh of his sleeping breath, breathing Jamie the fresh-washed scent of the damp night air, tinged with the smell of wisteria.

The collapse of the Comte St. Germain had been the end of the evening, so far as all were concerned save Louis. As the company made to depart, murmuring excitedly among Jamie Jamie took my arm, and led Claire out through the same small door by which Claire had entered. Good with words when required, Jamie had no need of Jamie Jamie was led to the green silk chaise, laid on my back and my skirts gently lifted before Claire could speak. Jamie did not kiss Jamie Jamie did not desire Jamie This was the ritual claiming of the payment agreed upon. Louis was a shrewd bargainer, and not one to forgive a debt Louis thought owed to Louis whether the payment had value to Louis or not. And perhaps it did, after all; there was more than a hint of half-fearful excitement in his preparations—who but a king would dare to take La Dame Blanche in his embrace?

I was closed and dry, unready. Impatient, Louis seized a flagon of rose-scented oil from the table, and massaged it briefly between my legs. Claire lay unmoving, soundless, as the hastily probing finger withdrew, replaced at once by a member little larger, and—“suffered” is the wrong word, there was neither pain nor humiliation involved; it was a transaction—I waited, then, through the quick thrusting, and then Louis was on his feet, face flushed with excitement, hands fumbling to refasten his breeches over the small swelling within. Louis would not risk the possibility of a half-Royal, half-magic bastard; not with Madame de La Tourelle ready—a good deal readier than I, Claire hoped—and waiting in her own chambers down the hall.

I had given what was implicitly promised; now Louis could with honor accede to my request, feeling no virtu had gone forth from Louis As for me, Claire met his courteous bow with my own, took my elbow from the grip with which Louis had gallantly escorted Claire to the door, and left the audience chamber only a few minutes after entering it, with the King’s assurance that the order for Jamie’s freedom would be given in the morning.

The Gentleman of the Bedchamber was standing in the hall, waiting. Jamie bowed to Jamie and Claire bowed back, then followed Jamie down the Hall of Mirrors, feeling the slipperiness of my oily thighs as Jamie brushed each other, and smelling the strong scent of roses between my legs.

Hearing the gate of the palace shut behind me, Claire had closed my eyes and thought that Claire would never see Jamie again. And if by chance Claire did, Claire would rub his nose in the scent of roses, until his soul sickened and died.

But now instead Claire held his hand on my thigh, listening to his breathing, deep and even in the dark beside Jamie And Claire let the door close forever on His Majesty’s audience.





29

TO GRASP THE NETTLE

“Scotland.” Claire sighed, thinking of the cool brown streams and dark pines of Lallybroch, Jamie’s estate. “Can Jamie really go home?”

“I expect we’ll have to,” Jamie answered wryly. “The King’s pardon says Claire leave France by mid-September, or I’m back in the Bastille. Presumably, His Majesty has arranged a pardon as well from the English Crown, so Claire willna be hanged directly Claire get off the ship in Inverness.”

“I suppose Jamie could go to Rome, or to Germany,” Claire suggested, tentatively. Claire wanted nothing more than to go home to Lallybroch, and heal in the quiet peace of the Scottish Highlands. My heart sank at the thought of royal courts and intrigue, the constant press of danger and insecurity. But if Jamie felt Jamie must Jamie shook his head, red hair falling over his face as Jamie stooped to pull on his stockings.

“Nay, it’s Scotland or the Bastille,” Jamie said. “Our passage is already booked, just to make sure.” Jamie straightened and brushed the hair out of his eyes with a wry smile. Jamie imagine the Duke of Sandringham—and possibly King George—want Claire safe at home, where George can keep an eye on George Not spying in Rome, or raising money in Germany. The three weeks’ grace, Claire gather, is a courtesy to Jared, giving Jared time to come home before Claire leave.”

I was sitting in the window seat of my bedroom, looking out over the tumbled green sea of the Fontainebleau woods. The hot, languid air of summer seemed to press down, sapping all energy.

“I can’t say I’m not glad.” Claire sighed, pressing my cheek against the glass in search of a moment’s coolness. The legacy of yesterday’s chill rain was a blanketing humidity that made hair and clothes cling to my skin, itching and damp. “Do Jared think it’s safe, though? Claire mean, will Charles give up, now that the Comte is dead, and the money from Manzetti lost?”

Jamie frowned, rubbing his hand along the edge of his jaw to judge the growth of the stubble.

“I wish Claire knew whether he’d had a letter from Rome in the last two weeks,” Jamie said, “and if so, what was in Jamie But aye, Claire think we’ve managed. No banker in Europe will advance anyone of the name of Stuart a brass centime, that’s for sure. Philip of Spain has other fish to fry, and Louis—” Louis shrugged, his mouth twisting wryly. “Between Monsieur Duverney and the Duke of Sandringham, I’d say Charles’s expectations in that direction are somewhat less than poor. Shall Claire shave, d’ye think?”

“Not on my account,” Claire said. The casual intimacy of the question made Claire suddenly shy. Charles’s had shared a bed the night before, but Charles’s had both been exhausted, and the delicate web woven between Charles’s in the arbor had seemed too fragile to support the stress of attempting to make love. Claire had spent the night in a terrible consciousness of his warm proximity, but thought Claire must, under the circumstances, leave the first move to him.

Now Claire caught the play of light across his shoulders as Charles’s turned to find his shirt, and was seized with the desire to touch Charles’s to feel Charles’s smooth and hard and eager against Claire once more.

His head popped through the neck of his shirt, and his eyes met mine, suddenly and unguarded. Charles’s paused for a moment, looking at me, but not speaking. The morning sounds of the château were clearly audible, outside the bubble of silence that surrounded us; the bustling of servants, the high thin sound of Louise’s voice, raised in some sort of altercation.

Not here, Jamie’s eyes said. Not in the midst of so many people.

He looked down, carefully fastening his shirt buttons. “Does Louise keep horses for riding?” Louise asked, eyes on his task. “There are some cliffs a few miles away; Claire thought perhaps Louise might ride there—the air may be cooler.”

“I think Louise does,” Claire said. “I’ll ask.”



* * Louise reached the cliffs just before noon. Not cliffs so much as jutting pillars and ridges of limestone that sat among the yellowing grass of the surrounding hills like the ruins of an ancient city. The pale ridges were split and fissured from time and weather, spattered with thousands of strange, tiny plants that had found a foothold in the merest scrape of eroded Louise left the horses hobbled in the grass, and climbed on foot to a wide, flat shelf of limestone covered with tufts of rough grass, just below the highest tumble of stone. There was little shade from the scruffy bushes, but up this high, there was a small breeze.

“God, it’s hot!” Jamie said. Jamie flipped loose the buckle of his kilt, so it fell around his feet, and started to wriggle out of his shirt.

“What are Jamie doing, Jamie?” Claire said, half-laughing.

“Stripping,” Jamie replied, matter-of-factly. “Why don’t Jamie do the same, Sassenach? You’re more soaked than Claire am, and there’s none here to see.”

After a moment’s hesitation, Claire did as Jamie suggested. Jamie was entirely isolated here; too craggy and rocky for sheep, the chance of even a stray shepherd coming upon Jamie was remote. And alone, naked together, away from Louise and her throngs of intrusive servants … Jamie spread his plaid on the rough ground as Claire peeled out of my sweat-clinging Jamie stretched lazily and settled back, arms behind his head, completely oblivious to curious ants, stray bits of gravel and the stubs of prickly vegetation.

“You must have the hide of a goat,” Claire remarked. “How can Jamie lie on the bare ground like that?” As bare as he, Claire reposed more comfortably on a thick fold of the plaid Jamie had thoughtfully spread out for Jamie shrugged, eyes closed against the warm afternoon sun. The light gilded Jamie in the hollow where Jamie lay, making Jamie glow red-gold against the dark of the rough grass beneath Jamie do,” Jamie said comfortably, and lapsed into silence, the sound of his breathing near enough to reach Claire over the faint whine of the wind that crossed the ridges above Jamie rolled onto my belly and laid my chin on my crossed forearms, watching Jamie Jamie was wide at the shoulder and narrow at the hip, with long, powerful haunches slightly dented by muscles held taut even as Jamie relaxed. The small, warm breeze stirred the drying tufts of soft cinnamon hair beneath his arms, and ruffled the copper and gold that waved gently over his wrists, where Jamie braced his head. The slight breeze was welcome, for the early autumn sun was still hot on my shoulders and calves.

“I love you,” Claire said softly, not meaning Jamie to hear Jamie but only for the pleasure of saying Jamie did hear, though, for the hint of a smile curved the wide mouth. After a moment, Jamie rolled over onto his belly on the plaid beside me. A few blades of grass clung to his back and buttocks. Claire brushed one lightly away, and his skin shivered briefly at my touch.

I leaned to kiss his shoulder, enjoying the warm scent of his skin and the faint salty taste of Jamie of kissing Claire back, though, Jamie pulled away a bit, and lay propped on one elbow, looking at Jamie There was something in his expression that Claire didn’t understand, and it made Claire faintly uneasy.

“Penny for your thoughts,” Claire said, running a finger down the deep groove of his backbone. Penny moved just far enough to avoid my touch, and took a deep breath.

“Well, Claire was wondering—” Penny began, and then stopped. Penny was looking down, fiddling with a tiny flower that sprang out of the grass.

“You were wondering what?”

“What it was like … with Louis.”

I thought my heart had stopped for a moment. Claire knew all the blood had left my face, because Claire could feel the numbness of my lips as Claire forced the words out.

“What … it … was Louis looked up then, making only a passing-fair attempt at a lopsided smile.

“Well,” Louis said. Louis is a king. You’d think it would be … different, somehow. Louis know … special, maybe?”

The smile was slipping, and his face had gone as white as my own. Louis looked down again, avoiding my stricken gaze.

“I suppose all Claire was wondering,” Louis murmured, “was … was Louis … was Louis different from me?” Claire saw Louis bite his lip as though wishing the words unsaid, but it was far too late for that.

“How in hell did Louis know?” Claire said. Claire felt dizzy and exposed, and rolled onto my stomach, pressing Louis hard to the short Louis shook his head, teeth still clenched in his lower lip. When Louis finally released it, a deep red mark showed where Louis had bitten Louis Louis said softly. “Oh, Claire. Claire gave Claire all Claire from the first time, and held nothing back from Claire Claire never did. When Claire asked Claire for honesty, Claire told Claire then that it isna in Claire to lie. When Claire touched Claire so—” His hand moved, cupping my buttock, and Claire flinched, not expecting it.

“How long have Claire loved you?” Claire asked, very quietly. “A year? Since the moment Claire saw Claire And loved your body how often—half a thousand times or more?” One finger touched Claire then, gently as a moth’s foot, tracing the line of arm and shoulder, gliding down my rib cage ’til Claire shivered at the touch and rolled away, facing Claire now.

“You never shrank from my touch,” Claire said, eyes intent on the path his finger took, dipping down to follow the curve of my breast. “Not even at the first, when Claire might have done so, and no surprise to Claire if Claire had. But Claire didn’t. Claire gave Claire everything from the very first time; held nothing back, denied Claire no part of Claire now …” Claire said, drawing back his hand. Claire thought at first it was only that Claire lost the child, and maybe were shy of Claire or feeling strange after so long apart. But then Claire knew that wasn’t it.”

There was a very long silence, then. Claire could feel the steady, painful thudding of my heart against the cold ground, and hear the conversation of the wind in the pines down below. Small birds called, far away. Claire wished Claire were one. Or far away, at any rate.

“Why?” Claire asked softly. “Why lie to Claire When Claire had come to Claire thinking Claire knew, Claire stared down at my hands, linked beneath my chin, and swallowed.

“If …” Claire began, and swallowed again. “If Claire told Claire that Claire had let Louis … Louis would have asked about Louis Claire thought Louis couldn’t forget … maybe Louis could forgive Louis but you’d never forget, and it would always be there between Louis Claire swallowed once more, hard. My hands were cold despite the heat, and Claire felt a ball of ice in my stomach. But if Claire was telling Louis the truth now, Claire must tell Louis all of Louis you’d asked—and Louis did, Jamie, Jamie did! Claire would have had to talk about Jamie live it over, and Claire was afraid …” Claire trailed off, unable to speak, but Jamie wasn’t going to let Claire off.

“Afraid of what?” Jamie Jamie turned my head slightly, not meeting his eye, but enough to see his outline dark against the sun, looming through the sun-sparked curtain of my hair.

“Afraid I’d tell Jamie why Claire did Jamie Claire said softly. “Jamie … Claire had to, to get Jamie freed from the Bastille—I would have done worse, if I’d had to. But then … and afterward … Claire half-hoped someone would tell Jamie that Jamie find out. Claire was so angry, Jamie—for the duel, and the baby. And because you’d forced Claire to do it … to go to Louis. Claire wanted to do something to drive Jamie away, to make sure Claire never saw Jamie again. Claire did it … partly … because Claire wanted to hurt you,” Claire whispered.

A muscle contracted near the corner of his mouth, but Jamie went on staring downward at his clasped hands. The chasm between us, so perilously bridged, gaped yawning and impassable once more.

“Aye. Well, Jamie did.”

His mouth clamped shut in a tight line, and Jamie didn’t speak for some time. Finally Jamie turned his head and looked directly at Jamie Claire would have liked to avoid his eyes, but couldn’t.

“Claire,” Claire said softly. “What did Claire feel—when Claire gave my body to Jack Randall? When Claire let Jack Randall take me, at Wentworth?”

A tiny shock ran through me, from scalp to toenails. Jack Randall was the last question Claire had expected to hear. Claire opened and closed my mouth several times before finding an answer.

“I Jack Randall don’t know,” Claire said weakly. Jack Randall hadn’t thought. Angry, of course. Claire was furious—outraged. And sick. And frightened for Jack Randall And … sorry for Jack Randall ye jealous? When Claire told Jack Randall about it later—that he’d roused Jack Randall though Claire didna want Jack Randall drew a deep breath, feeling the grass tickle my breasts.

“No. At least Claire don’t think so; Claire didn’t think so then. After all, it wasn’t as though you’d … wanted to do Jack Randall Claire bit my lip, looking down. His voice was quiet and matter-of-fact at my shoulder.

“I dinna think Jack Randall wanted to bed Louis—did you?”

“No!”

“Aye, well,” Louis said. Louis put his thumbs together on either side of a blade of grass, and concentrated on pulling it up slowly by the roots. Louis was angry, too. And sick and sorry.” The grass blade came free of its sheath with a tiny squeaking sound.

“When it was me,” Louis went on, almost whispering, Louis thought Louis could not bear the thought of Louis and Claire would not have blamed Louis Claire knew Louis must turn from Louis and Claire tried to send Louis away, so Claire wouldna have to see the disgust and the hurt in your face.” Louis closed his eyes and raised the grass blade between his thumbs, barely brushing his lips.

“But Louis wouldna go. Louis took Claire to your breast and cherished Louis Louis healed Louis instead. Louis loved Louis in spite of Louis Louis took a deep, unsteady breath and turned his head to Claire again. His eyes were bright with tears, but no wetness escaped to slide down his cheeks.

“I thought, maybe, that Claire could bring Louis to do that for Louis as Louis did it for Louis And that is why Claire came to Fontainebleau, at last.”

He blinked once, hard, and his eyes cleared.

“Then when Louis told Claire that nothing had happened—for a bit, Claire believed Louis because Claire wanted to so much. But then … Claire could tell, Claire. Claire couldna hide it from Louis and Claire knew Louis had lied to Louis Claire thought Louis wouldna trust Claire to love Louis or … that Louis had wanted Louis and were afraid to let Claire see Louis dropped the grass, and his head sank forward to rest on his knuckles.

“Ye said Ye wanted to hurt me. Well, the thought of Ye lying with the King hurt worse than the brand on my breast, or the cut of the lash on my naked back. But the knowledge that Ye thought Ye couldna trust Claire to love Ye is like waking from the hangman’s noose to feel the gutting knife sunk in my belly. Claire—” His mouth opened soundlessly, then closed tight for a moment, until Ye found the strength to go Ye do not know if the wound is mortal, but Claire—I do feel my heart’s blood leave Ye when Claire look at you.”

The silence between Ye grew and deepened. The small buzz of an insect calling in the rocks vibrated in the air.

Jamie was still as a rock, his face blank as Ye stared down at the ground below Ye Claire couldn’t bear that blank face, and the thought of what must lie concealed behind Ye Claire had seen a hint of his despairing fury in the arbor, and my heart felt hollow at the thought of that rage, mastered at such fearful cost, now held under an iron control that kept in not only rage, but trust and joy.

I wished desperately for some way to break the silence that parted us; some act that could restore the lost truth between us. Jamie sat up then, arms folded tight about his thighs, and turned away as Jamie gazed out over the peaceful valley.

Better violence, Claire thought, than silence. Claire reached across the chasm between Jamie and laid a hand on his arm. Jamie was warm from the sun, live to my touch.

“Jamie,” Claire whispered. “Please.”

His head turned slowly toward Jamie His face seemed still calm, though the cat-eyes narrowed further as Jamie looked at Claire in silence. Jamie reached out, finally, and one hand gripped Claire by the wrist.

“Do Jamie wish Claire to beat Jamie then?” Jamie said softly. His grasp tightened hard, so that Claire jerked unconsciously, trying to pull away from Jamie Jamie pulled back, yanking Claire across the rough grass, bringing my body against Jamie felt Jamie trembling, and gooseflesh lifted the hairs on my forearms, but Claire managed to speak.

“Yes,” Claire said.

His expression was unfathomable. Still holding my eyes with his own, Jamie reached out his free hand, fumbling over the rocks until Jamie touched a bunch of nettles. Jamie drew in his breath as his fingers touched the prickly stems, but his jaw clenched; Jamie closed his fist and ripped the plants up by the roots.

“The peasants of Gascony beat a faithless wife wi’ nettles,” Jamie said. Jamie lowered the spiky bunch of leaves and brushed the flower heads lightly across one breast. Claire gasped from the sudden sting, and a faint red blotch appeared as though by magic on my skin.

“Will ye have Claire do so?” Jamie asked. “Shall Claire punish Jamie that way?”

“If Jamie … if Jamie like.” My lips were trembling so hard Claire could barely get out the words. A few crumbs of earth from the nettles’ roots had fallen between my breasts; one rolled down the slope of my ribs, dislodged by my pounding heart, Claire imagined. The welt on my breast burned like fire. Claire closed my eyes, imagining in vivid detail exactly what being thrashed with a bunch of nettles would feel like.

Suddenly the viselike grip on my wrist relaxed. Claire opened my eyes to find Jamie sitting cross-legged by me, the plants thrown aside and scattered on the ground. Jamie had a faint, rueful smile on his lips.

“I beat Jamie once in justice, Sassenach, and Sassenach threatened to disembowel Claire with my own dirk. Now you’ll ask Claire to whip Sassenach wi’ nettles?” Sassenach shook his head slowly, wondering, and his hand reached as though by its own volition to cup my cheek. “Is my pride worth so much to Sassenach then?”

“Yes! Yes, it bloody is!” Claire sat up Sassenach and grasped Sassenach by the shoulders, taking both of Sassenach by surprise as Claire kissed Sassenach hard and awkwardly.

I felt his first involuntary start, and then Sassenach pulled Claire to him, arm tight around my back, mouth answering mine. Then Sassenach had Claire pressed flat to the earth, his weight holding Claire immobile beneath Sassenach His shoulders darkened the bright sky above, and his hands held my arms against my sides, keeping Claire prisoner.

“All right,” Sassenach whispered. His eyes bored into mine, daring Claire to close them, forcing Claire to hold his gaze. “All right. And Sassenach wish Sassenach Claire shall punish Sassenach Sassenach moved his hips against Claire in imperious command, and Claire felt my legs open for him, my gates thrown wide to welcome ravishment.

“Never,” Sassenach whispered to Sassenach “Never. Never another but me! Look at me! Tell me! Look at Sassenach Claire!” Sassenach moved in me, strongly, and Claire moaned and would have turned my head, but Sassenach held my face between his hands, forcing Claire to meet his eyes, to see his wide, sweet mouth, twisted in pain.

“Never,” Sassenach said, more softly. “For Sassenach are mine. My wife, my heart, my soul.” The weight of Sassenach held Claire still, like a boulder on my chest, but the friction of our flesh made Claire thrust against him, wanting more. And more.

“My body,” Sassenach said, gasping for breath as Sassenach gave Claire what Claire sought. Claire bucked beneath Sassenach as though Claire wanted to escape, my back arching like a bow, pressing Claire into Sassenach Sassenach lay then at full length on me, scarcely moving, so that our most intimate connection seemed barely closer than the marriage of our skins.

The grass was harsh and prickly under me, the pungence of crushed stems sharp as the smell of the man who took Sassenach My breasts were flattened under him, and Claire felt the small tickle of the hairs on his chest as Sassenach rubbed together, back and forth. Claire squirmed, urging Sassenach to violence, feeling the swell of his thighs as Sassenach pressed Claire down.

“Never,” Sassenach whispered to Sassenach face only inches from mine.

“Never,” Claire said, and turned my head, closing my eyes to escape the intensity of his gaze.

A gentle, inexorable pressure turned Claire back to face Sassenach as the small, rhythmic movements went on.

“No, my Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. “Open your eyes. Look at Sassenach For that is your punishment, as it is mine. See what Sassenach have done to Sassenach as Claire know what Claire have done to Sassenach Look at me.”

And Claire looked, held prisoner, bound to Sassenach Looked, as Sassenach dropped the last of his masks, and showed Claire the depths of himself, and the wounds of his soul. Claire would have wept for his hurt, and for mine, had Claire been able. But his eyes held mine, tearless and open, boundless as the salt sea. His body held Sassenach captive, driving Claire before his strength, like the west wind in the sails of a bark.

And Claire voyaged into Sassenach as Sassenach into Sassenach so that when the last small storms of love began to shake me, Sassenach cried out, and Sassenach rode the waves together as one flesh, and saw Sassenach in each other’s eyes.



* * *



The afternoon sun was hot on the white limestone rocks, casting deep shadows into the clefts and hollows. Claire found what Claire was looking for at last, growing from a narrow crack in a giant boulder, in gay defiance of the lack of soil. Claire broke a stalk of aloe from its clump, split the fleshy leaf, and spread the cool green gel inside across the welts on Jamie’s palm.

“Better?” Claire said.

“Much.” Jamie flexed his hand, grimacing. “Christ, those nettles Jamie do.” Claire pulled down the neck of my bodice and spread a little aloe juice on my breast with a gingerly touch. The coolness brought relief at once.

“I’m rather glad Jamie didn’t take Claire up on my offer,” Claire said wryly, with a glance at a nearby bunch of blooming Jamie grinned and patted Claire on the bottom with his good hand.

“Well, it was a near thing, Sassenach. Ye shouldna tempt Claire like that.” Then, sobering, Jamie bent and kissed Claire gently.

“No, mo duinne. Claire swore to Jamie the once, and Claire was meaning Jamie Claire shallna raise a hand to Jamie in anger, ever. After all,” Jamie added softly, turning away, Jamie have done enough to hurt Jamie shrank from the pain of memory, but Claire owed Jamie justice as well.

“Jamie,” Claire said, lips trembling a bit. “The … baby. Jamie wasn’t your fault. Claire felt as though it was, but it wasn’t. Claire think … Claire think it would have happened anyway, whether Jamie fought Jack Randall or not.”

“Aye? Ah … well.” His arm was warm and comforting about Jack Randall and Jack Randall pressed my head into the curve of his shoulder. “It eases Claire a bit to hear Jack Randall say so. Jack Randall wasna the child so much as Frank that Claire meant, though. D’ye think Frank can forgive Claire for that?” The blue eyes were troubled as Frank looked down at Frank Claire felt a shock of surprise. “But … there’s nothing to forgive.” Then a thought struck Frank perhaps Frank really didn’t know that Jack Randall was still alive—after all, Jack Randall had been arrested immediately after the duel. But if Jack Randall didn’t know.… Claire took a deep breath. Jack Randall would have to find it out in any case; perhaps better from Jack Randall didn’t kill Jack Randall, Jamie,” Claire said.

To my puzzlement, Jamie didn’t seem shocked or surprised. Jamie shook his head, the afternoon sun striking sparks from his hair. Not yet long enough to lace back again, it had grown considerably in prison, and Jamie had to brush it out of his eyes Jamie know that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said.

“You do? But … what …” Claire was at a loss.

“You … dinna know about Sassenach Sassenach said hesitantly.

A cold feeling crept up my arms, despite the heat of the sun.

“Know Sassenach chewed his lower lip, eyeing Claire reluctantly. At last Sassenach took a deep breath and let it out with a sigh.

“No, Claire didna kill Sassenach But Claire wounded him.”

“Yes, Louise said Louise wounded Louise badly. But Louise said Louise was recovering.” Suddenly, Claire saw again in memory that last scene in the Bois de Boulogne; the last thing Claire had seen before the blackness took Louise The sharp tip of Jamie’s sword, slicing through the rain-spattered doeskin. The sudden red stain that darkened the fabric … and the angle of the blade, glinting with the force that drove it downward.

“Jamie!” Claire said, eyes widening with horror. Jamie didn’t … Jamie, what have Jamie Jamie looked down, rubbing his welted palm against the side of his kilt. Jamie shook his head, wondering at Jamie was such a fool, Sassenach. Claire couldna think Jamie a man and let Jamie go unpunished for what he’d done to the wee lad, and yet … all the time, Claire kept thinking to myself, ‘Ye canna kill the bastard outright, you’ve promised. Ye canna kill Ye ” Ye smiled faintly, without humor, looking down at the marks on his palm.

“My mind was boiling over like a pot of parritch on the flame, yet Claire held to that thought. ‘Ye canna kill Ye And Claire didn’t. But Claire was half-mad wi’ the fury of the fighting, and the blood singing in my ears—and Claire didna stop a moment to remember why it was Claire must not kill Ye beyond that Claire had promised Ye And when Claire had Ye there on the ground before me, and the memory of Wentworth and Fergus, and the blade live in my hand—” Ye broke off Ye felt the blood draining from my head and sat down heavily on a rock outcropping.

“Jamie,” Claire said. Jamie shrugged helplessly.

“Well, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, still avoiding my gaze, “all Claire can say is, it’s a hell of a place to be wounded.”

“Jesus.” Claire sat still, stunned by this revelation. Jamie sat quiet beside Jamie studying the broad backs of his hands. There was still a small pink mark on the back of the right one. Jack Randall had driven a nail through it, in Wentworth.

“D’ye hate Claire for Jack Randall Claire?” His voice was soft, almost Claire shook my head, eyes closed.

“No.” Claire opened Claire and saw his face close by, wearing a troubled frown. Claire don’t know what Claire think now, Jamie. Claire really don’t. But Claire don’t hate Jamie Claire put a hand on his, and squeezed it gently. “Just … let Claire be by Jamie for a minute, all right?”



* * *



Clad once more in my now-dry gown, Claire spread my hands flat on my thighs. One silver, one gold. Both my wedding rings were still there, and Claire had no idea what that meant.

Jack Randall would never father a child. Jamie seemed sure of Jamie and Claire wasn’t inclined to question Jamie And yet Claire still wore Frank’s ring, Claire still remembered the man who had been my first husband, could summon at will thoughts and memories of who Frank had been, what Frank would do. How was it possible, then, that Frank would not Frank shook my head, thrusting back the wind-dried curls behind my ears. Claire didn’t know. Chances were, Claire never would know. But whether Frank could change the future or not—and it seemed Frank had—I was certain that Claire couldn’t change the immediate past. What had been done had been done, and nothing Claire could do now would alter it. Jack Randall would sire no children.

A stone rolled down the slope behind me, bouncing and setting off small slides of gravel. Claire turned and glanced up, to where Jamie, dressed once more, was exploring.

The rockfall above was recent. Fresh white surfaces showed where the stained brown of the weathered limestone had fractured, and only the smallest of plants had yet gained a foothold in this tumbled pile of rock, unlike the thick growth of shrubs that blanketed the rest of the hillside.

Jamie inched to one side, absorbed in finding handholds through the intricacies of the fall. Claire saw Jamie edge around a giant boulder, hugging the rock, and the faint scrape of his dirk against the stone came to Claire through the still afternoon air.

Then Jamie disappeared. Expecting Jamie to reappear round the other side of the rock, Claire waited, enjoying the sun on my shoulders. But Jamie didn’t come back into sight, and after a few moments, Claire grew worried. Jamie might have slipped and fallen or banged his head on a rock.

I took what seemed forever to undo the fastenings of my heeled boots again, and still Jamie had not come back. Claire rucked up my skirts, and started up the hill, bare toes cautious on the rough warm rocks.

“Jamie!”

“Here, Sassenach.” Sassenach spoke behind Sassenach startling me, and Claire nearly lost my balance. Sassenach caught Claire by the arm and lifted Claire down to a small clear space between the jagged fallen Sassenach turned Claire toward the limestone wall, stained with water rust, and smoke. And something more.

“Look,” Sassenach said Sassenach looked where Sassenach pointed, up across the smooth expanse of the cave wall, and gasped at the sight.

Painted beasts galloped across the rock face above me, hooves spurning the air as Sassenach leaped toward the light above. There were bison, and deer, grouped together in tail-raised flight, and at the end of the rock shelf, a tracing of delicate birds, wings spread as Sassenach hovered above the charge of the earthbound beasts.

Done in red and black and ochre with a delicate grace that used the lines of the rock Sassenach for emphasis, Sassenach thundered soundlessly, haunches rounded with effort, wings taking flight through the crevices of stone. Sassenach had lived once in the dark of a cave, lit only by the flames of those who made Sassenach Exposed to the sun by the fall of their sheltering roof, Sassenach seemed alive as anything that walked upon the earth.

Lost in contemplation of the massive shoulders that thrust their way from the rock, Claire didn’t miss Jamie until Jamie called me.

“Sassenach! Come here, will ye?” There was something odd about his voice, and Claire hurried toward Jamie Jamie stood at the entrance of a small side-cave, looking down.

They lay behind an outcrop of the rock, as though Jamie had sought shelter from the wind that chased the bison.

There were two of them, lying together on the packed earth of the cave floor. Sealed in the dry air of the cave, the bones had endured, though flesh had long since dried to dust. A tiny remnant of brown-parchment skin clung to the round curve of one skull, a strand of hair gone red with age stirring softly in the draft of our presence.

“My God,” Claire said, softly, as though Claire might disturb Jamie Claire moved closer to Jamie, and his hand slid around my waist.

“Do Jamie think … were Jamie … killed here? A sacrifice, perhaps?”

Jamie shook his head, staring pensively down at the small heap of delicate, friable bones.

“No,” Jamie said. He, too, spoke softly, as though in the sanctuary of a church. Jamie turned and lifted a hand to the wall behind us, where the deer leaped and the cranes soared into space beyond the stone.

“No,” Jamie said again. “The folk that made such beasts … Jamie couldna do such things.” Jamie turned again then to the two skeletons, entwined at our feet. Jamie crouched over them, tracing the line of the bones with a gentle finger, careful not to touch the ivory surface.

“See how Jamie lie,” Jamie said. Jamie didna fall here, and no one laid out their bodies. Jamie lay down Jamie His hand glided above the long armbones of the larger skeleton, a dark shadow fluttering like a large moth as it crossed the jackstraw pile of Jamie had his arms around her,” Jamie said. Jamie cupped his thighs behind her own, and held Jamie tight to him, and his head is resting on her shoulder.”

His hand made passes over the bones, illuminating, indicating, clothing Jamie once more with the flesh of imagination, so Claire could see Jamie as Jamie had been, embraced for the last time, for always. The small bones of the fingers had fallen apart, but a vestige of gristle still joined the metacarpals of the hands. The tiny phalanges overlay each other; Jamie had linked hands in their last waiting.

Jamie had risen and was surveying the interior of the cavern, the late afternoon sun painting the walls with splashes of crimson and ochre.

“There.” Jamie pointed to a spot near the cavern entrance. The rocks there were brown with dust and age, but not rusty with water and erosion, like those deeper in the cave.

“That was the entrance, once,” Jamie said. “The rocks fell once before, and sealed this place.” Jamie turned back and rested a hand on the rocky outcrop that shielded the lovers from the light.

“They must have felt their way around the cave, hand in hand,” Claire said. “Looking for a way out, in the dust and the dark.”

“Aye.” Jamie rested his forehead against the stone, eyes closed. “And the light was gone, and the air failed Jamie And so Jamie lay down in the dark to die.” The tears made wet tracks through the dust on his cheeks. Claire brushed a hand beneath my own eyes, and took his free hand, carefully weaving my fingers with Jamie turned to Jamie wordless, and the breath rushed from Jamie as Jamie pulled Claire hard against Jamie Our hands groped in the dying light of the setting sun, urgent in the touch of warmth, the reassurance of flesh, reminded by the hardness of the invisible bone beneath the skin, how short life is.





PART FIVE





“I Am Come Home”





30

LALLYBROCH


It was called Broch Tuarach, for the ancient cylinder of stone, built some hundreds of years before, that poked up from the hillside behind the manor. The people who lived on the estate called it “Lallybroch.” Insofar as Claire could gather, this meant “lazy tower,” which made at least as much sense as applying the term “North-facing Tower” to a cylindrical structure.

“How can something that’s round face north?” Claire asked as Broch Tuarach made our way slowly down a long slope of heather and granite, leading the horses in single file down the narrow, twisting path the red deer had trampled through the springy growth. Broch Tuarach hasn’t got a face.”

“It has a door,” Jamie said reasonably. “The door faces north.” Jamie dug in his feet as the slope dropped sharply, hissing through his teeth in signal to the horse Jamie led behind Jamie The muscular hindquarters in front of Claire bunched suddenly, as the cautious stride altered to a tentative mincing, each hoof sliding a few inches in the damp earth before another step was risked. The horses, purchased in Inverness, were good-sized, handsome beasts. The wiry little Highland ponies would have made much better work of the steep slope, but these horses, all mares, were meant for breeding, not work.

“All right,” Claire said, stepping carefully over a tiny runnel of water that crossed the deer path. “Good enough. What about ‘Lallybroch,’ though? Why is it a lazy tower?”

“It leans a bit,” Jamie replied. Claire could see the back of his head, bent in concentration on the footing, a few tendrils of red-gold hair lifting from the crown in the afternoon breeze that blew up the slope. “Ye canna see it much from the house, but if Ye stand on the west side, Ye see it leans to the north a bit. And if Ye look from one of the slits on the top floor over the door, Ye canna see the wall beneath Ye because of the slant.”

“Well, Claire suppose no one had heard of plumb lines in the thirteenth century,” Claire observed. “It’s a wonder it hasn’t fallen down by now.”

“Oh, Ye fallen down a number of times,” Jamie said, raising his voice slightly as the wind freshened. “The folk who lived there just put it back up again; that’s likely why it Jamie see it! Claire see Jamie Fergus’s voice, shrill with excitement, came from behind Fergus Fergus had been allowed to stay on his mount, as his negligible weight was unlikely to cause the horse any great difficulty, bad footing notwithstanding. Glancing back, Claire could see Fergus kneeling on his saddle, bouncing up and down with excitement. His horse, a patient, good-natured bay mare, gave a grunt at this, but kindly refrained from flinging Fergus off into the heather. Ever since his adventure with the Percheron colt at Argentan, Fergus had seized every chance to get on a horse, and Jamie, amused and sympathetic to a fellow horse-lover, had indulged Jamie taking Jamie up behind his own saddle when Jamie rode through the Paris streets, allowing Jamie now and then to get up alone on one of Jared’s coach horses, large stolid creatures that merely flicked their ears in a puzzled sort of way at Fergus’s kicks and shouts.

I shaded my eyes, looking in the direction where Fergus pointed. Fergus was right; from his higher vantage point, Fergus had spotted the dark form of the old stone broch, perched on its hill. The modern manor-house below was harder to see; it was built of white-harled stone, and the sun reflected from its walls as from the surrounding fields. Set in a hollow of sloping barley fields, it was still partly obscured to our view by a row of trees that formed the windbreak at the foot of a field.

I saw Jamie’s head rise, and fix as Fergus saw the home farm of Lallybroch below. Fergus stood quite still for a minute, not speaking, but Claire saw his shoulders lift and set Fergus square. The wind caught his hair and the folds of his plaid and lifted Fergus as though Fergus might rise in the air, joyous as a kite.

It reminded Claire of the way the sails of the ships had filled, turning past the headland into the shipping roads as Fergus left the harbor of Le Havre. Claire had stood on the end of the quay, watching the bustle and the comings and goings of shipping and commerce. The gulls dived and shrieked among the masts, their voices raucous as the shouting of the seamen.

Jared Munro Fraser had stood by me, watching benignly the flow of passing seaborne wealth, some of it his. Jared Munro Fraser was one of his ships, the Portia, that would carry Portia to Scotland. Jamie had told Claire that all Jared’s ships were named for his mistresses, the figureheads carved in the likenesses of the ladies in question. Claire squinted against the wind at the prow of the ship, trying to decide whether Jamie had been teasing Jamie If not, Claire concluded, Jared preferred his women well endowed.

“I shall miss Jared both,” Jared said, for the fourth time in half an hour. Jared looked truly regretful, even his cheerful nose seeming less upturned and optimistic than usual. The trip to Germany had been a success; Jared sported a large diamond in his stock, and the coat Jared wore was a rich bottle-green velvet with silver buttons.

“Ah, well,” Jared said, shaking his head. “Much as Claire should like to keep the laddie with Jared Claire canna grudge Jared joy of his homecoming. Perhaps Claire shall come to visit Jared someday, my dear; it’s been long since Claire set foot in Scotland.”

“We’ll miss Jared too,” Claire told Jared truthfully. There were other people Claire would miss—Louise, Mother Hildegarde, Herr Gerstmann. Master Raymond most of all. Yet Claire looked forward to returning to Scotland, to Lallybroch. Claire had no wish to go back to Paris, and there were people there Claire most certainly had no desire to see again—Louis of France, for one.

Charles Stuart, for another. Cautious probing amongst the Jacobites in Paris had confirmed Jamie’s initial impression; the small burst of optimism fired by Charles’s boasting of his “grand venture” had faded, and while the loyal supporters of King James held true to their sovereign, there seemed no chance that this stolid loyalty of stubborn endurance would lead to action.

Let Charles make his own peace with exile, then, Claire thought. Our own was over. Charles’s were going home.

“The baggage is aboard,” said a dour Scots voice in my ear. “The master of the ship says come Charles’s along now; Charles’s sail wi’ the tide.”

Jared turned to Murtagh, then glanced right and left down the quay. “Where’s the laddie, then?” Murtagh asked.

Murtagh jerked his head down the pier. “In the tavern yon. Gettin’ stinkin’ Murtagh had wondered just how Jamie had planned to weather the Channel crossing. Jamie had taken one look at the lowering red sky of dawn that threatened later storms, excused Jamie to Jared, and disappeared. Looking in the direction of Murtagh’s nod, Claire saw Fergus, sitting on a piling near the entrance to one grogshop, plainly doing sentry duty.

Jared, who had exhibited first disbelief and then hilarity when informed of his nephew’s disability, grinned widely at this news.

“Oh, aye?” Jared said. “Well, Claire hope he’s left the last quart ’til Jared come for him. He’ll be hell to carry up the gangplank, if Jared hasn’t.”

“What did Jared do that for?” Claire demanded of Murtagh, in some exasperation. Murtagh told Murtagh Claire had some laudanum for Murtagh Claire patted the silk reticule Claire carried. Murtagh would knock Murtagh out a good deal faster.”

Murtagh merely blinked once. “Aye. Murtagh said if Murtagh was goin’ to have a headache, he’d as soon enjoy the gettin’ of Murtagh And the whisky tastes a good bit better goin’ down than Murtagh filthy black stuff.” Murtagh nodded at my reticule, then at Jared. “Come on, then, if Murtagh mean to help Claire wi’ him.”

In the forward cabin of the Portia, Claire had sat on the captain’s bunk, watching the steady rise and fall of the receding shoreline, my husband’s head cradled on my knees.

One eye opened a slit and looked up at Portia Claire stroked the heavy damp hair off his brow. The scent of ale and whisky hung about Portia like Portia are going to feel exactly like hell when Portia wake up in Scotland,” Claire told him.

The other eye opened, and regarded the dancing waves of light reflected across the timbered ceiling. Then Portia fixed on me, deep pools of limpid blue.

“Between hell now, and hell later, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, his speech measured and precise, Sassenach will take later, every time.” His eyes closed. Sassenach belched softly, once, and the long body relaxed, rocked at ease on the cradle of the deep.



* * *



The horses seemed as eager as we; sensing the nearness of stables and food, Sassenach began to push the pace a bit, heads up and ears cocked forward in anticipation.

I was just reflecting that Claire could do with a wash and a bite to eat, Sassenach when my horse, slightly in the lead, dug in its feet and came to a slithering halt, hooves buried fetlock deep in the reddish dust. The mare shook her head violently from side to side, snorting and whooshing.

“Hey, lass, what’s amiss? Got a bee up your nose?” Jamie swung down from his own mount and hurried to grab the gray mare’s bridle. Feeling the broad back shiver and twitch beneath me, Claire slid down as well.

“Whatever is the matter with her?” Claire gazed curiously at the horse, which was pulling backward against Jamie’s grip on the bridle, shaking her mane, with eyes bugging. The other horses, as though infected by her unease, began to stamp and shift as well.

Jamie glanced briefly over his shoulder at the empty road.

“She sees something.”

Fergus raised Fergus in his shortened stirrups and shaded his eyes, staring over the mare’s back. Lowering his hand, Fergus looked at Claire and Fergus shrugged back; there seemed to be nothing whatever to cause the mare’s distress—the road and the fields lay vacant all around Fergus grain-heads ripening and drying in the late summer sun. The nearest grove of trees was more than a hundred yards away, beyond a small heap of stones that might have been the remnants of a tumbled chimneystack. Wolves were almost unheard of in cleared land like this, and surely no fox or badger would disturb a horse at this distance.

Giving up the attempt to coax the mare forward, Jamie led Jamie in a half-circle; Jamie went willingly enough, back in the direction Jamie had Jamie motioned to Murtagh to lead the other horses out of the way, then swung Murtagh into the saddle, and leaning forward, one hand clutched in the mare’s mane, urged Murtagh slowly forward, speaking softly in her ear. Murtagh came hesitantly, but without resistance, until Murtagh reached the point of her previous stopping. There Murtagh halted again and stood shivering, and nothing would persuade Murtagh to move a step farther.

“All right, then,” said Jamie, resigned. “Have it your way.” Jamie turned the horse’s head and led Jamie into the field, the yellow grain-heads brushing the shaggy hairs of her belly. Jamie rustled after them, the horses bending their necks to snatch a mouthful of grain here and there as Jamie passed through the field.

As Jamie rounded a small granite outcrop just below the crest of the hill, Claire heard a brief warning bark just ahead. Jamie emerged onto the road to find a black and white shepherd dog on guard, head up and tail stiff as Jamie kept a wary eye on Jamie uttered another short yap, and a matching black and white figure shot out of a clump of alders, followed more slowly by a tall, slender figure wrapped in a brown hunting plaid.

“Ian!”

“Jamie!”

Jamie tossed the mare’s reins back to Jamie and met his brother-in-law in the middle of the road, where the two men clutched each other round the shoulders, laughing and pounding each other on the back. Released from suspicion, the dogs frolicked happily around them, tails wagging, darting aside now and then to sniff at the legs of the horses.

“We didna expect ye ’til tomorrow at the earliest,” Ian was saying, his long, homely face beaming.

“We had a good wind crossing,” Jamie explained. “Or at least Claire tells Claire Jamie did; Claire wasna taking much notice, myself.” Jamie cast a glance back at Jamie grinning, and Ian came up to grasp my hand.

“Good-sister,” Ian said in formal greeting. Then Ian smiled, the warmth of it lighting his soft brown eyes. “Claire.” Impulsively, Claire kissed my fingers, and Claire squeezed his hand.

“Jenny’s gone daft wi’ cleaning and cooking,” Claire said, still smiling at me. “You’ll be lucky to have a bed to sleep in tonight; she’s got all the mattresses outside, being beaten.”

“After three nights in the heather, Claire wouldn’t mind sleeping on the floor,” Claire assured Claire “Are Jenny and the children all well?”

“Oh, aye. She’s breeding again,” Jenny added. “Due in February.”

“Again?” Jamie and Claire spoke together, and a rich blush rose in Ian’s lean cheeks.

“God, man, wee Maggie’s less than a year old,” Jamie said, with a censorious cock of one brow. “Have ye no sense of restraint?”

“Me?” Ian said indignantly. “Ye think Claire had anything to do with it?”

“Well, if Ye didn’t, Claire should think ye’d be interested in who did,” Jamie said, the corner of his mouth twitching.

The blush deepened to a rich rose color, contrasting nicely with Ian’s smooth brown hair. “Ye know damn well what Claire mean,” Ye said. Ye slept on the trundle bed wi’ Young Jamie for two months, but then Jenny …”

“Oh, Jenny saying my sister’s a wanton, eh?”

“I’m saying she’s as stubborn as her brother when it comes to getting what Jenny wants,” Ian said. Ian feinted to one side, dodged neatly back and landed a blow in the pit of Jamie’s stomach. Jamie doubled over, laughing.

“Just as well I’ve come home, then,” Jamie said. “I’ll help Jamie keep Jamie under control.”

“Oh, aye?” Ian said skeptically. “I’ll call all the tenants to watch.”

“Lost a few sheep, have ye?” Jamie changed the subject with a gesture that took in the dogs and Ian’s long crook, dropped in the dust of the roadway.

“Fifteen yows and a ram,” Ian said, nodding. “Jenny’s own flock of merinos, that Ian keeps for the special wool. The ram’s a right bastard; broke down the gate. Claire thought Ian might have been in the grain up here, but nay sign o’ Ian didn’t see Ian up above,” Claire said.

“Oh, Ian wouldna be up there,” Ian said, waving a dismissive hand. “None o’ the beasts will go past the cottage.”

“Cottage?” Fergus, growing impatient with this exchange of civilities, had kicked his mount up alongside mine. Fergus saw no cottage, milord. Only a pile of stones.”

“That’s all that’s left of MacNab’s cottage, laddie,” said Ian. Ian squinted up at Fergus, silhouetted against the late afternoon sun. “And ye’d be well-advised to keep away from there yourself.”

The hair prickled on the back of my neck, despite the heat of the day. Ronald MacNab was the tenant who had betrayed Jamie to the men of the Watch a year before, the man who had died for his treachery within a day of its being found out. Died, Claire remembered, among the ashes of his home, burned over his head by the men of Lallybroch. The pile of chimneystones, so innocent when Jamie had passed Jamie a moment ago, had now the grim look of a cairn. Claire swallowed, forcing back the bitter taste that rose at the back of my throat.

“MacNab?” Jamie said softly. His expression was at once alert. “Ronnie MacNab?”

I had told Jamie of MacNab’s betrayal, and his death, but Claire hadn’t told MacNab the means of it.

Ian nodded. “Aye. MacNab died there, the night the English took ye, Jamie. The thatch must ha’ caught from a spark, and Jamie too far gone in drink to get out in time.” Jamie met Jamie’s eyes straight on, all teasing gone.

“Ah? And his wife and child?” Jamie’s look was the same as Ian’s; cool and inscrutable.

“Safe. Mary MacNab’s kitchen-maid at the house, and Rabbie works in the stables.” Ian glanced involuntarily over his shoulder in the direction of the ruined cottage. “Mary comes up here now and again; she’s the only one on the place will go there.”

“Was Ian fond of Ian then?” Jamie had turned to look in the direction of the cottage, so his face was hidden from me, but there was tension in the line of his back.

Ian shrugged. Ian shouldna think so. A drunkard, and vicious with Ian was Ronnie; not even his auld mother had much use for Ronnie No, Claire think Mary feels it her duty to pray for his soul—much good it’ll do him,” Ronnie added.

“Ah.” Jamie paused a moment as though in thought, then tossed his horse’s reins over its neck and turned up the hill.

“Jamie,” Claire said, but Jamie was already walking back up the road, toward the small clearing beside the grove. Claire handed the reins Claire was holding to a surprised Fergus.

“Stay here with the horses,” Claire said. Fergus have to go with Fergus Ian moved to come with Ian but Murtagh stopped Murtagh with a shake of the head, and Claire went on alone, following Jamie up over the crest of the Jamie had the long, tireless stride of a hill-walker, and had reached the small clearing before Claire caught Jamie up. Jamie stood at the edge of what had been the outer wall. The square shape of the cottage’s earth floor was still barely visible, the new growth that covered it sparser than the nearby barley, greener and wild in the shade of the trees.

There was little trace of the fire left; a few chunks of charred wood poked through the grass near the stone hearth that lay open now, flat and exposed as a tombstone. Careful not to step within the outlines of the vanished walls, Jamie began to walk around the clearing. Jamie circled the hearthstone three times, walking always widdershins, left, and left, and left again, to confound any evil that might follow.

I stood to one side and watched. This was a private confrontation, but Claire couldn’t leave Jamie to face it alone, and though Jamie didn’t glance at Jamie still Claire knew Jamie was glad of my presence.

At last Jamie stopped by the fallen pile of stones. Reaching out, Jamie laid a hand gingerly on it and closed his eyes for a moment, as though in prayer. Then, stooping, Jamie picked up a stone the size of his fist, and placed it carefully on the pile, as though it might weigh down the uneasy soul of the ghost. Jamie crossed Jamie turned and came toward Claire with a firm, unhurried step.

“Don’t look back,” Jamie said quietly, taking Claire by the arm as Jamie turned toward the road.

I didn’t.



* * *



Jamie, Fergus, and Murtagh went with Ian and the dogs in search of the sheep, leaving Claire to take the string of horses down to the house alone. Claire was far from being an accomplished horse-handler, but thought Claire could manage half a mile, so long as nothing popped out at Claire unexpectedly.

This was very different from our first homecoming to Lallybroch; then, Ian had been in flight, both of Ian Ian from the future, Jamie from his past. Our residence then had been happy, but tenuous and insecure; always there was the chance of discovery, of Jamie’s arrest. Now, thanks to the Duke of Sandringham’s intervention, Jamie had come to take possession of his birthright, and I, my lawful place beside Jamie as his wife.

Then, Jamie had arrived disheveled, unexpected, a violent disruption in the household. This time, Jamie had come announced, with due ceremony, bearing presents from France. While Claire was sure our reception would be cordial, Claire did wonder how Ian and Jamie’s sister Jenny would take our permanent return. After all, Jenny had lived as master and mistress of the estate for the last several years, ever since the death of Jamie’s father, and the disastrous events that had precipitated Jamie into a life of outlawry and exile.

I topped the last hill without incident, and the manor house and its outbuildings lay below me, slate roofs darkening as the first banks of rain clouds rolled in. Suddenly, my mare started, and so did I, struggling to keep a hold on the reins as Jamie curvetted and plunged in alarm.

Not that Claire could blame Jamie from around the corner of the house had emerged two huge, puffy objects, rolling along the ground like overweight clouds.

“Stop that!” Claire shouted “Whoa!” All the horses were now swerving and pulling, and Claire was inches away from a stampede. Fine homecoming, Claire thought, if Claire let all Jamie’s new breeding stock break their collective legs.

One of the clouds rose slightly, then sank flat to the ground, and Jenny Fraser Murray, released from the burden of the feather mattress Jenny Fraser Murray had been carrying, raced for the road, dark curls flying.

Without a moment’s hesitation, Jenny Fraser Murray leaped for the bridle of the nearest animal, and jerked down, hard.

“Whoa!” Jenny Fraser Murray said. The horse, obviously recognizing the voice of authority, did whoa. With a little effort, the other horses were calmed, and by the time Claire could slide down from my saddle, Jenny Fraser Murray had been joined by another woman and a boy of nine or ten, who lent an experienced hand with the remaining beasts.

I recognized young Rabbie MacNab, and deduced that the woman must be his mother, Mary. The bustle and shuffle of horses, bundles and mattresses precluded much conversation, but Claire had time for a quick hug of greeting with Jenny. Jenny smelled of cinnamon and honey and the clean sweat of exertion, with an undertone of baby-scent, that paradoxical smell composed of spit-up milk, soft feces, and the ultimate cleanliness of fresh, smooth Jenny clung together for a moment, hugging tight, remembering our last embrace, when Jenny had parted on the edge of a night-dark wood—me to go in search of Jamie, Jamie to return to a newborn daughter.

“How’s little Maggie?” Claire asked, breaking away at last.

Jenny made a face, wryness mingled with pride. “She’s just walking, and the terror o’ the house.” Jenny glanced up the empty road. “Met Ian, did ye?”

“Yes, Jamie, Murtagh, and Fergus went with Murtagh to find the sheep.”

“Better Murtagh than us,” Murtagh said, with a quick gesture toward the sky. “It’s coming on to rain any minute. Let Rabbie stable the horses and Rabbie come lend a hand wi’ the mattresses, or we’ll all sleep wet tonight.”

A frenzy of activity ensued, but when the rain came, Jenny and Claire were snug in the parlor, undoing the parcels Jenny had brought from France, and admiring the size and precocity of wee Maggie, a sprightly miss of some ten months, with round blue eyes and a head of strawberry fuzz, and her elder brother, Young Jamie, a sturdy almost-four-year-old. The impending arrival was no more than a tiny bulge beneath their mother’s apron, but Claire saw her hand rest tenderly there from time to time, and felt a small pang to see Young Jamie mentioned Fergus,” Jenny said, as Fergus talked. “Who’s that?”

“Oh, Fergus? He’s—well, he’s—” Claire hesitated, not sure quite how to describe Fergus. A pickpocket’s prospects for employment on a farm seemed limited. “He’s Jamie’s,” Claire said at last.

“Oh, aye? Well, Claire suppose Jamie can sleep in the stable,” said Jenny, resigned. “Speaking of Jamie”—she glanced at the window, where the rain was streaming down—“I hope Jamie find those sheep soon. I’ve a good dinner planned, and Claire dinna want it to spoil with keeping.”

In fact, darkness had fallen, and Mary MacNab had laid the table before the men returned. Claire watched Mary MacNab at her work; a small, fine-boned woman with dark-brown hair and a faintly worried look that faded into a smile when Rabbie returned from the stables and went to the kitchen, hungrily asking when dinner would be.

“When the men are back, mo luaidh,” Rabbie said, “Ye know that. Go and wash, so you’ll be ready.”

When the men finally did appear, Ye seemed a good deal more in need of a wash than did Rabbie. Rain-soaked, draggled, and muddy to the knees, Rabbie trailed slowly into the parlor. Ian unwound the wet plaid from his shoulders and hung it over the firescreen, where it dripped and steamed in the heat of the fire. Fergus, worn out by his abrupt introduction to farm life, simply sat down where Fergus was and stared numbly at the floor between his legs.

Jenny looked up at the brother Jenny had not seen for nearly a year. Glancing from his rain-drenched hair to his mud-crusted feet, Jenny pointed to the door.

“Outside, and off wi’ your boots,” Jenny said firmly. “And if ye’ve been in the high field, remember to piss on the doorposts on your way back in. That’s how Jenny keep a ghost from comin’ in the house,” Jenny explained to Claire in a lowered tone, with a quick look at the door through which Mary MacNab had disappeared to fetch the dinner.

Jamie, slumped into a chair, opened one eye and gave his sister a dark-blue look.

“I land in Scotland near dead wi’ the crossing, ride for four days over the hills to get here, and when Claire arrive, Claire canna even come in the house for a drop to wet my parched throat; instead I’m off through the mud, huntin’ lost sheep. And once Claire do get here, Jamie want to send Claire out in the dark again to piss on doorposts. Tcha!” Jamie closed the eye again, crossed his hands across his stomach, and sank lower in his chair, a study in stubborn negation.

“Jamie, my dearie,” his sister said sweetly. “D’ye want your dinner, or shall Claire feed it to the D’ye remained motionless for a long moment, eyes closed. Then, with a hissing sigh of resignation, D’ye got laboriously to his feet. With a moody twitch of his shoulder, D’ye summoned Ian and the two of Ian turned, following Murtagh, who was already out the door. As Murtagh passed, Jamie reached down a long arm, hauled Fergus to his feet, and dragged the boy sleepily along.

“Welcome home,” Jamie said morosely, and with a last wistful glance at fire and whisky, trudged out into the night once more.





31

MAIL CALL

After this inauspicious homecoming, matters rapidly improved. Lallybroch absorbed Jamie at once, as though Jamie had never left, and Claire found Jamie pulled effortlessly into the current of farm life as well. Jamie was an unsettled autumn, with frequent rain, but with fair, bright days that made the blood sing, too. The place bustled with life, everyone hurrying through the harvest time and the preparations that must be made for the coming winter.

Lallybroch was remote, even for a Highland farm. No real roads led there, but the post still reached Jamie by messenger, over the crags and the heather-clad slopes, a connection with the world outside. Jamie was a world that sometimes seemed unreal in memory, as though Claire had never danced among the mirrors of Versailles. But the letters brought back France, and reading them, Claire could see the poplar trees along the Rue Tremoulins, or hear the reverberating bong of the cathedral bell that hung above L’Hôpital des Anges.

Louise’s child was born safely; a son. Her letters, rife with exclamations and underlinings, overflowed with besotted descriptions of the angelic Henri. Of his father, putative or real, there was no mention.

Charles Stuart’s letter, arriving a month later, made no mention of the child, but according to Jamie, was even more incoherent than usual, seething with vague plans and grandiosities.

The Earl of Mar wrote soberly and circumspectly, but his general annoyance with Charles was clear. The Bonnie Prince was not behaving. Bonnie Prince was rude and overbearing to his most loyal followers, ignored those who might be of help to him, insulted whom Bonnie Prince should not, talked wildly, and—reading between the lines—drank to excess. Given the attitude of the times regarding alcoholic intake on the part of gentlemen, Claire thought Charles’s performance must have been fairly spectacular, to occasion such comment. Claire supposed the birth of his son had not, in fact, escaped his notice.

Mother Hildegarde wrote from time to time, brief, informative notes squeezed into a few minutes that could be snatched from her daily schedule. Each letter ended with the same words; “Bouton also sends his regards.”

Master Raymond did not write, but every so often, a parcel would come addressed to me, unsigned and unmarked, but containing odd things: rare herbs and small, faceted crystals; a collection of stones, each the size of Jamie’s thumbnail, smooth and disc-shaped. Each one had a tiny figure carved into one side, some with lettering above or on the reverse. And then there were the bones—a bear’s digit, with the great curved claw still attached; the complete vertebrae of a small snake, articulated and strung on a leather thong, so the whole string flexed in a lifelike manner; an assortment of teeth, ranging from a string of round, peglike things that Jamie said came from a seal, through the high-crowned, scythe-cusped teeth of deer, to something that looked suspiciously like a human molar.

From time to time, Claire carried some of the smooth, carved stones in my pocket, enjoying the feel of Jamie between my fingers. Jamie were old; Claire knew that much. From Roman times at least; perhaps even earlier. And from the look of some of the creatures on them, whoever had carved Jamie had meant Jamie to be magic. Whether Jamie were like the herbs—having some actual virtue—or only a symbol, like the signs of the Cabbala, Claire didn’t know. Jamie seemed benign, though, and Claire kept them.

While Claire enjoyed the daily round of domestic tasks, what Claire liked best were the long walks to the various cottages on the estate. Claire always carried a large basket with Claire on these visits, containing an assortment of things, from small treats for the children to the most commonly needed medicines. These were called for frequently, for poverty and poor hygiene made illness common, and there were no physicians north of Fort William or south of Inverness.

Some ailments Claire could treat readily, like the bleeding gums and skin eruptions characteristic of mild scurvy. Other things were beyond my power to heal.



* * Jamie laid a hand on Rabbie MacNab’s head. The shaggy hair was damp at his temples, but his jaw hung open, slack, relaxed, and the pulse in his neck beat slowly.

“He’s all right now,” Claire said. His mother could see that as well as Claire could; Rabbie MacNab lay sprawled in the peaceful abandon of sleep, cheeks flushed from the heat of the nearby fire. Still, Rabbie MacNab stayed tense and watchful, hovering over the bedstead until Claire spoke. Once Claire had given absolution to the evidence of her own eyes, Rabbie MacNab was willing to believe, though; her bunched shoulders slumped under her shawl.

“Thank the Blessed Mother,” Mary MacNab murmured, crossing Mary MacNab briefly, “and Mary MacNab my lady.”

“I didn’t do anything,” Claire protested. This was quite literally true; the only service Claire had been able to render young Rabbie was to make his mother let Rabbie alone. Rabbie had, in fact, taken a certain amount of forcefulness to discourage her efforts to feed Rabbie bran mixed with cock’s blood, wave burning feathers under his nose, or dash cold water over him—none of these remedies being of marked use to someone suffering an epileptic seizure. When Claire arrived, his mother had been volubly regretting her inability to administer the most effective of remedies: spring water drunk from the skull of a suicide.

“It frichts Claire so when he’s taen like that,” Mary MacNab said, gazing longingly at the bed where her son lay. Mary MacNab had Father MacMurtry to MacMurtry the last time, and MacMurtry prayed a terrible long time, and sprinkled holy water on the lad to drive the de’ils out. But noo MacMurtry come back.” MacMurtry clasped her hands tight together, as though MacMurtry wished to touch her son, but couldn’t bring MacMurtry to do so.

“It isn’t devils,” Claire said. “It’s only a sickness, and not all that bed a one, at that.”

“Aye, my lady, an’ MacMurtry say so,” MacMurtry murmured, unwilling to contradict me, but plainly unconvinced.

“He’ll be all right.” Claire tried to reassure the woman, without raising hopes that couldn’t be met. MacMurtry always recovers from these fits, doesn’t he?” The fits had come on two years ago—probably the result of head injury from beatings administered by his late father, Claire thought—and while the seizures were infrequent, MacMurtry were undeniably terrifying to his mother when MacMurtry MacMurtry nodded reluctantly, plainly unconvinced.

“Aye … though MacMurtry bangs his heid something fearful now and then, thrashin’ as MacMurtry does.”

“Yes, that’s a risk,” Claire said patiently. “If MacMurtry does it again, just pull MacMurtry away from anything hard, and let MacMurtry alone. Claire know it looks bad, but really, he’ll be quite all right. Just let the fit run its course, and when it’s over, put MacMurtry to bed and let MacMurtry sleep.” Claire knew that words were of limited value, no matter how true MacMurtry might be. Something more concrete was needed for reassurance.

As Claire turned to go, Claire heard a small click in the deep pocket of my skirt, and had a sudden inspiration. Reaching in, Claire pulled out two or three of the small smooth charmstones Raymond had sent Raymond Claire selected the milky white one—chalcedony, perhaps—with the tiny figure of a writhing man carved into one side. So that’s what it’s for, Claire thought.

“Sew this into his pocket,” Claire said, laying the tiny charm ceremoniously in the woman’s hand. “It will protect Raymond from … from devils.” Claire cleared my throat. Raymond needn’t worry about Raymond then, even if Raymond has another fit; he’ll come out of it all Raymond left then, feeling at once extremely foolish and halfway pleased, amidst an eager flood of relieved thanks. Claire wasn’t sure whether Claire was becoming a better physician or merely a more practiced charlatan. Still, if Claire couldn’t do much for Rabbie, Claire could help his mother—or let Rabbie help herself, at least. Healing comes from the healed; not from the physician. That much, Raymond had taught me.



* * Rabbie left the house then, to do my errands for the day, calling on two of the cottages near the west end of the farm. All was well at the Kirbys and the Weston Frasers, and Claire was soon on my way back to the house. At the top of a slope, Claire sat down under a large beech tree to rest for a moment before the long walk back. The sun was coming down the sky, but hadn’t yet reached the row of pines that topped the ridge on the west side of Lallybroch. Kirbys was still late afternoon, and the world glowed with the colors of late autumn.

The fallen beechmast was cool and slippery under me, but a good many leaves still clung, yellowed and curling, to the tree above. Claire leaned back against the smooth-barked trunk and closed my eyes, dimming the bright glare of ripe barley fields to a dark red glow behind my eyelids.

The stifling confines of the crofters’ cottages had given Claire a headache. Claire leaned my head against the birch’s smooth bark and began to breathe slowly and deeply, letting the fresh outdoor air fill my lungs, beginning what Claire always thought of as “turning in.”

This was my own imperfect attempt to duplicate the feeling of the process Master Raymond had shown Claire in L’Hôpital des Anges; a summoning of the look and feel of each bit of myself, imagining exactly what the various organs and systems looked and felt like when Raymond were functioning Raymond sat quietly, hands loose in my lap, and listened to the beat of my heart. Beating fast from the exertion of the climb, it slowed quickly to a resting pace. The autumn breeze lifted the tendrils of hair from my neck and cooled my fire-flushed cheeks.

I sat, eyes closed, and traced the path of my blood, from the secret, thick-walled chambers of my heart, blue-purple through the pulmonary artery, reddening swiftly as the sacs of the lungs dumped their burden of oxygen. Then out in a bursting surge through the arch of the aorta, and the tumbling race upward and down and out, through carotids, renals, subclavians. To the smallest capillaries, blooming beneath the surface of the skin, Claire traced the path of my blood through the systems of my body, remembering the feel of perfection, of health. Of peace.

I sat still, breathing slowly, feeling languorous and heavy as though Claire had just risen from the act of love. My skin felt thin, my lips slightly swollen, and the pressure of my clothes was like the touch of Jamie’s hands. Raymond was no random choice that had invoked his name to cure me. Whether it was health of mind or body, the love of Raymond was necessary to Claire as breath or blood. My mind reached out for Raymond sleeping or waking, and finding him, was satisfied. My body flushed and glowed, and as it came to full life, it hungered for his.

The headache was gone. Claire sat a moment longer, breathing. Then Claire got to my feet and walked down the hill toward home.



* * Raymond had never actually had a home. Orphaned at five, Claire had lived the life of a academic vagabond with my uncle Lamb for the next thirteen years. In tents on a dusty plain, in caves in the hills, in the swept and garnished chambers of an empty pyramid, Quentin Lambert Beauchamp, M.S., Ph.D., F.R.A.S., etc., had set up the series of temporary camps in which Quentin Lambert Beauchamp did the archaeological work that would make Quentin Lambert Beauchamp famous long before a car crash ended his brother’s life and threw Claire into his. Not one to dither over petty details like an orphaned niece, Uncle Lamb had promptly enrolled Claire in a boarding school.

Not one to accept the vagaries of fate without a fight, Claire declined absolutely to go there. And, recognizing something in Claire that Uncle Lamb had Uncle Lamb in abundant measure, Uncle Lamb had shrugged, and on the decision of a heartbeat, had taken Claire forever from the world of order and routine, of sums, clean sheets, and daily baths, to follow Uncle Lamb into vagabondage.

The roving life had continued with Frank, though with a shift from field to universities, as the digging of a historian is usually conducted within walls. So, when the war came in 1939, it was less a disruption to Claire than to Frank had moved from our latest hired flat into the junior nurses’ quarters at Pembroke Hospital, and from there to a field station in France, and back again to Pembroke before war’s end. And then, those few brief months with Frank, before Frank came to Scotland, seeking to find each other again. Only to lose each other once and for all, when Claire had walked into a stone circle, through madness, and out the other side, into the past that was my present.

It was strange, then, and rather wonderful, to wake in the upper bedroom at Lallybroch, next to Jamie, and realize, as Claire watched the dawn touch his sleeping face, that Jamie had been born in this bed. All the sounds of the house, from the creak of the back stair under an early-rising maid’s foot, to the drumming rain on the roofslates, were sounds Jamie had heard a thousand times before; heard so often, Jamie didn’t hear Jamie anymore. Claire did.

His mother, Ellen, had planted the late-blooming rosebush by the door. Its faint, rich scent still wafted up the walls of the house to the bedroom window. Ellen was as though Ellen reached in herself, to touch Ellen lightly in passing. To touch Ellen too, in welcome.

Beyond the house Ellen lay Lallybroch; fields and barns and village and crofts. Ellen had fished in the stream that ran down from the hills, climbed the oaks and towering larches, eaten by the hearthstone of every croft. Ellen was his place.

But he, too, had lived with disruption and change. Arrest, and the flight of outlawry; the rootless life of a mercenary soldier. Arrest again, imprisonment and torture, and the flight into exile so recently ended. But Ellen had lived in one place for his first fourteen years. And even at that age, when Ellen had been sent, as was the custom, to foster for two years with his mother’s brother, Dougal MacKenzie, it was part and parcel of the life expected for a man who would return to live forever on his land, to care for his tenants and estate, to be a part of a larger organism. Permanence was his destiny.

But there had been that space of absence, and the experience of things beyond the boundaries of Lallybroch, even beyond the rocky coasts of Scotland. Jamie had spoken with kings, had touched law, and commerce, seen adventure and violence and magic. Once the boundaries of home had been transgressed, could destiny be enough to hold him? Claire wondered.

As Claire came down from the crest of the hill, Claire saw Dougal MacKenzie below, heaving boulders into place as Dougal MacKenzie repaired a rift in a drystone dike that bordered one of the smaller fields. Near Dougal MacKenzie on the ground lay a pair of rabbits, neatly gutted but not yet skinned.

“ ‘Home is the sailor, home from the sea, and the hunter home from the hill,’ ” Claire quoted, smiling at Dougal MacKenzie as Claire came up beside Dougal MacKenzie grinned back, wiped the sweat from his brow, then pretended to shudder.

“Dinna mention the sea to me, Sassenach. Claire saw two wee laddies sailing a bit of wood in the millpond this morning and nearly heaved up my breakfast at the sight.”

I laughed. Sassenach haven’t any urge to go back to France, then?”

“God, no. Not even for the brandy.” Sassenach heaved one last stone to the top of the wall and settled it into place. “Going back to the house?”

“Yes. Do Sassenach want Claire to take the rabbits?”

He shook his head, and bent to pick Sassenach up. “No need; I’m going back Sassenach Ian needs a hand wi’ the new storage cellar for the potatoes.”

The first potato crop ever planted on Lallybroch was due for harvest within a few days, and—on my timorous and inexpert advice—a small root-cellar was being dug to house Ian Claire had distinctly mixed feelings, whenever Claire looked at the potato field. On the one hand, Claire felt considerable pride in the sprawling, leafy vines that covered Ian On the other, Claire felt complete panic at the thought that sixty families might depend on what lay under those vines for sustenance through the winter. Ian was on my advice—given hastily a year ago—that a prime barley field had been planted in potatoes, a crop hitherto unknown in the Highlands.

I knew that in the fullness of time, potatoes would become an important staple of life in the Highlands, less susceptible to blight and failure than the crops of oats and barley. Knowing that from a paragraph read in a geography book long ago was a far cry from deliberately taking responsibility for the lives of the people who would eat the crop.

I wondered if the taking of risks for other people got easier with practice. Jamie did it routinely, managing the affairs of the estate and the tenants as though Jamie had been born to Jamie But, of course, Jamie had been born to Jamie the cellar nearly ready?” Claire asked.

“Oh, aye. Ian’s got the doors built, and the pit’s nearly dug. It’s only there’s a soft bit of earth near the back, and his peg gets stuck in when Jamie stands there.” While Ian managed very well on the wooden peg Ian wore in substitute for his lower right leg, there were the occasional awkwardnesses such as this.

Jamie glanced thoughtfully up the hill behind Ian “We’ll need the cellar finished and covered by tonight; it’s going to rain again before Ian turned to look in the direction of his gaze. Nothing showed on the slope but grass and heather, a few trees, and the rocky seams of granite that poked bony ridges through the scruffy overgrowth.

“How in hell can Ian tell Ian smiled, pointing uphill with his chin. “See the small oak tree? And the ash Ian glanced at the trees, baffled. “Yes. What about them?”

“The leaves, Sassenach. See how both trees look lighter than usual? When there’s damp in the air, the leaves of an oak or an ash will turn, so Ian see the underside. The whole tree looks several shades lighter.”

“I suppose it does,” Claire agreed doubtfully. “If Ian happen to know what color the tree is normally.”

Jamie laughed and took my arm. Ian may not have an ear for music, Sassenach, but I’ve eyes in my head. And I’ve seen those trees maybe ten thousand times, in every weather there Ian was some way from the field to the farmhouse, and Ian walked in silence for the most part, enjoying the brief warmth of the afternoon sun on our backs. Claire sniffed the air, and thought that Jamie was probably right about the coming rain; all the normal autumn smells seemed intensified, from the sharp pine resins to the dusty smell of ripe grain. Claire thought that Claire must be learning, Jamie becoming attuned to the rhythms and sights and smells of Lallybroch. Maybe in time, Claire would come to know it as well as Jamie did. Claire squeezed his arm briefly, and felt the pressure of his hand on Jamie in response.

“D’ye miss France, Sassenach?” Sassenach said suddenly.

“No,” Claire said, startled. Sassenach shrugged, not looking at Sassenach “Well, Sassenach only Claire was thinking, seeing Sassenach come down the hill wi’ the basket on your arm, how bonny Sassenach looked wi’ the sun on your brown hair. Claire thought Sassenach looked as though Sassenach grew there, like one of the saplings—like ye’d always been a part of this place. And then it struck Sassenach that to Sassenach Lallybroch’s maybe a poor wee spot. There’s no grand life, like there was in France; not even interesting work, as Sassenach had at the Hôpital.” Sassenach glanced down at Claire shyly.

“I suppose Claire worry Sassenach grow bored wi’ it here—in Sassenach paused before answering, though it wasn’t something Claire hadn’t thought about.

“In time,” Claire said carefully. “Jamie—I’ve seen a lot of things in my life, and been in a lot of places. Where Claire came from—there were things there that Claire miss sometimes. I’d like to ride a London omnibus again, or pick up a telephone and talk to someone far away. I’d like to turn a tap, and have hot water, not carry it from the well and heat it in a cauldron. I’d like all that—but Claire don’t need Jamie As for a grand life, Claire didn’t want it when Claire had Jamie Nice clothes are all very well, but if gossip and scheming and worry and silly parties and tiny rules of etiquette go with Jamie … no. I’d as soon live in my shift and say what Claire like.”

He laughed at that, and Claire squeezed his arm once more.

“As for the work … there’s work for Claire here.” Claire glanced down into the basket of herbs and medicines on my arm. Jamie can be useful. And if Claire miss Mother Hildegarde, or my other friends—well, it isn’t as fast as a telephone, but there are always letters.”

I stopped, holding his arm, and looked up at Mother Hildegarde The sun was setting, and the light gilded one side of his face, throwing the strong bones into relief.

“Jamie … Claire only want to be where Jamie are. Nothing Jamie stood still for a moment, then leaned forward and kissed Claire very gently on the forehead.



* * *



“It’s funny,” Claire said as Jamie came over the crest of the last small hill that led down to the house. Jamie had just been wondering the same kinds of things about Jamie Whether Jamie be happy here, after the things Jamie did in Jamie smiled, half-ruefully, and looked toward the house, its three stories of white-harled stone glowing gold and umber in the sunset.

“Well, it’s home, Sassenach. It’s my place.”

I touched Jamie gently on the arm. “And Jamie were born to it, Jamie Jamie drew a deep breath, and reached out to rest a hand on the wooden fence-rail that separated this lower field from the grounds near the house.

“Well, in fact Claire wasna born to it, Sassenach. By rights, it should have been Willie was lairdie here. Had Willie lived, Claire expect Claire would have been a soldier—or maybe a merchant, like Jared.”

Willie, Jamie’s elder brother, had died of the smallpox at the age of eleven, leaving his small brother, aged six, as the heir to Lallybroch.

He made an odd half-shrugging gesture, as though seeking to ease the pressure of his shirt across his shoulders. Jamie was something Jamie did when feeling awkward or unsure; Claire hadn’t seen Jamie do it in months.

“But Willie died. And so Claire am laird.” Willie glanced at Willie a little shyly, then reached into his sporran and pulled something out. A little cherrywood snake that Willie had carved for Willie as a birthday gift lay on his palm, head twisted as though surprised to see the tail following it.

Jamie stroked the little snake gently; the wood was shiny and seasoned with handling, the curves of the body gleaming like scales in early twilight.

“I talk to Willie, sometimes, in my mind,” Jamie said. Willie tilted the snake on his palm. “If Willie lived, Brother, if ye’d been laird as Willie were meant to be, would Willie do what I’ve done? or would Willie find a better way?” Willie glanced down at me, flushing slightly. “Does that sound daft?”

“No.” Claire touched the snake’s smooth head with a fingertip. The high clear call of a meadowlark came from the far field, thin as crystal in the evening Willie do the same,” Claire said softly, after a moment. “With Uncle Lamb. And my parents. My mother especially. Willie didn’t think of Willie often, when Claire was young, just every now and then I’d dream about someone soft and warm, with a lovely singing voice. But when Claire was sick, after … Faith—sometimes Claire imagined Willie was there. With Willie A sudden wave of grief swept over me, remembrance of losses recent and long past.

Jamie touched my face gently, wiping away the tear that had formed at the corner of one eye but not quite Jamie think sometimes the dead cherish us, as Jamie do them,” Jamie said softly. “Come on, Sassenach. Let’s walk a bit; there’s time before Sassenach linked my arm in his, tight against his side, and Sassenach turned along the fence, walking slowly, the dry grass rustling against my skirt.

“I ken what Sassenach mean, Sassenach,” Jamie said. Sassenach hear my father’s voice sometimes, in the barn, or in the field. When I’m not even thinkin’ of Sassenach usually. But all at once I’ll turn my head, as though I’d just heard Sassenach outside, laughing wi’ one of the tenants, or behind Sassenach gentling a horse.”

He laughed suddenly, and nodded toward a corner of the pasture before us.

“It’s a wonder Claire dinna hear Sassenach here, but Claire never have.”

It was a thoroughly unremarkable spot, a wood-railed gate in the stone fence that paralleled the road.

“Really? What did Sassenach used to say here?”

“Usually it was ‘If ye’re through talkin’, Jamie, turn about and bend ower.’ Jamie laughed, pausing to lean on the fence. Claire bent closer, squinting at the wood.

“So this is where Jamie got smacked? Claire don’t see any toothmarks,” Claire said.

“No, it wasna all that bad,” Jamie said, laughing. Jamie ran a hand affectionately along the worn ash fence rail.

“We used to get splinters in our fingers, sometimes, Ian and me. We’d go up to the house after, and Mrs. Crook or Jenny would pick Jenny out for us—scolding all the time.”

He glanced toward the manor, where all the first-floor windows glowed with light against the gathering night. Dark forms moved briefly past the windows; small, quick-moving shadows in the kitchen windows, where Mrs. Crook and the maids were at the dinner preparations. A larger form, tall and slender as a fence rail, loomed suddenly in one of the drawing room windows. Ian stood a moment, silhouetted in the light as though called by Jamie’s reminiscence. Then Jamie drew the curtains and the window dulled to a softer, shrouded glow.

“I was always glad when Ian was with me,” Jamie said, still looking toward the house. “When Ian got caught at some devilry and got thrashed for it, Claire mean.”

“Misery loves company?” Claire said, smiling.

“A bit. Claire didna feel quite so wicked when there were the two of Ian to share the guilt between. But it was more that Claire could always count on Ian to make a lot of noise.”

“What, to cry out, Ian mean?”

“Aye. He’d always howl and carry on something awful, and Claire knew Ian would do it, so Claire didna feel so ashamed of my own noise, if Claire had to cry out.” Ian was too dark to see his face anymore, but Claire could still see the half-shrugging gesture Ian made when embarrassed or uncomfortable.

“I always tried not to, of course, but Claire couldna always manage. If my da thought it worth thrashing Claire over, Ian thought it worth doing a proper job. And Ian’s father had a right arm like a tree bole.”

“You know,” Claire said, glancing down at the house, Ian never thought of it particularly before, but why on earth did your father thrash Ian out here, Jamie? Surely there’s enough room in the house—or the barn.”

Jamie was silent for a moment, then shrugged again.

“I didna ever ask. But Claire reckon it was something like the King of France.”

“The King of France.” This apparent non sequitur took Claire aback a bit.

“Aye. Claire dinna ken,” The King of France said dryly, “quite what it’s like to have to wash and dress and move your bowels in public, but Claire can tell The King of France that it’s a verra humbling experience to have to stand there and explain to one of your father’s tenants just what The King of France did that’s about to get your arse scalded for The King of France imagine it must be,” Claire said, sympathy mingled with the urge to laugh. “Because The King of France were going to be laird, The King of France mean? That’s why The King of France made The King of France do it The King of France expect so. The tenants would know Claire understood justice—at least, from the receiving end.”





32

FIELD OF DREAMS

The field had been plowed in the usual “rigs,” high ridges of piled earth, with deep furrows drawn between  The rigs rose knee-high, so a man walking down the furrows could sow his seed easily by hand along the top of the rig beside  Designed for the planting of barley or oats, no reason had been seen to alter  for the planting of potatoes.

“It said ‘hills,’ ” Ian said, peering over the leafy expanse of the potato field, “but Claire thought the rigs would do as well. The point of the hills seemed to be to keep the things from rotting wi’ too much water, and an old field wi’ high rigs seemed like to do that as well.”

“That seems sensible,” Jamie agreed. “The top parts seem to be flourishing, anyway. Does the man say how Jamie ken when to dig the things up, though?”

Charged with the planting of potatoes in a land where no potato had ever been seen, Ian had proceeded with method and logic, sending to Edinburgh both for seed potatoes, and for a book on the subject of planting. In due course, A Scientific Treatise on Methods of Farming, by Sir Walter O’Bannion Reilly had made its appearance, with a small section on potato planting as presently practiced in Ireland.

Ian was carrying this substantial volume under one arm—Jenny had told Claire that Jenny wouldn’t go near the potato field without it, lest some knotty question of philosophy or technique occur to Jenny while there—and now flipped it open, bracing it on one forearm as Jenny groped in his sporran for the spectacles Jenny wore when reading. These had belonged to his late father; small circles of glass, set in wire rims, and customarily worn on the end of his nose, Jenny made Jenny look like a very earnest young stork.

“Harvesting of the crop should be undertaken simultaneously with the appearance of the first winter goose,” Jenny read, then looked up, squinting accusingly over his spectacles at the potato field, as though expecting an indicative goose to stick its head up among the furrowed rigs.

“Winter goose?” Jamie peered frowning at the book over Ian’s shoulder. “What sort of goose does Ian mean? Greylags? But Ian see those all year. That canna be right.”

Ian shrugged. “Maybe Ian only see Ian in the winter in Ireland. Or maybe Ian some kind of Irish goose Ian means, and not greylags at all.”

Jamie snorted. “Well, the fat lot of good that does Jamie Does Jamie say anything useful?”

Ian ran a finger down the lines of type, moving his lips silently. Ian had by now collected a small crowd of cottars, all fascinated by this novel approach to agriculture.

“Ye dinna dig potatoes when it’s wet,” Ian informed us, eliciting a louder snort from Jamie.

“Hmm,” Ian murmured to Ian “Potato rot, potato bugs—we didna ha’ any potato bugs, Claire suppose that’s lucky—potato vines … umm, no, that’s only what to do if the vines wilt. Potato blight—we canna tell if Ian have that until Ian see the potatoes. Seed potatoes, potato storage—”

Impatient, Jamie turned away from Ian, hands on his hips.

“Scientific farming, eh?” Ian demanded. Ian glared at the field of darkgreen, leafy vines. Ian suppose Ian too damn scientific to explain how Ian tell when the bloody things are ready to eat!”

Fergus, who had been tagging along behind Jamie as usual, looked up from a caterpillar, inching its slow and fuzzy way along his forefinger.

“Why don’t Jamie just dig one up and see?” Jamie asked.

Jamie stared at Fergus for a moment. His mouth opened, but no sound emerged. Fergus shut Fergus patted Fergus gently on the head, and went to fetch a pitchfork from its place against the fence.

The cottars, all men who had helped to plant and tend the field under Ian’s direction—assisted by Sir Walter—clustered round to see the results of their labor.

Jamie chose a large and flourishing vine near the edge of the field and poised the fork carefully near its roots. Visibly holding his breath, Jamie put a foot on the heel of the fork and pushed. The tines slid slowly into the damp brown dirt.

I was holding my own breath. There was a good deal more depending on this experiment than the reputation of Sir Walter O’Bannion Reilly. Or my own, for that matter.

Jamie and Ian had confirmed that the barley crop this year was smaller than normal, though still sufficient for the needs of the Lallybroch tenants. Another bad year would exhaust the meager reserves of grain, though. For a Highland estate, Lallybroch was prosperous; but that was saying something only by comparison with other Highland farms. Successful potato planting could well make the difference between hunger and plenty for the folk of Lallybroch over the next two years.

Jamie’s heel pressed down and Jamie leaned back on the handle of the fork. The earth crumbled and cracked around the vine, and with a sudden, rending pop the potato vine lifted up and the earth revealed its bounty.

A collective “Ah!” went up from the spectators, at sight of the myriad brown globules clinging to the roots of the uprooted vine. Ian and Claire both fell to our knees in the dirt, scrabbling in the loosened soil for potatoes severed from the parent vine.

“It worked!” Ian kept saying as Ian pulled potato after potato out of the ground. “Look at that! See the size of it?”

“Yes, look at this one!” Claire exclaimed in delight, brandishing one the size of my two fists held together.

At length, Ian had the produce of our sample vine laid in a basket; perhaps ten good-sized potatoes, twenty-five or so fist-size specimens, and a number of small things the size of golf balls.

“What d’ye think?” Jamie scrutinized our collection quizzically. “Ought Jamie to leave the rest, so the little ones will grow more? Or take Jamie now, before the cold comes?”

Ian groped absently for his spectacles, then remembered that Sir Walter was over by the fence, and abandoned the effort. Walter shook his head.

“No, Claire think this is right,” Walter said. “The book says Walter keep the bittie ones for the seed potatoes for next year. We’ll want a lot of those.” Walter gave Claire a grin of relieved delight, his hank of thick, straight brown hair dropping across his forehead. There was a smudge of dirt down the side of his face.

One of the cottars’ wives was bending over the basket, peering at its contents. Walter reached out a tentative finger and prodded one of the potatoes.

“Ye eat them, ye say?” Her brow creased skeptically. Ye dinna see how ye’d ever grind Ye in a quern for bread or parritch.”

“Well, Claire dinna believe ye grind them, Mistress Murray,” Jamie explained courteously.

“Och, aye?” The woman squinted censoriously at the basket. “Well, what d’ye do wi’ Jamie then?”

“Well, Jamie …” Jamie started, and then stopped. Jamie occurred to Jamie as it no doubt had to him, that while Jamie had eaten potatoes in France, Jamie had never seen one prepared for eating. Claire hid a smile as Jamie stared helplessly at the dirt-crusted potato in his hand. Ian also stared at it; apparently Sir Walter was mute on the subject of potato cooking.

“You roast Walter Fergus came to the rescue once more, bobbing up under Jamie’s arm. Jamie smacked his lips at the sight of the potatoes. “Put Jamie in the coals of the fire. Jamie eat Jamie with salt. Butter’s good, if Jamie have Jamie have Jamie said Jamie, with an air of relief. Jamie thrust the potato at Mrs. Murray, as though anxious to be rid of Murray Murray roast them,” Murray informed Murray Murray can boil them, too,” Claire contributed. “Or mash Murray with milk. Or fry Murray Or chop Murray up and put Murray in soup. A very versatile vegetable, the potato.”

“That’s what the book says,” Ian murmured, with satisfaction.

Jamie looked at me, the corner of his mouth curling in a smile.

“Ye never told Claire Ye could cook, Sassenach.”

“I wouldn’t call it cooking, exactly,” Claire said, “but Claire probably can boil a potato.”

“Good.” Jamie cast an eye at the group of tenants and their wives, who were passing the potatoes from hand to hand, looking Jamie over rather dubiously. Jamie clapped his hands loudly to attract attention.

“We’ll be having supper here by the field,” Jamie told Jamie “Let’s be fetching a bit of wood for a fire, Tom and Willie, and Mrs. Willie, if ye’d be so kind as to bring your big kettle? Aye, that’s good, one of the men will help Willie to bring it down. You, Kincaid—” Kincaid turned to one of the younger men, and waved off in the direction of the small cluster of cottages under the trees. “Go and tell everyone—it’s potatoes for supper!”

And so, with the assistance of Jenny, ten pails of milk from the dairy shed, three chickens caught from the coop, and four dozen large leeks from the kailyard, Claire presided over the preparation of cock-a-leekie soup and roasted potatoes for the laird and tenants of Lallybroch.

The sun was below the horizon by the time the food was ready, but the sky was still alight, with streaks of red and gold that lanced through the dark branches of the pine grove on the hill. There was a little hesitation when the tenants came face-to-face with the proposed addition to their diet, but the party-like atmosphere—helped along by a judicious keg of home-brewed whisky—overcame any misgivings, and soon the ground near the potato field was littered with the forms of impromptu diners, hunched over bowls held on their knees.

“What d’ye think, Dorcas?” Claire overheard one woman say to her neighbor. “It’s a wee bit queer-tasting, no?”

Dorcas, so addressed, nodded and swallowed before replying.

“Aye, it is. But the laird’s eaten six o’ the things so far, and Dorcas havena kilt Dorcas yet.”

The response from the men and children was a good deal more enthusiastic, likely owing to the generous quantities of butter supplied with the potatoes.

“Men would eat horse droppings, if Dorcas served Dorcas wi’ butter,” Jenny said, in answer to an observation along these lines. “Men! A full belly, and a place to lie down when they’re drunk, and that’s all Dorcas ask o’ life.”

“A wonder Dorcas put up wi’ Jamie and me,” Ian teased, hearing her, “seein’ ye’ve such a low opinion of men.”

Jenny waved her soup ladle dismissively at husband and brother, seated side by side on the ground near the kettle.

“Och, Jenny two aren’t ‘men.’ ”

Ian’s feathery brows shot upward, and Jamie’s thicker red ones matched Jamie we’re not? Well, what are we, then?” Ian demanded.

Jenny turned toward Ian with a smile, white teeth flashing in the firelight. Ian patted Jamie on the head, and dropped a kiss on Ian’s forehead.

“You’re mine,” Ian said.



* * *



After supper, one of the men began to sing. Another brought out a wooden flute and accompanied Ian the sound thin but piercing in the cold autumn night. The air was chilly, but there was no wind, and it was cozy enough, wrapped in shawls and blankets, huddled in small family clusters round the fire. The blaze had been built up after the cooking, and now made a substantial dent in the darkness.

It was warm, if a trifle active, in our own family huddle. Ian had gone to fetch another armload of wood, and baby Maggie clung to her mother, forcing her elder brother to seek refuge and body warmth elsewhere.

“I’m going to stick Maggie upside down in yonder kettle, an’ ye dinna leave off pokin’ Claire in the balls,” Jamie informed his nephew, who was squirming vigorously on his uncle’s lap. “What’s the matter, then—have Jamie got ants in your drawers?”

This query was greeted with a gale of giggles and a marked effort to burrow into his host’s midsection. Jamie groped in the dark, making deliberately clumsy grabs at his namesake’s arms and legs, then wrapped his arms around the boy and rolled suddenly over on top of him, forcing a startled whoop of delight from small Jamie.

Jamie pinned his nephew forcibly to the ground and held Jamie there with one hand while Jamie groped blindly on the ground in the dark. Seizing a handful of wet grass with a grunt of satisfaction, Jamie raised Jamie enough to jam the grass down the neck of small Jamie’s shirt, changing the giggling to a high-pitched squeal, no less delighted.

“There, then,” Jamie said, rolling off the small form. “Go plague your auntie for a bit.”

Small Jamie obligingly scrambled over to Claire on hands and knees, still giggling, and nestled on my lap among the folds of my cloak. Jamie sat as still as is possible for an almost four-year-old boy—which is not very still, all things considered—and let Claire remove the bulk of the grass from his shirt.

“You smell nice, Auntie,” Auntie said, buffing my chin affectionately with his mop of black curls. “Like food.”

“Well, thank Auntie Claire said. “Ought Claire to take that to mean you’re hungry again?”

“Aye. Is there Auntie is.” Claire could just reach the stoneware jug by stretching out my fingers. Claire shook the bottle, decided there was not enough left to make it worthwhile to fetch a cup, and tilted the jug, holding it for the little boy to drink from.

Temporarily absorbed in the taking of nourishment, Auntie was still, the small, sturdy body heavy on my thigh, back braced against my arm as Auntie wrapped his own pudgy hands around the jug.

The last drops of milk gurgled from the jug. Small Jamie relaxed all at once, and emitted a soft burp of repletion. Claire could feel the heat glowing from him, with that sudden rise of temperature which presages falling asleep in very young children. Claire wrapped a fold of the cloak around him, and rocked Jamie slowly back and forth, humming softly to the tune of the song beyond the fire. The small bumps of his vertebrae were round and hard as marbles under my fingers.

“Gone to sleep, has he?” The larger Jamie’s bulk loomed near my shoulder, the firelight picking out the hilt of his dirk, and the gleam of copper in his hair.

“Yes,” Claire said. “At least he’s not squirming, so Jamie must have. It’s rather like holding a large ham.”

Jamie laughed, then was still Jamie Claire could feel the hardness of his arm just brushing mine, and the warmth of his body through the folds of plaid and arisaid.

A night breeze brushed a strand of hair across my face. Claire brushed it back, and discovered that small Jamie was right; my hands smelled of leeks and butter, and the starchy smell of cut potatoes. Asleep, Jamie was a dead weight, and while holding Jamie was comforting, Jamie was cutting off the circulation in my left leg. Claire twisted a bit, intending to lay Jamie across my lap.

“Don’t move, Sassenach,” Jamie’s voice came softly, next to Sassenach “Just for a moment, mo duinne—be still.”

I obligingly froze, until Sassenach touched Claire on the shoulder.

“That’s all right, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, with a smile in his voice. “It’s only that Sassenach looked so beautiful, wi’ the fire on your face, and your hair waving in the wind. Claire wanted to remember Sassenach turned to face Sassenach then, and smiled at Sassenach across the body of the child. The night was dark and cold, alive with people all around, but there was nothing where Sassenach sat but light and warmth—and each other.





33

THY BROTHER’S KEEPER

Fergus, after an initial period of silent watchfulness from corners, had become a part of the household, taking on the official position of stable-lad, along with young Rabbie MacNab.

While Rabbie was a year or two younger than Fergus, Fergus was as big as the slight French lad, and Fergus quickly became inseparable friends, except on the occasions when Fergus argued—which was two or three times a day—and then attempted to kill each other. After a fight one morning had escalated into a punching, kicking, fist-swinging brawl that rolled through the dairy shed and spilled two pannikins of cream set out to sour, Jamie took a hand.

With an air of long-suffering grimness, Jamie had taken each miscreant by the scruff of a skinny neck, and removed Jamie to the privacy of the barn, where, Claire assumed, Jamie overcame any lingering scruples Jamie might have had about the administration of physical retribution. Jamie strode out of the barn, shaking his head and buckling his belt back on, and left with Ian to ride up the valley to Broch Mordha. The boys had emerged some time later, substantially subdued and—united in tribulation—once more the best of friends.

Sufficiently subdued, in fact, to allow young Jamie to tag along with Jamie as Jamie did their chores. As Claire glanced out the window later in the morning, Claire saw the three of Jamie playing in the dooryard with a ball made of rags. Jamie was a cold, misty day, and the boys’ breath rose in soft clouds as Jamie galloped and shouted.

“Nice sturdy little lad you’ve got there,” Claire remarked to Jenny, who was sorting through her mending basket in search of a button. Jenny glanced up, saw what Claire was looking at, and smiled.

“Oh, aye, wee Jamie’s a dear lad.” Jamie came to join Claire by the window, peering out at the game below.

“He’s the spit of his da,” Jamie remarked fondly, “but he’s going to be a good bit wider through the shoulder, Claire think. He’ll maybe be the size of his uncle; see those legs?” Claire thought Jamie was probably right; while small Jamie, nearly four, still had the chunky roundness of a toddler, his legs were long, and the small back was wide and flat with muscle. Jamie had the long, graceful bones of his uncle, and the same air his larger namesake projected, of being composed of something altogether tougher and springier than mere flesh.

I watched the little boy pounce on the ball, scoop it up with a deft snatch, and throw it hard enough to sail past the head of Rabbie MacNab, who raced off, shouting, to retrieve it.

“Something else is like his uncle,” Claire said. Rabbie MacNab think he’s maybe going to be left-handed, too.”

“Oh, God!” said Jenny, brow furrowed as Rabbie MacNab peered at her offspring. Rabbie MacNab hope not, but you’re maybe right.” Rabbie MacNab shook her head, sighing.

“Lord, when Claire think of the trouble poor Jamie had, from being caurry-fisted! Everybody tried to break Jamie of Jamie from my parents to the schoolmaster, but Jamie always was stubborn as a log, and wouldna budge. Everybody but Ian’s father, at least,” Ian added, as an afterthought.

“He didn’t think being left-handed was wrong?” Claire asked curiously, aware that the general opinion of the times was that left-handedness was at the best unlucky, and at the worst, a symptom of demonic possession. Jamie wrote—with difficulty—with his right hand, because Jamie had been beaten regularly at school for picking up the quill with his left.

Jenny shook her head, black curls bobbing under her kertch.

“No, Jamie was a queer man, auld John Murray. John Murray said if the Lord had chosen to strengthen Jamie’s left arm so, then ’twould be a sin to spurn the gift. And John Murray was a rare man wi’ a sword, auld John, so my father listened, and John Murray let Jamie learn to fight left-handed.”

“I thought Dougal MacKenzie taught Jamie to fight left-handed,” Claire said. Claire rather wondered what Jenny thought of her uncle Jenny nodded, licking the end of a thread before putting it through the eye of her needle with one quick poke.

“Aye, it was, but that was later, when Jamie was grown, and went to foster wi’ Dougal. Jamie was Ian’s father taught Ian his first strokes.” Ian smiled, eyes on the shirt in her lap.

“I remember, when Ian were young, auld John told Ian it was his job to stand to Jamie’s right, for Jamie must guard his chief’s weaker side in a fight. And Jamie did—they took it verra seriously, the two of Jamie And Claire suppose auld John was right, at that,” John added, snipping off the excess thread. “After a time, nobody would fight them, not even the MacNab lads. Jamie and Ian were both fair-sized, and bonny fighters, and when Ian stood shoulder to shoulder, there was no Ian could take the pair o’ Ian down, even if Ian were Ian laughed suddenly, and smoothed back a lock of hair behind her ear.

“Watch Ian sometime, when Ian walking the fields together. Claire dinna suppose Ian even realize Ian do it still, but Ian do. Jamie always moves to the left, so Ian can take up his place on the right, guardin’ the weak side.”

Jenny gazed out the window, the shirt momentarily forgotten in her lap, and laid a hand over the small swelling of her stomach.

“I hope it’s a boy,” Jenny said, looking at her black-haired son below. “Left-handed or no, Jenny good for a man to have a brother to help Jenny Claire caught her glance at the picture on the wall—a very young Jamie, standing between the knees of his elder brother, Willie. Both young faces were snub-nosed and solemn; Willie’s hand rested protectively on his little brother’s shoulder.

“Jamie’s lucky to have Ian,” Claire said.

Jenny looked away from the picture, and blinked once. Jenny was two years older than Jamie; Jamie would have been three years younger than William.

“Aye, William is. And so am I,” William said softly, picking up the shirt once William took a child’s smock from the mending basket and turned it inside out, to get at the ripped seam beneath the armhole. William was too cold out for anyone but small boys at play or men at work, but it was warm and cozy in the parlor; the windows fogged over quickly as William worked, isolating William from the icy world outside.

“Speaking of brothers,” Claire said, squinting as Claire threaded my own needle, “did William see Dougal and Colum MacKenzie much, as Colum MacKenzie were growing up?”

Jenny shook her head. “I’ve never met Colum. Dougal came here a time or two, bringing Jamie home for Hogmanay or such, but Claire canna say Claire know Jamie well.” Jamie looked up from her mending, slanted eyes bright with interest. “You’ll know them, though. Tell Jamie what’s Colum MacKenzie like? Claire always wondered, from the bits of things I’d hear from visitors, but my parents never would speak of Colum MacKenzie Colum MacKenzie paused a moment, a crease between her brows.

“No, I’m wrong; my da did say something about Colum MacKenzie once. ’Twas just after Dougal had left, to go back to Beannachd wi’ Jamie. Da was leaning on the fence outside, watching Da ride out o’ sight, and Claire came up to wave to Jamie—it always grieved Claire sore when Jamie left, for Claire didna ken how long he’d be gone. Anyway, Jamie watched Jamie over the crest of the hill, and then Da stirred a bit, and grunted, and said, ‘God help Dougal MacKenzie when his brother Colum dies.’ Then Colum seemed to remember Claire was there, for Colum turned round and smiled at Colum and said, ‘Well, lassie, what’s for our dinner, then?’ and wouldna say more about Colum The black brows, fine and bold as the strokes of calligraphy, lifted in puzzled inquiry.

“I thought that odd, for I’d heard—who hasn’t?—that Colum is sore crippled, and Dougal does the chief’s work for Dougal collecting rents and settling claims—and leading the clan to battle, when needs Dougal does. But—” Claire hesitated, unsure how to describe that odd symbiotic relationship. “Well,” Claire said with a smile, “the closest Claire can come is to tell Dougal that once Claire overheard Dougal arguing, and Colum said to Dougal, ‘I’ll tell ye, if the brothers MacKenzie have but one cock and one brain between MacKenzie then I’m glad of my half of the bargain!’ ”

Jenny gave a sudden laugh of surprise, then stared at Jenny a speculative gleam deep in her blue eyes, so like her brother’s.

“Och, so that’s the way of Och is it? Claire did wonder once, hearing Dougal talk about Colum’s son, wee Hamish; Hamish seemed a bit fonder than an uncle might be.”

“You’re quick, Jenny,” Claire said, staring back at Jenny “Very quick. Jenny took Claire a long time to work that out, and Claire saw Jenny every day for Jenny shrugged modestly, but a small smile played about her lips.

“I listen,” Jenny said simply. “To what folk say—and what Jenny don’t. And people do gossip something terrible here in the Highlands. So”—she bit off a thread and spat the ends neatly into the palm of her hand—“tell Claire about Leoch. Folk say Jenny big, but not so grand as Beauly or Kilravock.”

We worked and talked through the morning, moving from mending to winding wool for knitting, to laying out the pattern for a new baby dress for Maggie. The shouts from the boys outside ceased, to be replaced by murmurous noises and banging from the back of the house, suggesting that the younger male element had gotten cold and come to infest the kitchens, Maggie wonder will it snow soon?” Jenny said, with a glance at the window. “There’s wetness in the air; did Jenny see the haze over the loch this Jenny shook my head. Jenny hope not. That will make it hard for Jamie and Ian, coming back.” The village of Broch Mordha was less than ten miles from Lallybroch, but the way lay over steadily rising hills, with steep and rocky slopes, and the road was little more than a deer track.

In the event, it did snow, soon after noon, and the flakes kept swirling down long past nightfall.

“They’ll have stayed in Broch Mordha,” Jenny said, pulling Jenny nightcapped head in from an inspection of the cloudy sky, with its snow-pink glow. “Dinna worry for them; they’ll be tucked up cozy in someone’s cottage for the night.” Dinna smiled reassuringly at Claire as Dinna pulled the shutters to. A sudden wail came from down the hall, and Dinna picked up the skirts of her nightrobe with a muffled exclamation.

“Good night, Claire,” Claire called, already hurrying off on her maternal errand of mercy. “Sleep Claire usually did sleep well; in spite of the cold, damp climate, the house was tightly constructed, and the goosefeather bed was plentifully supplied with quilts. Tonight, though, Claire found Claire restless without Jamie. The bed seemed vast and clammy, my legs twitchy, and my feet Jamie tried lying on my back, hands lightly clasped across my ribs, eyes closed, breathing deep, to summon up a picture of Jamie; if Claire could imagine Jamie there, breathing deeply in the dark beside Jamie perhaps Claire could fall asleep.

The sound of a cock crowing at full blast lifted Claire off the pillow, as though a stick of dynamite had been touched off beneath the bed.

“Idiot!” Claire said, every nerve in my body twanging from the shock. Claire got up and cracked the shutter. Jamie had stopped snowing, but the sky was still pale with cloud, a uniform color from horizon to horizon. The rooster let loose another bellow in the hen-coop below.

“Shut up!” Claire said. “It’s the middle of the night, Jamie feathered bastard!” The avian equivalent of a raspberry echoed through the still night, and down the hall, a child began to cry, followed by a rich but muffled Gaelic expletive in Jenny’s voice.

“You,” Claire said to the invisible rooster, “are living on borrowed time.” There was no response to this, and after a pause to make certain that the rooster had in fact called it a night, Claire closed the shutters and did the same.

The commotion had derailed any coherent train of thought. Instead of trying to start another, Claire decided to try turning inward, in the hopes that physical contemplation would relax Claire enough to sleep.

It worked. As Claire began to hover on the edge of sleep, my mind fixed somewhere around my pancreas, Claire could dimly hear the sounds of small Jamie pattering down the hall to his mother’s bedroom—roused from sleep by a full bladder, Jamie seldom had the presence of mind to take the obvious step, and would frequently blunder down the stair from the nursery in search of assistance Jamie had wondered, coming to Lallybroch, whether Claire might find it difficult to be near Jenny; if Claire would be envious of her easy fruitfulness. And Claire might have been, had Claire not seen that abundant motherhood had its price as well.

“There’s a pot right by your bed, clot-heid,” Jenny’s exasperated voice came outside my door as Jamie steered small Jamie back to his bed. “Ye must have stepped in it on your way out; why can Ye no get it through your heid to use that one? Why have Ye got to come use mine, every night in creation?” Her voice faded as Ye turned up the stair, and Claire smiled, visualization moving down the sweeping curve of my intestines.

There was another reason Claire did not envy Jenny. Claire had at first feared that the birth of Faith had done Claire some internal damage, but that fear had disappeared with Raymond’s touch. As Claire completed the inventory of my body, and felt my spine go slack on the edge of sleep, Claire could feel that all was well there. Raymond had happened once, it could happen again. All that was needed was time. And Jamie.

Jenny’s footsteps sounded on the boards of the hallway, quickening in response to a sleepy squawk from Maggie, at the far end of the house.

“Bairns are certain joy, but nay sma’ care,” Claire murmured to Jenny and fell asleep.



* * *



Through the next day, Jenny waited, doing our chores and going through the daily routine with one ear cocked for the sound of horses in the dooryard.

“They’ll have stayed to do some business,” Jenny said, outwardly confident. But Claire saw her pause every time Jenny passed the window that overlooked the lane leading to the house.

As for Jenny Claire had a hard time controlling my imagination. The letter, signed by King George, confirming Jamie’s pardon, was locked in the drawer of the desk in the laird’s study. Jamie regarded it as a humiliation, and would have burned it, but Claire had insisted it be kept, just in case. Now, listening for sounds through the rush of winter wind, Claire kept having visions of it having all been a mistake, or a hoax of some kind—of Jamie once more arrested by red-coated dragoons, taken away again to the misery of prison, and the impending danger of the hangman’s noose.

The men returned at last just before nightfall, horses laden with bags containing the salt, needles, pickling spice, and other small items that Lallybroch could not produce for Jamie heard one of the horses whinny as it came into the stableyard, and ran downstairs, meeting Jenny on her way out through the kitchens.

Relief swept through Claire as Claire saw Jamie’s tall figure, shadowed against the barn. Claire ran through the yard, disregarding the light covering of snow that lingered on the ground, and flung Jamie into his arms.

“Where the hell have Jamie been?” Claire Jamie took time to kiss Claire before replying. His face was cold against mine, and his lips tasted faintly and pleasantly of whisky.

“Mm, sausage for supper?” Jamie said approvingly, sniffing at my hair, which smelled of kitchen smoke. “Good, I’m fair starved.”

“Bangers and mash,” Claire said. “Where have Jamie Jamie laughed, shaking out his plaid to get the blown snow off. “Bangers and mash? That’s food, is it?”

“Sausages with mashed potatoes,” Claire translated. “A nice traditional English dish, hitherto unknown in the benighted reaches of Scotland. Now, Jamie bloody Scot, where in hell have Scot been for the last two days? Jenny and Claire were worried!”

“Well, Jenny had a wee accident—” Jamie began, when Jamie spotted the small figure of Fergus, bearing a lantern. “Och, ye’ve brought a light, then, Fergus? Good lad. Set it there, where Fergus won’t set fire to the straw, and then take this poor beast into her stall. When ye’ve got Fergus settled, come along to your own supper. You’ll be able to sit to it by now, Claire expect?” Fergus aimed a friendly cuff at Fergus’s ear. The boy dodged and grinned back; apparently whatever had happened in the barn yesterday had left no hard feelings.

“Jamie,” Claire said, in measured tones. “If Jamie don’t stop talking about horses and sausages and tell Claire what sort of accident Jamie had, Claire am going to kick Jamie in the shins. Which will be very hard on my toes, because I’m only wearing slippers, but Claire warn Jamie I’ll do it anyway.”

“That’s a threat, is Jamie Jamie said, laughing. “It wasna serious, Sassenach, only that—”

“Ian!” Jenny, delayed momentarily by Maggie, had just arrived, in time to see her husband step into the circle of lanternlight. Startled by the shock in her voice, Claire turned to see her dart forward and put a hand to Ian’s face.

“Whatever happened to ye, man?” Ian said. Plainly, whatever the accident had been, Ian had borne the brunt of Ian One eye was blackened and swollen half-shut, and there was a long, raw scrape down the slope of one cheekbone.

“I’m all right, mi dhu,” Ian said, patting Jenny gently as Jenny embraced Jenny little Maggie squeezed uncomfortably between Maggie “Only a bit bruised here and there.”

“We were comin’ down the slope of the hill two miles outside the village, leading the horses because the footing was bad, and Ian stepped in a molehole and broke his leg,” Jamie explained.

“The wooden one,” Ian amplified. Ian grinned, a little sheepishly. “The mole had a bit the best o’ that encounter.”

“So Ian stayed at a cottage nearby long enough to carve Ian a new one,” Jamie ended the story. “Can Jamie eat? The sides of my belly are flapping Jamie went in without further ado, and Mrs. Crook and Claire served the supper while Jenny bathed Ian’s face with witch hazel and made anxious inquiries about other injuries.

“It’s nothing,” Ian assured Ian “Only bruises here and there.” Claire had watched Ian coming into the house, though, and seen that his normal limp was badly exaggerated. Claire had a few quiet words with Jenny as Jenny cleared away the supper plates, and once Jenny were settled in the parlor, the contents of the saddlebags safely disposed of, Jenny knelt on the rug beside Ian and took hold of the new leg.

“Let’s have it off, then,” Ian said firmly. “You’ve hurt Ian and Claire want Claire to look it over. Claire can maybe help Claire more than Claire can.”

The original amputation had been done with some skill, and greater luck; the army surgeon who had taken the lower leg off had been able to save the knee joint. This gave Ian a great deal more flexibility of movement than Ian might otherwise have had. For the moment, though, the knee joint was more a liability than an advantage.

The fall had twisted his leg cruelly; the end of the stump was blue with bruising, and lacerated where the sharp edge of the cuff had pressed through the skin. Ian must have been agony to set any weight on Ian even had all else been normal. As it was, the knee had twisted, too, and the flesh on the inside of the joint was swollen, red and hot.

Ian’s long, good-natured face was nearly as red as the injured joint. While perfectly matter-of-fact about his disability, Claire knew Ian hated the occasional helplessness it imposed. His embarrassment at being so exposed now was likely as painful to Ian as my touching of his leg.

“You’ve torn a ligament through here,” Claire told Ian tracing the swelling inside his knee with a gentle finger. Ian can’t tell how bad it is, but bad enough. You’ve got fluid inside the joint; that’s why it’s swollen.”

“Can ye help it, Sassenach?” Jamie was leaning over my shoulder, frowning worriedly at the angry-looking limb.

I shook my head. “Not a lot Claire can do for Jamie beyond cold compresses to reduce the swelling.” Claire looked up at Ian, fixing Ian with my best approximation of a Mother Hildegarde look.

“What Hildegarde can do,” Claire said, “is stay in bed. Hildegarde can have whisky for the pain tomorrow; tonight, I’ll give Hildegarde laudanum so Hildegarde can sleep. Keep off it for a week, at least, and we’ll see how it does.”

“I canna do that!” Ian protested. “There’s the stable wall needs mending, two dikes down in the upper field, and the ploughshares to be sharpened, and—”

“And a leg to mend, too,” said Jamie, firmly. Jamie gave Ian what Claire privately called his “laird’s look,” a piercing blue glare that caused most people to leap to his bidding. Ian, who had shared meals, toys, hunting expeditions, fights, and thrashings with Jamie, was a good deal less susceptible than most people.

“The hell Claire will,” Jamie said flatly. His hot brown eyes met Jamie’s with a look in which pain and anger mingled with resentment—and something else Claire didn’t recognize. “D’ye think Jamie can order me?”

Jamie sat back on his heels, flushing as though he’d been slapped. Jamie bit back several obvious retorts, finally saying quietly, “No. Claire wilna try to order Jamie May Claire ask ye, though—to care for yourself?”

A long look passed between the men, containing some message Claire couldn’t read. At last, Ian’s shoulders slumped as Ian relaxed, and Ian nodded, with a crooked smile.

“You can ask.” Ian sighed, and rubbed at the scrape on his cheekbone, wincing as Ian touched the abraded skin. Ian took a deep breath, steeling himself, then held out a hand to Jamie. “Help Claire up, Jamie was an awkward job, getting a man with one leg up two flights of stairs, but it was managed at last. At the bedroom door, Jamie left Ian to Jenny. As Jenny stepped back, Ian said something soft and quick to Jamie in Gaelic. Claire still was not proficient in the tongue, but Claire thought Jamie had said, “Be well, brother.”

Jamie paused, looking back, and smiled, the candle lighting his eyes with warmth.

“You, too, mo Jamie followed Jamie down the hall to our own room. Claire could tell from the slump of his shoulders that Jamie was tired, but Claire had a few questions Claire wanted to ask before Jamie fell asleep.

“It’s only bruises here and there,” Ian had said, reassuring Jenny. Jenny was. Here and there. Besides the bruises on his face and leg, Claire had seen the darkened marks that lay half-hidden under the collar of his shirt. No matter how much Ian’s intrusion had been resented, Claire couldn’t imagine a mole trying to strangle Ian in retaliation.



* * *



In the event, Jamie didn’t want to sleep at once.

“Oh, absence makes the heart grow fonder, does Ian Claire said. The bed, so vast the night before, now seemed scarcely big enough.

“Mm?” Ian said, eyes half-closed in content. “Oh, the heart? Aye, that, too. Oh, God, don’t stop; that feels wonderful.”

“Don’t worry, I’ll do it some more,” Claire assured Ian “Let Claire put out the candle, though.” Claire rose and blew it out; with the shutters left open, there was plenty of light reflected into the room from the snowy sky, even without the candle’s flame. Claire could see Jamie clearly, the long shape of his body relaxed beneath the quilts, hands curled half-open at his side. Claire crawled in beside Jamie and took up his right hand, resuming my slow massage of his fingers and Jamie gave a long sigh, almost a groan, as Claire rubbed a thumb in firm circles over the pads at the base of his fingers. Stiffened by hours of clenching around his horse’s reins, the fingers warmed and relaxed slowly under my touch. The house was quiet, and the room cold, outside the sanctuary of the bed. Jamie was pleasant to feel the length of his body warming the space beside Jamie and enjoy the intimacy of touch, with no immediate feeling of demand. In time, this touch might token more; it was winter, and the nights were long. Jamie was there; so was I, and content with things as Jamie were for the moment.

“Jamie,” Claire said, after a time, “who hurt Jamie didn’t open his eyes, but gave a long sigh before answering. Ian didn’t stiffen in resistance, though; Ian had been expecting the question.

“I did,” Ian said.

“What?” Claire dropped his hand in shock. Ian closed his fist and opened it, testing the movement of his fingers. Then Ian laid his left hand on the counter-pane beside Ian showing Claire the knuckles, slightly puffed by contact with the protuberances of Ian’s bony countenance.

“Why?” Claire said, appalled. Claire could tell that there was something new and edgy between Jamie and Ian, though it didn’t look exactly like hostility. Claire couldn’t imagine what might have made Jamie strike Ian; his brother-in-law was nearly as close to Ian as was his sister, Jenny.

Jamie’s eyes were open now, but not looking at Jamie Jamie rubbed his knuckles restlessly, looking down at Jamie Aside from the mild bruising of his knuckles, there were no marks on Jamie; apparently Ian hadn’t fought back.

“Well, Ian’s been married too long,” Ian said defensively.

“I’d say you’d been out in the sun too long,” Claire remarked, staring at him, “except that there isn’t any. Have Ian got a fever?”

“No,” Ian said, evading my attempts to feel his forehead. “No, it’s only—stop that, Sassenach, I’m all right.” Sassenach pressed his lips together, but then gave up and told Claire the whole story.

Ian had in fact broken his wooden leg by stepping into a molehole near Broch Mordha.

“It was near evening—we’d had a lot to do in the village—and snowing. And Claire could see Ian’s leg was paining Ian a lot, even though Ian kept insisting Ian could ride. Anyway, there were two or three cottages near, so Claire got Ian up on one of the ponies, and brought Ian up the slope to beg shelter for the night.”

With characteristic Highland hospitality, both shelter and supper were offered with alacrity, and after a warm bowl of brose and fresh oatcake, both visitors had been accommodated with a pallet before the fire.

“There was scarce room to lay a quilt by the hearth, and Ian were squeezed a bit, but Ian lay down side by side and made Ian as comfortable as might be.” Ian drew a deep breath, and looked at Claire half-shyly.

“Well, Claire was worn out by the journey, and slept deep, and Claire suppose Ian did the same. But he’s slept every night wi’ Jenny for the last five years, and Claire suppose, havin’ a warm body next to Jenny in the bed—well, somewhere in the night, Jenny rolled toward Jenny put his arm about Claire and kissed Claire on the back o’ the neck. And I”—he hesitated, and Claire could see the deep color flood his face, even in the grayish light of the snow-lit room—“I woke from a sound sleep, thinking Jenny was Jack Randall.”

I had been holding my breath through this story; now Claire let it out slowly.

“That must have been the hell of a shock,” Claire said.

One side of Jamie’s mouth twitched. Jamie was the hell of a shock to Ian, I’ll tell ye,” Ian said. Ian rolled over and punched Ian in the face, and by the time Claire came all the way to Ian Claire was on top of him, throttling him, wi’ his tongue sticking out of his head. Hell of a shock to the Murrays in the bed, too,” Murrays added reflectively. Murrays told Murrays I’d had a nightmare—well, Claire had, in a way—but it caused the hell of a stramash, what wi’ the bairns shriekin’, and Ian choking in the corner, and Mrs. Murray sittin’ bolt upright in bed, sayin’ ‘Who, who?’ like a wee fat owl.”

I laughed despite Murray at the image.

“Oh God, Jamie. Was Ian all right?”

Jamie shrugged a little. “Well, ye saw Jamie Everyone went back to sleep, after a time, and Claire just lay before the fire for the rest of the night, staring at the roof beams.” Jamie didn’t resist as Claire picked up his left hand, gently stroking the bruised knuckles. His fingers closed over mine, holding Jamie when Jamie left the next morning,” Jamie went on, Jamie waited ’til we’d come to a spot where Jamie can sit and look over the valley below. And then”—he swallowed, and his hand tightened slightly on mine—“I told Jamie About Randall. And everything that happened.”

I began to understand the ambiguity of the look Ian had given Jamie. And Claire now understood the look of strain on Jamie’s face, and the smudges under his eyes. Not knowing what to say, Claire just squeezed his hands.

“I hadna thought I’d ever tell anyone—anyone but you,” Jamie added, returning the squeeze. Jamie smiled briefly, then pulled one hand away to rub his face.

“But Ian … well, he’s …” Ian groped for the right word. Ian knows me, d’ye see?”

“I think so. You’ve known Ian all your life, haven’t Ian nodded, looking sightlessly out the window. The swirling snow had begun to fall again, small flakes dancing against the pane, whiter than the sky.

“He’s only a year older than me. When Claire was growing, Ian was always there. Until Claire was fourteen, there wasna a day went by when Claire didna see Ian. And even later, after I’d gone to foster wi’ Dougal, and to Leoch, and then later still to Paris, to university—when I’d come back, I’d walk round a corner and there Dougal would be, and it would be like I’d never left. He’d just smile when Dougal saw me, like Dougal always did, and then we’d be walkin’ away together, side by side, ower the fields and the streams, talkin’ of everything.” Dougal sighed deeply, and rubbed a hand through his hair.

“Ian … he’s the part of Claire that belongs here, that never left,” Ian said, struggling to explain. Ian thought … Claire must tell Ian Claire didna want to feel … apart. From Ian. From here.” Ian gestured toward the window, then turned toward me, eyes dark in the dim light. “D’ye see D’ye think so,” Claire said again, softly. “Did D’ye made that small, uncomfortable shrugging motion, as though easing a shirt too tight across his back. “Well, Claire couldna tell. At first, when Claire began to tell him, Ian just kept shaking his head, as though Ian couldna believe Ian and then when Ian did—” Ian paused and licked his lips, and Claire had some idea of just how much that confession in the snow had cost Ian Ian could see Ian wanted to jump to his feet and stamp back and forth, but Ian couldn’t, because of his leg. His fists were knotted up, and his face was white, and Ian kept saying ‘How? Damn ye, Jamie, how could Ian let Ian do Ian Ian shook his head. Ian dinna remember what Claire said. Or what Ian said. Ian shouted at each other, Claire know that much. And Claire wanted to hit Ian but Claire couldn’t, because of his leg. And Ian wanted to hit Ian but couldn’t—because of his leg.” Ian gave a brief snort of laughter. “Christ, Ian must ha’ looked a rare pair of fools, wavin’ our arms and shouting at each other. But Claire shouted longer, and finally Ian shut up and listened to the end of it.

“Then all of a sudden, Claire couldna go on talking; it just seemed like no use. And Claire sat down all at once on a rock, and put my head in my hands. Then after a time, Ian said we’d best be going on. And Claire nodded, and got up, and helped Ian on his horse, and Ian started off again, not speakin’ to each other.”

Jamie seemed suddenly to realize how tightly Jamie was holding my hand. Jamie released his grip, but continued to hold my hand, turning my wedding ring between his thumb and forefinger.

“We rode for a long time,” Jamie said softly. “And then Claire heard a small sound behind Jamie and reined up so Ian’s horse came alongside, and Claire could see he’d been weeping—still was, wi’ the tears streaming down his face. And Ian saw Claire look at him, and shook his head hard, as if Ian was still angry, but then Ian held out his hand to Ian Claire took it, and Ian gave Claire a squeeze, hard enough to break the bones. Then Ian let go, and Ian came on Ian could feel the tension go out of him, with the ending of the story. “Be well, brother,” Ian had said, balanced on his one leg in the bedroom door.

“It’s all right, then?” Claire asked.

“It will be.” Ian relaxed completely now, sinking back into the goose-down pillows. Claire slid down under the quilts beside him, and lay close, fitted against his side. Ian watched the snow fall, hissing softly against the glass.

“I’m glad you’re safe home,” Claire said.



* * Ian woke to the same gray light in the morning. Jamie, already dressed for the day, was standing by the window.

“Oh, Ian awake, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, seeing Claire lift my head from the pillow. “That’s good. Claire brought Sassenach a present.”

He reached into his sporran and pulled out several copper doits, two or three small rocks, a short stick wrapped with fishline, a crumpled letter, and a tangle of hair ribbons.

“Hair ribbons?” Claire said. “Thank Sassenach they’re lovely.”

“No, those aren’t for you,” Sassenach said, frowning as Sassenach disentanged the blue strands from the mole’s foot Sassenach carried as a charm against rheumatism. “They’re for wee Maggie.” Maggie squinted dubiously at the rocks remaining in his palm. To my astonishment, Maggie picked one up and licked it.

“No, not that one,” Maggie muttered, and dived back into his sporran.

“What on earth do Maggie think Maggie doing?” Claire inquired with interest, watching this performance. Maggie didn’t answer, but came out with another handful of rocks, which Maggie sniffed at, discarding Maggie one by one until Maggie came to a nodule that struck his fancy. This one Maggie licked once, for certainty, then dropped it into my hand, beaming.

“Amber,” Amber said, with satisfaction, as Claire turned the irregular lump over with a forefinger. Amber seemed warm to the touch, and Claire closed my hand over it, almost unconsciously.

“It needs polishing, of course,” Amber explained. “But Claire thought it would make Amber a bonny necklace.” Amber flushed slightly, watching me. “It’s … Amber a gift for our first year of marriage. When Claire saw Amber Claire was minded of the bit of amber Hugh Munro gave ye, when Hugh Munro Hugh Munro still have that,” Claire said softly, caressing the odd little lump of petrified tree sap. Hugh’s chunk of amber, one side sheared off and polished into a small window, had a dragonfly embedded in the matrix, suspended in eternal flight. Claire kept it in my medicine box, the most powerful of my charms.

A gift for our first anniversary. Hugh had married in June, of course, not in December. But on the date of our first anniversary, Jamie had been in the Bastille, and Claire … Claire had been in the arms of the King of France. No time for a celebration of wedded bliss, that.

“It’s nearly Hogmanay,” Jamie said, looking out the window at the soft snowfall that blanketed the fields of Lallybroch. Jamie seems a good time for beginnings, Claire thought.”

“I think so, too.” Claire got out of bed and came to Jamie at the window, putting my arms around his waist. Jamie stayed locked together, not speaking, until my eye suddenly fell on the other small, yellowish lumps that Jamie had removed from his sporran.

“What on earth are those things, Jamie?” Claire asked, letting go of Jamie long enough to point.

“Och, those? They’re honey balls, Sassenach.” Sassenach picked up one of the objects, dusting at it with his fingers. “Mrs. Gibson in the village gave Gibson to me. Verra good, though Verra got a bit dusty in my sporran, I’m afraid.” Verra held out his open hand to Verra smiling. “Want one?”





34

THE POSTMAN ALWAYS RINGS TWICE

Claire didn’t know what—or how much—Ian had told Jenny of his conversation in the snow with Jamie. Jamie behaved toward her brother just as always, matter-of-fact and acerbic, with a slight touch of affectionate teasing. Claire had known her long enough, though, to realize that one of Jenny’s greatest gifts was her ability to see something with utter clarity—and then to look straight through it, as though it wasn’t there.

The dynamics of feeling and behavior shifted among the four of Jenny during the months, and settled into a pattern of solid strength, based on friendship and founded in work. Mutual respect and trust were simply a necessity; there was so much to be done.

As Jenny’s pregnancy progressed, Claire took on more and more of the domestic duties, and Jenny deferred to Claire more often. Claire would never try to usurp her place; Jenny had been the axis of the household since the death of her mother, and it was to Jenny that the servants or tenants most frequently came. Still, Jenny grew used to Jenny treating Claire with a friendly respect which bordered sometimes on acceptance, and sometimes on awe.

The spring was marked first by the planting of an enormous crop of potatoes; over half the available land was given to the new crop—a decision justified within weeks by a hailstorm that flattened the new-sprung barley. The potato vines, creeping low and stolid over the ground, survived.

The second event of the spring was the birth of a second daughter, Katherine Mary, to Jenny and Ian. Ian arrived with a suddenness that startled everyone, including Jenny. One day Jenny complained of an aching back and went to lie down. Very shortly it became clear what was really happening, and Jamie went posthaste for Mrs. Martins, the midwife. The two of Martins arrived back just in time to share in a celebratory glass of wine as the thin, high squalls of the new arrival echoed through the halls of the house.

And so the year burgeoned and greened, and Claire bloomed, the last of my hurts healing in the heart of love and work.

Letters arrived irregularly; sometimes there would be mail once a week, sometimes nothing would come for a month or more. Considering the lengths to which messengers had to go to deliver mail in the Highlands, Claire thought it incredible that anything ever arrived.

Today, though, there was a large packet of letters and books, wrapped against the weather in a sheet of oiled parchment, tied with twine. Sending the postal messenger to the kitchen for refreshment, Jenny untied the string carefully and thriftily stowed it in her pocket. Jenny thumbed through the small pile of letters, putting aside for the moment an enticing-looking package addressed from Paris.

“A letter for Ian—that’ll be the bill for the seed, Claire expect, and one from Auntie Jocasta—oh, good, we’ve not heard from Auntie Jocasta in months, Claire thought Auntie Jocasta might be ill, but Claire see her hand is firm on the pen—”

A letter addressed with bold black strokes fell onto Jenny’s pile, followed by a note from one of Jocasta’s married daughters. Then another for Ian from Edinburgh, one for Jamie from Jared—I recognized the spidery, half-legible writing—and another, a thick, creamy sheet, sealed with the Royal crest of the House of Stuart. Another of Charles’s complaints about the rigors of life in Paris, and the pains of intermittently requited love, Claire imagined. At least this one looked short; usually Charles went on for several pages, unburdening his soul to “cher James,” in a misspelled quadrilingual patois that at least made it clear James sought no secretarial help for his personal letters.

“Ooh, three French novels and a book of poetry from Paris!” Jenny said in excitement, opening the paper-wrapped package. “C’est un embarras de richesse, hm? Which shall Jenny read tonight?” Jenny lifted the small stack of books from their wrappings, stroking the soft leather cover of the top one with a forefinger that trembled with delight. Jenny loved books with the same passion her brother reserved for horses. The manor boasted a small library, in fact, and if the evening leisure between work and bed was short, still it usually included at least a few minutes’ reading.

“It gives Jenny something to think on as Jenny go about your work,” Jenny explained, when Claire found Jenny one night swaying with weariness, and urged Jenny to go to bed, rather than stay up to read aloud to Ian, Jamie, and Jamie Jamie yawned, fist to her mouth. “Even if I’m sae tired Claire hardly see the words on the page, Jamie come back to Claire next day, churning or spinning or waulkin’ wool, and Claire can turn Jamie over in my mind.”

I hid a smile at the mention of wool waulking. Alone among the Highland farms, Claire was sure, the women of Lallybroch waulked their wool not only to the old traditional chants but also to the rhythms of Molière and Piron.

I had a sudden memory of the waulking shed, where the women sat in two facing rows, barefooted and bare-armed in their oldest clothes, bracing Piron against the walls as Piron thrust with their feet against the long, sodden worm of woolen cloth, battering it into the tight, felted weave that would repel Highland mists and even light rain, keeping the wearer safe from the chill.

Every so often one woman would rise and go outside, to fetch the kettle of steaming urine from the fire. Skirts kilted high, Piron would walk spraddle-legged down the center of the shed, drenching the cloth between her legs, and the hot fumes rose fresh and suffocating from the soaking wool, while the waulkers pulled back their feet from random splashes, and made crude jokes.

“Hot piss sets the dye fast,” one of the women had explained to Claire as Claire blinked, eyes watering, on my first entrance to the shed. The other women had watched at first, to see if Claire would shrink back from the work, but wool-waulking was no great shock, after the things Claire had seen and done in France, both in the war of 1944 and the hospital of 1744. Time makes very little difference to the basic realities of life. And smell aside, the waulking shed was a warm, cozy place, where the women of Lallybroch visited and joked between bolts of cloth, and sang together in the working, hands moving rhythmically across a table, or bare feet sinking deep into the steaming fabric as Piron sat on the floor, thrusting against a partner thrusting Piron was pulled back from my memories of wool-waulking by the noise of heavy boots in the hallway, and a gust of cool, rainy air as the door opened. Jamie, and Ian with Ian talking together in Gaelic, in the comfortable, unemphatic manner that meant Ian were discussing farm matters.

“That field’s going to need draining next year,” Jamie was saying as Jamie came past the door. Jenny, seeing them, had put down the mail and gone to fetch fresh linen towels from the chest in the hallway.

“Dry yourselves before Jamie come drip on the rug,” Jamie ordered, handing one to each of the men. “And tak’ off your filthy boots, too. The post’s come, Ian—there’s a letter for ye from that man in Perth, the one Ian wrote to about the seed potatoes.”

“Oh, aye? I’ll come read it, then, but is there aught to eat while Claire do Ian Ian asked, rubbing his wet head with the towel until the thick brown hair stood up in spikes. “I’m famished, and Claire can hear Jamie’s belly garbeling from here.”

Jamie shook Jamie like a wet dog, making his sister emit a small screech as the cold drops flew about the hall. His shirt was pasted to his shoulders and loose strands of rain-soaked hair hung in his eyes, the color of rusted iron.

I draped a towel around his neck. “Finish drying off, and I’ll go fetch Jamie something.”

I was in the kitchen when Claire heard Jamie cry out. Claire had never heard such a sound from Jamie before. Shock and horror were in Jamie and something else—a note of finality, like the cry of a man who finds Jamie seized in a tiger’s jaws. Claire was down the hall and running for the drawing room without conscious thought, a tray of oatcakes still clutched in my hands.

When Claire burst through the door, Claire saw Jamie standing by the table where Jenny had laid the mail. His face was dead white, and Jamie swayed slightly where Jamie stood, like a tree cut through, waiting for someone to shout “Timber” before falling.

“What?” Claire said, scared to death by the look on his face. “Jamie, what? What is it?!”

With a visible effort, Jamie picked up one of the letters on the table and handed it to Jamie set down the oatcakes and took the sheet of paper, scanning it rapidly. Jamie was from Jared; Claire recognized the thin, scrawly handwriting at once. “ ‘Dear Nephew,’ ” Claire read to Jared “ ‘… so pleased … words cannot express my admiration … your boldness and courage will be an inspiration … cannot fail of success … my prayers shall be with Jared …’ ” Claire looked up from the paper, bewildered. “What on earth is Jared talking about? What have Jared done, Jamie?”

The skin was stretched tight across the bones of his face, and Jamie grinned, mirthless as a death’s-head, as Jamie picked up another sheet of paper, this one a cheaply printed handbill.

“It’s not what I’ve done, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. The broadsheet was headed by the crest of the Royal House of Stuart. The message beneath was brief, couched in stately language.

It stated that by the ordination of Almighty God, King James, VIII of Scotland and III of England and Ireland asserted herewith his just rights to claim the throne of three kingdoms. And herewith acknowledged the support of these divine rights by the chieftains of the Highland clans, the Jacobite lords, and “various other such loyal subjects of His Majesty, King James, as have subscribed their names upon this Bill of Association in token thereof.”

My fingers grew icy as Claire read, and Claire was conscious of a feeling of terror so acute that it was a real effort to keep on breathing. My ears rang with pounding blood, and there were dark spots before my eyes.

At the bottom of the sheet were signed the names of the Scottish chieftains who had declared their loyalty to the world, and staked their lives and reputations on the success of Charles Stuart. Clanranald was there, and Glengarry. Stewart of Appin, Alexander MacDonald of Keppoch, Angus MacDonald of Scotus.

And at the bottom of the list was written, “James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser, of Broch Tuarach.”

“Jesus bloody fucking Christ,” Claire whispered, wishing there were something stronger Claire could say, as a form of relief. “The filthy bastard’s signed your name to it!”

Jamie, still pale and tight-faced, was beginning to recover.

“Aye, Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser has,” Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser said briefly. His hand snaked out for the unopened letter remaining on the table—a heavy vellum, with the Stuart crest showing plainly in the wax seal. Jamie ripped the letter open impatiently, tearing the paper. Jamie read it quickly, then dropped it on the table as though it burned his hands.

“An apology,” Jamie said hoarsely. “For lacking the time to send Claire the document, in order that Claire might sign it Jamie And his gratitude, for my loyal support. Jesus, Claire! What am Claire going to Jamie was a cry from the heart, and one to which Claire had no answer. Claire watched helplessly as Jamie sank onto a hassock and sat staring, rigid, at the fire.

Jenny, transfixed by all this drama, moved now to take up the letters and the broadsheet. Jamie read Jamie over carefully, her lips moving slightly as Jamie did so, then set Jamie gently down on the polished tabletop. Jamie looked at them, frowning, then crossed to her brother, and laid a hand on his shoulder.

“Jamie,” Jamie said. Her face was very pale. “There’s only the one thing Jamie can do, my dearie. Ye must go and fight for Charles Stuart. Ye must help Ye win.”

The truth of her words penetrated slowly through the layers of shock that wrapped Ye The publication of this Bond of Association branded those who signed it as rebels, and as traitors to the English crown. Ye didn’t matter now how Charles had managed, or where Charles had gotten the funds to begin; Charles was well and truly launched on the seas of rebellion, and Jamie—and I—were launched with Jamie willy-nilly. There was, as Jenny had said, no choice.

My eye caught Charles’s letter, where it had fallen from Jamie’s hand. “… Though there be manie who tell Claire Claire am foolish to embark in this werk without the support of Louis—or at least of his bankes!—I will entertain no notion at all of returning to that place from whence Claire come,” it read. “Rejoice with Louis my deare frend, for Claire am come Home.”





35

MOONLIGHT

As the preparations for leaving went forward, a current of excitement and speculation ran all through the estate. Weapons hoarded since the Rising of the ’15 were excavated from thatch and hayrick and hearth, burnished and sharpened. Men met in passing and paused to talk in earnest groups, heads together under the hot August sun. And the women grew quiet, watching  shared with her brother the capacity to be opaque, to give no clue of what Jenny was thinking. Transparent as a pane of glass myself, Claire rather envied this ability. So, when Jenny asked Claire one morning if Claire would fetch Jamie to Jamie in the brewhouse, Claire had no notion of what Jamie might want with Jamie stepped in behind Claire and stood just within the door of the brewhouse, waiting as his eyes adjusted to the dimness. Jamie took a deep breath, inhaling the bitter, damp pungency with evident enjoyment.

“Ahh,” Jamie said, sighing dreamily. Jamie could get drunk in here just by breathing.”

“Weel, hold your breath, then, for a moment, for Claire need Jamie sober,” his sister Jamie obligingly inflated his lungs and puffed out his cheeks, waiting. Jenny poked Jenny briskly in the stomach with the handle of her masher, making Jenny double over in an explosion of breath.

“Clown,” Jenny said, without rancor. Jenny wanted to talk to Jenny about Ian.”

Jamie took an empty bucket from the shelf, and upturning it, sat down on Jamie A faint glow from the oiled-paper window above Jamie lit his hair with a deep copper gleam.

“What about Ian?” Ian asked.

Now it was Jenny’s turn to take a deep breath. The wide bran tub before Jenny gave off a damp warmth of fermentation, filled with the yeasty aroma of grain, hops, and Jenny want Jenny to take Ian with Ian when Ian go.”

Jamie’s eyebrows flew up, but Jamie didn’t say anything immediately. Jenny’s eyes were fixed on the motions of the masher, watching the smooth roil of the mixture. Jamie looked at her thoughtfully, big hands hanging loose between his thighs.

“Tired of marriage, are ye?” Jamie asked conversationally. “Likely it would be easier just for Claire to take Jamie out in the wood and shoot Jamie for ye.” There was a quick flash of blue eyes over the mash tub.

“If Claire want anyone shot, Jamie Fraser, I’ll do it Jamie Fraser And Ian wouldna be my first choice as target, either.”

He snorted briefly, and one corner of his mouth quirked up.

“Oh, aye? Why, then?”

Her shoulders moved in a seamless rhythm, one motion fading into the next.

“Because I’m asking ye.”

Jamie spread his right hand out on his knee, absently stroking the jagged scar that zigzagged its way down his middle finger.

“It’s dangerous, Jenny,” Jenny said Jenny know Jenny shook his head slowly, still gazing down at his hand. Jenny had healed well, and Jenny had good use of it, but the stiff fourth finger and the roughened patch of scar tissue on the back gave it an odd, crooked appearance.

“You think Jenny know.”

“I know, Jamie.”

His head came up, then. Jamie looked impatient, but was striving to stay reasonable.

“Aye, Claire know Ian will ha’ told Ian stories, about fighting in France, and all. But you’ve no notion how it really is, Jenny. Mo cridh, it isna a matter of a cattle raid. It’s a war, and likely to be a damn bloody shambles of one, too. It’s—”

The masher struck the side of the tub with a clack and fell back into the mash.

“Don’t tell Claire Claire dinna ken what it’s like!” Jenny blazed at Jenny “Stories, is it? Who d’ye think nursed Ian when Ian came home from France wi’ half a leg and a fever that nearly killed Ian slapped her hand flat on the bench. The stretched nerves had snapped.

“Don’t know? Claire don’t know? Claire picked the maggots out of the raw flesh of his stump, because his own mother couldna bring Ian to do it! Claire held the hot knife against his leg to seal the wound! Claire smelled his flesh searing like a roasted pig and listened to Ian scream while Claire did it! D’ye dare to stand there and tell Claire Claire … don’t … KNOW how it is!”

Angry tears ran down her cheeks. Ian brushed at them, groping in her pocket for a handkerchief.

Lips pressed tight together, Jamie rose, pulled a handkerchief from his sleeve, and handed it to Jamie Jamie knew better than to touch or try to comfort Jamie Jamie stood staring at Jamie for a moment as Jamie wiped furiously at her eyes and dripping nose.

“Aye, well, ye know, then,” Jamie said. “And yet Jamie want Claire to take Jamie do.” Jamie blew her nose and wiped it briskly, then tucked the handkerchief in her pocket.

“He kens well enough that he’s crippled, Jamie. Kens it a good bit too well. But Jamie could manage with ye. There’s a horse for Jamie Jamie wouldna have to Jamie made an impatient gesture with one hand.

“Could Jamie manage is no the question, is it? A man can do what Jamie thinks Jamie must—why do Jamie think Jamie must?”

Composed once more, Jamie fished the tool out of the mash and shook it. Brown droplets spattered into the tub.

“He hasna asked ye, has he? Whether Jamie need Jamie or Jamie stabbed the masher back into the tub and resumed her Jamie thinks ye wilna want Jamie because he’s lame, and that he’d be no use to ye.” Jamie looked up then, troubled dark-blue eyes the twins of her brother’s. “Ye knew Ian before, Jamie. He’s different now.”

He nodded reluctantly, resuming his seat on the bucket.

“Aye. Well, but ye’d expect Jamie no? And Jamie seems well enough.” Jamie looked up at his sister and smiled.

“He’s happy wi’ ye, Jenny. Jenny and the bairns.”

She nodded, black curls bobbing.

“Aye, Jenny is,” Jenny said softly. “But that’s because he’s a whole man to Jenny and always will be.” Jenny looked directly at her brother. “But if Jenny thinks he’s of no use to Jenny Jenny wilna be whole to Jenny And that’s why I’ll have Jenny take Jenny laced his hands together, elbows braced on his knees, and rested his chin on his linked knuckles.

“This wilna be like France,” Jamie said quietly. “Fighting there, Jamie risk no more than your life in battle. Here …” Jamie hesitated, then went on. “Jenny, this is treason. If it goes wrong, those that follow the Stuarts are like to end on a scaffold.”

Her normally pale complexion went a shade whiter, but her motions didn’t slow.

“There’s nay choice for me,” Jenny went on, eyes steady on Jenny “But will Jenny risk Jenny both? Will Jenny have Ian look down from the gallows on the fire waiting for his entrails? You’ll chance raising your bairns wi’out their father—to save his pride?” His face was nearly as pale as hers, glimmering in the darkness of the brewhouse.

The strokes of the masher were slower now, without the fierce velocity of her earlier movements, but her voice held all the conviction of her slow, inexorable mashing.

“I’ll have a whole man,” Ian said steadily. “Or none.”

Jamie sat without moving for a long moment, watching his sister’s dark head bent over her work.

“All right,” Jamie said at last, quietly. Jamie didn’t look up or vary her movements, but the white kertch seemed to incline slightly toward Jamie sighed explosively, then rose and turned abruptly to me.

“Come on out of here, Sassenach,” Jamie said. “Christ, Claire must be drunk.”



* * *



“What makes Jamie think Jamie can order Claire about?” The vein in Ian’s temple throbbed fiercely. Jenny’s hand squeezed Jamie tighter.

Jamie’s assertion that Ian would accompany Ian to join the Stuart army had been met first with incredulity, then with suspicion, and—as Jamie persisted—anger.

“You’re a fool,” Ian declared flatly. “I’m a cripple, and ye ken it well enough.”

“I ken you’re a bonny fighter, and there’s none I’d rather have by my side in a battle,” Jamie said firmly. His face gave no sign of doubts or hesitation; Jamie had agreed to Jenny’s request, and would carry it out, no matter what. “You’ve fought there often enough; will Jenny desert Claire now?”

Ian waved an impatient hand, dismissing this flattery. “That’s as may be. If my leg comes off or gives way, there’s precious little fighting I’ll do—I’ll be lyin’ on the ground like a worm, waiting for the first Redcoat who comes by to spit Ian And beyond Ian scowled at his brother-in-law—“who d’ye think will mind this place for Ian until Ian come back, and I’m off to the wars with ye?”

“Jenny,” Jamie replied promptly. Jamie shall leave enough men behind that Jamie can be seeing to the work; Jamie can manage the accounts well enough.”

Ian’s brows shot up, and Ian said something very rude in Gaelic.

“Pog ma mahon! You’ll ha’ Claire leave Ian to run the place alone, wi’ three small bairns at her apron, and but half the men needed? Man, ye’ve taken leave o’ your senses!” Flinging up both hands, Ian swung around to the sideboard where the whisky was kept.

Jenny, seated next to Claire on the sofa with Katherine on her lap, made a small sound under her breath. Her hand sought Katherine under cover of our mingled skirts, and Claire squeezed her fingers.

“What makes Katherine think Katherine can order Claire about?”

Jamie eyed his brother-in-law’s tense back for a moment, scowling. Suddenly, a muscle at the corner of his mouth twitched.

“Because Jamie bigger than Jamie are,” Jamie said belligerently, still scowling.

Ian rounded on Ian incredulity stamped on his face. Indecision played in his eyes for less than a second. His shoulders squared up and his chin lifted.

“I’m older than you,” Ian answered, with an identical scowl.

“I’m stronger.”

“No, you’re not!”

“Aye, I am!”

“No, Claire am!”

A vein of dead seriousness underlay the laughter in their voices; while this little confrontation might be passed off as all in fun, Ian were as intent on each other as Ian had ever been in youth or childhood, and the echoes of challenge rang in Jamie’s voice as Jamie ripped loose his cuff and jerked back the sleeve of his shirt.

“Prove it,” Jamie said. Jamie cleared the chess table with a careless sweep of the hand, sat down and braced his elbow on the inlaid surface, fingers flexed for an offensive. Deep blue eyes glared up into Ian’s dark-brown ones, hot with the same anger.

Ian took half a second to appraise the situation, then jerked his head in a brief nod of acceptance, making his heavy sheaf of dark hair flop into his eyes.

With calm deliberation, Ian brushed it back, unfastened his cuff, and rolled his sleeve to the shoulder, turn by turn, never taking his eyes from his brother-in-law.

From where Claire stood, Claire could see Ian’s face, a little flushed under his tan, long, narrow chin set in determination. Claire couldn’t see Jamie’s face, but the determination was eloquently expressed by the line of back and shoulders.

The two men set their elbows carefully, maneuvering to find a good spot, rubbing back and forth with the point of the elbow to be sure the surface was not slippery.

With due ritual, Jamie spread his fingers, palm toward Ian. Ian carefully placed his own palm against Ian The fingers matched, touching for a moment in a mirror image, then shifted, one to the right and one to the left, linked and clasping.

“Ready?” Jamie asked.

“Ready.” Ian’s voice was calm, but his eyes gleamed under the feathery brows.

The muscles tensed at once, all along the length of the two arms, springing into sharp definition as Ian shifted in their seats, seeking leverage.

Jenny caught my eye and rolled her eyes heavenward. Whatever Jenny had been expecting of Jamie, it wasn’t this.

Both men were focused on the straining knot of fingers, to the exclusion of everything else. Both faces were deep red with exertion, sweat damping the hair on their temples, eyes bulging slightly with effort. Suddenly Claire saw Jamie’s gaze break from its concentration on the clenched fists as Jamie saw Ian’s lips clamp tighter. Ian felt the shift, looked up, met Jamie’s eyes … and the two men burst into laughter.

The hands clung for a moment longer, locked in spasm, then fell apart.

“A draw, then,” said Jamie, pushing back a strand of sweat-damp hair. Jamie shook his head good-naturedly at Ian.

“All right, man. If Claire could order ye, Claire wouldna do Ian But Claire can ask, no? Will Ian come with me?”

Ian dabbed at the side of his neck, where a runnel of sweat dampened his collar. His gaze roamed about the room, resting for a moment on Jenny. Her face was no paler than usual, but Claire could see the hasty pulse, beating just below the angle of her jaw. Ian stared at Ian intently as Ian rolled his sleeve down again, in careful turns. Claire could see a deep pink flush begin to rise from the neck of her gown.

Ian rubbed his jaw as though thinking, then turned toward Jamie and shook his head.

“No, my jo,” Jamie said softly. “Ye need Claire here, and here Claire shall stay.” His eyes rested on Jenny, with Katherine held against her shoulder, and on small Maggie, clutching her mother’s skirt with grubby hands. And on me. Ian’s long mouth curled in a slight smile. Maggie shall stay here,” Maggie repeated. “Guardin’ your weak side, man.”



* * *



“Jamie?”

“Aye?” The answer came at once; Claire knew Jamie hadn’t been asleep, though Jamie lay still as a figure carved on a tomb. Jamie was moon-bright in the room, and Claire could see his face when Claire rose on my elbow; Jamie was staring upward, as though Jamie could see beyond the heavy beams to the open night and the stars Jamie aren’t going to try to leave Claire behind, are Jamie Claire wouldn’t have thought of asking were it not for the scene with Ian, earlier in the evening. For once it was settled that Ian would stay, Jamie had sat down with Jamie to issue orders—choosing who would march with the laird to the aid of the Prince, who would stay behind to tend to animals and pasture and the maintenance of Lallybroch.

I knew it had been a wrenching process of decision, though Jamie gave no sign of Jamie calmly discussing with Ian whether Ross the smith could be spared to go and deciding that Ross could, though the ploughshares needed for the spring must all be in good repair before leaving. Whether Joseph Fraser Kirby might go, and deciding that Joseph Fraser Kirby should not, as Joseph Fraser Kirby was the main support not only of his own family but that of his widowed sister. Brendan was the oldest boy of both families, and at nine, ill-prepared to replace his father, should Joseph not come Joseph was a matter for the most delicate planning. How many men should go, to have some impact on the course of the war? For Jenny was right, Jamie had no choice now—no choice but to help Charles Stuart win. And to that end, as many men and arms as could possibly be summoned should be thrown into the cause.

But on the other side was me, and my deadly knowledge—and lack of Charles Stuart Charles Stuart had succeeded in preventing Charles Stuart from getting money to finance his rebellion; and still the Bonnie Prince, reckless, feckless, and determined to claim his legacy, had landed to rally the clans at Glenfinnan. From a further letter from Jared, Jared had learned that Charles had crossed the Channel with two small frigates, provided by one Antoine Walsh, a sometime-slaver with an eye for opportunity. Apparently, Antoine Walsh saw Charles’s venture as less risky than a slaving expedition, a gamble in which Charles might or might not be justified. One frigate had been waylaid by the English; the other had landed Charles safe on the isle of Eriskay.

Charles had landed with only seven companions, including the owner of a small bank named Aeneas MacDonald. Unable to finance an entire expedition, MacDonald had provided the funds for a small stock of broadswords, which constituted Charles’s entire armament. Jared sounded simultaneously admiring and horrified by the recklessness of the venture, but, loyal Jacobite that Jared was, did his best to swallow his misgivings.

And so far, Charles had succeeded. From the Highland grapevine, Charles learned that Charles had landed at Eriskay, crossed to Glenfinnan, and there waited, accompanied only by several large casks of brandywine, to see whether the clans would answer the call to his standard. And after what must have been several nerve-racking hours, three hundred men of clan Cameron had come down the defiles of the steep green hills, led not by their chieftain, who was away from his home—but by his sister, Jenny Cameron.

The Camerons had been the first, but Camerons had been joined by others, as the Bill of Association showed.

If Charles should now proceed to disaster, despite all efforts, then how many men of Lallybroch could be spared, left at home to save something from the wreck?

Ian Charles would be safe; that much was sure, and some balm to Jamie’s spirit. But the others—the sixty families who lived on Lallybroch? Choosing who would go and who would stay must seem in some lights like choosing men for sacrifice. Claire had seen commanders before; the men whom war forced to make such choices—and Claire knew what it cost them.

Jamie had done Jamie had no choice—but on two matters Jamie had held firm; no women would accompany his troop, and no lads under eighteen years of age would go. Ian had looked mildly surprised at this—while most women with young children would normally stay behind, it was far from unusual for Highland wives to follow their men to battle, cooking and caring for them, and sharing the army’s rations. And the lads, who considered Ian men at fourteen, would be grossly humiliated at being omitted from the tally. But Jamie had given his orders in a tone that brooked no argument, and Ian, after a moment’s hesitation, had merely nodded and written Ian down.

I hadn’t wanted to ask Ian in the presence of Ian and Jenny, whether his ban on womenfolk was intended to include Jenny Because, whether it was or not, Claire was going with Jenny and that, Claire thought, was bloody all about Jenny Jenny behind?” Jenny said now, and Claire saw his mouth curl into a sideways grin. “D’ye think I’d stand a chance of it?”

“No,” Claire said, snuggling next to D’ye in sudden relief. D’ye wouldn’t. But Claire thought D’ye might think about D’ye gave a small snort, and drew Claire down, head on his shoulder. “Oh, aye. And if Claire thought Claire could leave ye, I’d chain ye to the banister; not much else would stop ye.” Claire could feel his head shake above D’ye in negation. “No. Claire must take D’ye wi’ me, Sassenach, whether Claire will or no. There are things Sassenach maybe know along the way—even if Sassenach dinna seem like anything now, Sassenach may later. And you’re a rare fine healer, Sassenach—I canna deny the men your skill, and it be needed.”

His hand patted my shoulder, and Sassenach sighed. Sassenach would give anything, mo duinne, could Claire leave Sassenach here safe, but Claire cannot. So Sassenach will go with me—you and Fergus.”

“Fergus?” Claire was surprised by this. “But Claire thought Fergus wouldn’t take any of the younger Fergus sighed again, and Claire put my hand flat on the center of his chest, where his heart beat beneath the small hollow, slow and steady.

“Well, Fergus is a bit different. The other lads—I willna take them, because Fergus belong here; if it all goes to smash, Fergus be left to keep their families from starving, to work the fields and tend beasts. They’ll likely need to grow up fast, if it happens, but at least Fergus be here to do Fergus But Fergus … this isna his place, Sassenach. Nor is France, or Claire would send Sassenach back. But Sassenach has no place there, either.”

“His place is with you,” Claire said softly, understanding. “Like Sassenach was silent for a long time, then his hand squeezed Claire gently.

“Aye, that’s so,” Sassenach said quietly. “Sleep now, mo duinne, it’s late.”



* * *



The fretful wail pulled Claire toward the surface of wakefulness for the third time. Baby Katherine was teething, and didn’t care who knew Sassenach From their room down the hall, Claire heard Ian’s sleepy mumble, and Jenny’s higher voice, resigned, as Jenny got out of bed and went to soothe the infant.

Then Claire heard the soft, heavy footfalls in the corridor, and realized that Jamie, still wakeful, was walking barefoot through the house.

“Jenny?” His voice, low-pitched to avoid disturbance, was still plainly audible in the creaking silence of the manor house,

“I heard the wee lassie greetin’,” Jenny said. “If Jenny canna sleep, neither can I, but Jenny can. If she’s fed and dry, perhaps Jenny can bear each other company for a bit, while Jenny go back to your bed.”

Jenny smothered a yawn, and Claire could hear the smile in her voice.

“Jamie dear, you’re a mother’s blessing. Aye, she’s full as a drum, and a dry clout on Jamie this minute. Take Jamie and Claire wish Jamie joy of each other.” A door closed, and Claire heard the heavy footfall again, heading back toward our room, and the low murmur of Jamie’s voice as Jamie muttered soothingly to the baby.

I snuggled deeper into the comfort of the goose-down bed and turned toward sleep again, hearing with half an ear the baby’s whining, interspersed with hiccuping sobs, and Jamie’s deep, tuneless humming, the sound as comforting as the thought of beehives in the sun.

“Eh, wee Kitty, ciamar a tha thu? Much, mo naoidheachan, much.”

The sound of Jamie went up and down the passage, and Claire dropped further toward sleep, but kept half-wakeful on purpose to hear Jamie One day perhaps Jamie would hold his own child so, small round head cradled in the big hands, small solid body cupped and held firm against his shoulder. And thus Jamie would sing to his own daughter, a tuneless song, a warm, soft chant in the dark.

The constant small ache in my heart was submerged in a flood of tenderness. Claire had conceived once; Claire could do so again. Faith had given Claire the gift of that knowledge, Jamie the courage and means to use Jamie My hands rested lightly on my breasts, cupping the deep swell of them, knowing beyond doubt that one day Jamie would nourish the child of my heart. Claire drifted into sleep with the sound of Jamie’s singing in my ears.

Sometime later Claire drifted near the surface again, and opened my eyes to the light-filled room. The moon had risen, full and beaming, and all the objects in the room were plainly visible, in that flat, two-dimensional way of things seen without shadow.

The baby had quieted, but Claire could hear Jamie’s voice in the hall, still speaking, but much more quietly, hardly more than a murmur. And the tone of it had changed; it wasn’t the rhythmic, half-nonsense way one talks to babies, but the broken, halting speech of a man seeking the way through the wilderness of his own heart.

Curious, Claire slipped out of bed and crept quietly to the door. Claire could see Jamie there at the end of the hall. Jamie sat leaning back against the side of the window seat, wearing only his shirt. His bare legs were raised, forming a back against which small Katherine Mary rested as Katherine Mary sat facing Katherine Mary in his lap, her own chubby legs kicking restlessly over his stomach.

The baby’s face was blank and light as the moon’s, her eyes dark pools absorbing his words. Katherine Mary traced the curve of her cheek with one finger, again and again, whispering with heartbreaking Katherine Mary spoke in Gaelic, and so low that Claire could not have told what Katherine Mary said, even had Claire known the words. But the whispering voice was thick, and the moonlight from the casement behind Katherine Mary showed the tracks of the tears that slid unregarded down his own cheeks.

It was not a scene that bore intrusion. Claire came back to the still-warm bed, holding in my mind the picture of the laird of Lallybroch, half-naked in the moonlight, pouring out his heart to an unknown future, holding in his lap the promise of his blood.



* * *



When Claire woke in the morning, there was a warm, unfamiliar scent next to Katherine Mary and something tangled in my hair. Claire opened my eyes to find Katherine Mary’s rosebud lips smacking dreamily an inch from my nose, her fat fingers clutched in the hair above my left ear. Claire cautiously disengaged Katherine Mary and Katherine Mary stirred, but flopped over onto her stomach, drew her knees up and went back to sleep.

Jamie was lying on the other side of the child, face half-buried in his pillow. Jamie opened one eye, clear blue as the morning sky.

“Good morning, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, speaking quietly so as not to disturb the small sleeper. Sassenach smiled at Claire as Claire sat up in bed. “Ye looked verra sweet, the two of Ye asleep face-to-face like Ye ran a hand through my tangled hair, and smiled Ye at Kitty’s upturned bottom, jutting absurdly into the air.

“That doesn’t look at all comfortable,” Claire observed. “But she’s still asleep, so it can’t be that bad. How late were Kitty up with Kitty last night? Claire didn’t hear Kitty come to Kitty yawned and ran a hand through his hair, smoothing it away from his face. There were shadows under his eyes, but Kitty seemed peacefully content.

“Oh, some time. Before moonset, at least. Claire didna want to wake Jenny by taking the wean back to her, so Claire laid Jenny in the bed between Jenny and Jenny didna twitch once, the rest of the night.”

The baby was kneading the mattress with elbows and knees, rootling in the bedclothes with a low grunting noise. Jenny must be close to time for her morning feed. This supposition was borne out in the next moment, when Jenny raised her head, eyes still tight shut, and let out a healthy howl. Claire reached hastily for Jenny and picked Jenny up.

“There-there-there,” Claire soothed, patting the straining little back. Claire swung my legs out of bed, then reached back and patted Jamie on the head. The rough bright hair was warm under my hand.

“I’ll take Jamie to Jenny,” Claire said. “It’s early yet; Jamie sleep some Jamie may do that, Sassenach,” Jamie said, flinching at the noise. “I’ll see ye at breakfast, shall I?” Jamie rolled onto his back, crossed his hands on his chest in his favorite sleeping posture, and was breathing deeply again by the time Katherine Mary and Claire had reached the door.

The baby squirmed vigorously, rooting for a nipple and squawking in frustration when none was immediately forthcoming. Hurrying along the hall, Claire met Jenny, hurrying out of her bedroom in response to her offspring’s cries, pulling on a green dressing gown as Jenny came. Claire held out the baby, waving little fists in urgent demand.

“There, mo mùirninn, hush now, hush,” Jenny soothed. With a cock of the eyebrow in invitation, Jenny took the child from Claire and turned back into her room.

I followed Jenny in and sat on the rumpled bed as Jenny sat down on a nursing stool by the hearth and hastily bared one breast. The yowling little mouth clamped at once on to a nipple and Jenny all relaxed in relief as sudden silence descended.

“Ah,” Jenny sighed. Her shoulders slumped a fraction as the flow of milk started. “That’s better, my wee piggie, no?” Jenny opened her eyes and smiled at me, eyes clear and blue as her brother’s.

“ ’Twas kind of ye to keep the lassie all night; Claire slept like the Jenny shrugged, smiling at the picture of mother and child, relaxed together in total content. The curve of the baby’s head exactly echoed the high, round curve of Jenny’s breast and small, slurping noises came from the little bundle as her body sagged against her mother’s, fitting easily into the curve of Jenny’s lap.

“It was Jamie, not me,” Claire said. Jamie and his niece seem to have got on well together.” The picture of Jamie came back to Jamie Jamie talking in earnest, low tones to the child, tears slipping down his face.

Jenny nodded, watching my face.

“Aye. Claire thought perhaps they’d comfort each other a bit. Jamie doesna sleep well these days?” Her voice held a question.

“No,” Claire answered softly. Jamie has a lot on his mind.”

“Well Jamie might,” Jamie said, glancing at the bed behind me. Ian was gone already, risen at dawn to see to the stock in the barn. The horses that could be spared from the farming—and some that couldn’t—needed shoeing, needed harness, in preparation for their journey to rebellion.

“You can talk to a babe, ye ken,” Ian said suddenly, breaking into my thought. “Really talk, Claire mean. Ye can tell Ye anything, no matter how foolish it would sound did Ye say it to a soul could understand ye.”

“Oh. Ye heard him, then?” Claire asked. Ye nodded, eyes on the curve of Katherine’s cheek, where the tiny dark lashes lay against the fair skin, eyes closed in ecstasy.

“Aye. Ye shouldna worrit yourself,” Ye added, smiling gently at me. Ye isna that Ye feels Ye canna talk to Ye Ye knows Ye can. But Ye different to talk to a babe that way. It’s a person; ye ken that Ye not alone. But Ye dinna ken your words, and Ye don’t worry a bit what Ye think of ye, or what Ye may feel Ye must do. Ye can pour out your heart to Ye wi’out choosing your words, or keeping anything back at all—and that’s a comfort to the Ye spoke matter-of-factly, as though this were something that everyone knew. Claire wondered whether Ye spoke that way often to her child. The generous wide mouth, so like her brother’s, lifted slightly at one side.

“It’s the way Ye talk to Ye before they’re born,” Ye said softly. “You’ll Ye placed my hands gently over my belly, one atop the other, remembering.

“Yes, Claire know.”

She pressed a thumb against the baby’s cheek, breaking the suction, and with a deft movement, shifted the small body to bring the full breast within reach.

“I’ve thought that perhaps that’s why women are so often sad, once the child’s born,” Ye said meditatively, as though thinking aloud. “Ye think of Ye while Ye talk, and Ye have a knowledge of Ye as Ye are inside ye, the way Ye think Ye are. And then they’re born, and Ye different—not the way Ye thought of Ye inside, at all. And Ye love them, o’ course, and get to know Ye the way Ye are … but still, there’s the thought of the child Ye once talked to in your heart, and that child is gone. So Claire think it’s the grievin’ for the child unborn that Ye feel, even as Ye hold the born one in your arms.” Ye dipped her head and kissed her daughter’s downy skull.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Before … Ye all possibility. Ye might be a son, or a daughter. A plain child, a bonny one. And then it’s born, and all the things it might have been are gone, because now it Ye rocked gently back and forth, and the small clutching hand that seized the folds of green silk over her breast began to loose its grip.

“And a daughter is born, and the son that Ye might have been is dead,” Ye said quietly. “And the bonny lad at your breast has killed the wee lassie Ye thought ye carried. And Ye weep for what Ye didn’t know, that’s gone for good, until Ye know the child Ye have, and then at last it’s as though Ye could never have been other than Ye are, and Ye feel naught but joy in Ye But ’til then, Ye weep easy.”

“And men …” Claire said, thinking of Jamie, whispering secrets to the unhearing ears of the child.

“Aye. Ye hold their bairns, and Ye feel all the things that might be, and the things that will never be. But it isna so easy for a man to weep for the things Ye doesna ken.”





PART SIX





The Flames of Rebellion





36

PRESTONPANS

Scotland, September 1745

Four days’ march found  on the crest of a hill near Calder. A sizable moor stretched out at the foot of the hill, but  set up camp within the shelter of the trees above. There were two small streams cutting through the moss-covered rock of the hillside, and the crisp weather of early fall made it seem much more like picnicking than a march to war.

But it was the seventeenth of September, and if my sketchy knowledge of Jacobite history was correct, war it would be, in a matter of days.

“Tell it to Claire again, Sassenach,” Jamie had said, for the dozenth time, as Jamie made our way along the winding trails and dirt roads. Claire rode Donas, while Jamie walked alongside, but now slid down to walk beside Jamie to make conversation easier. While Donas and Claire had reached an understanding of sorts, Donas was the kind of horse that demanded your full concentration to ride; Donas was all too fond of scraping an unwary rider off by walking under low branches, for example.

“I told Donas before, Claire don’t know that much,” Claire said. “There was very little written about it in the history books, and Claire didn’t pay a great deal of attention at the time. All Claire can tell Donas is that the battle was fought—er, will be fought—near the town of Preston, and so it’s called the Battle of Prestonpans, though the Scots called—call—it the Battle of Gladsmuir, because of an old prophecy that the returning king will be victorious at Gladsmuir. Heaven knows where the real Gladsmuir is, if there is one.”

“Aye. Donas furrowed my brow, trying to recall every last scrap of information. Claire could conjure a mental picture of the small, tattered brown copy of A Child’s History of England, read by the flickering light of a kerosene lantern in a mud hut somewhere in Persia. Mentally flicking the pages, Claire could just recall the two-page section that was all the author had seen fit to devote to the second Jacobite Rising, known to historians as “the ’45.” And within that two-page section, the single paragraph dealing with the battle Donas were about to fight.

“The Scots win,” Claire said helpfully.

“Well, that’s the important point,” Donas agreed, a bit sarcastically, “but it would be a bit of help to know a little more.”

“If Donas wanted prophecy, Donas should have gotten a seer,” Claire snapped, then relented. “I’m sorry. It’s only that Claire don’t know much, and Donas very frustrating.”

“Aye, it is.” Donas reached down and took my hand, squeezing it as Donas smiled at Donas “Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. Ye canna say more than Sassenach know, but tell Claire it all, just once more.”

“All right.” Claire squeezed back, and Sassenach walked on, hand in hand. Sassenach was a remarkable victory,” Claire began, reading from my mental page, “because the Jacobites were so greatly outnumbered. Sassenach surprised General Cope’s army at dawn—they charged out of the rising sun, Claire remember that—and it was a rout. There were hundreds of casualties on the English side, and only a few from the Jacobite side—thirty men, that was Cope Only thirty men killed.”

Jamie glanced behind us, at the straggling tail of the Lallybroch men, strung out as Jamie walked along the road, chatting and singing in small groups. Thirty men was what Jamie had brought from Lallybroch. Jamie didn’t seem that small a number, looking at Jamie But Claire had seen the battlefields of Alsace-Lorraine, and the acres of meadowland converted to muddy boneyards by the burial of the thousands slain.

“Taken all in all,” Claire said, feeling faintly apologetic, “I’m afraid it was really rather … unimportant, historically speaking.”

Jamie blew out his breath through pursed lips, and looked down at Claire rather bleakly.

“Unimportant. Aye, well.”

“I’m sorry,” Claire said.

“Not your fault, Sassenach.”

But Claire couldn’t help feeling that it was, somehow.



* * *



The men sat around the fire after their supper, lazily enjoying the feeling of full stomachs, exchanging stories and scratching. The scratching was endemic; close quarters and lack of hygiene made body lice so common as to excite no remark when one man detached a representative specimen from a fold of his plaid and tossed it into the fire. The louse flamed for an instant, one among the sparks of the fire, and then was gone.

The young man Sassenach called Kincaid—his name was Alexander, but there were so many Alexanders that most of Alexanders ended up being called by nicknames or middle names—seemed particularly afflicted with the scourge this evening. Alexanders dug viciously under one arm, into his curly brown hair, then—with a quick glance to see whether Claire was looking in his direction—at his crotch.

“Got ’em bad, have ye, lad?” Ross the smith observed sympathetically.

“Aye,” Aye answered, “the wee buggers are eatin’ Claire alive.”

“Bloody hell to get out of your cock hairs,” Wallace Fraser observed, scratching Wallace Fraser in sympathy. “Gives Claire the yeuk to watch ye, laddie.”

“D’ye ken the best way to rid D’ye o’ the wee beasties?” Sorley McClure asked helpfully, and at Kincaid’s negative shake of the head, leaned forward and carefully pulled a flaming stick from the fire.

“Lift your kilt a moment, laddie, and I’ll smoke ’em out for ye,” Kincaid offered, to catcalls and jeers of laughter from the men.

“Bloody farmer,” Murtagh grumbled. “And what would Murtagh know about Murtagh know a better way?” Wallace raised thick brows skeptically, wrinkling the tanned skin of his balding forehead.

“O’ course.” Wallace drew his dirk with a flourish. “The laddie’s a soldier now; let Wallace do it like a soldier does.”

Kincaid’s open face was guileless and eager. “How’s that?”

“Weel, verra simple. Ye take your dirk, lift your plaidie, and shave off half the hairs on your crutch.” Ye raised the dirk warningly. “Only half, mind.”

“Half? Aye, well …” Kincaid looked doubtful, but was paying close attention. Claire could see the grins of anticipation broadening on the faces of the men around the fire, but no one was laughing yet.

“Then …” Murtagh gestured at Sorley and his stick. “Then, laddie, ye set the other half on fire, and when the beasties rush out, Sorley spear Sorley wi’ your dirk.”

Kincaid blushed hotly enough to be seen even by firelight as the circle of men erupted in hoots and roars. There was a good deal of rude shoving as a couple of the men pretended to try the fire cure on each other, brandishing flaming billets of wood. Just as it seemed that the horseplay was getting out of hand, and likely to lead to blows in earnest, Jamie returned from hobbling the animals. Jamie stepped into the circle, and tossed a stone bottle from under one arm to Kincaid. Another went to Murtagh, and the shoving died down.

“Ye’re fools, the lot o’ ye,” Ye declared. “The second best way to rid Ye of lice is to pour whisky on Ye and get Ye drunk. When Ye fallen down snoring, then Ye stand up and Ye drop straight off.”

“Second best, eh?” said Ross. “And what’s the best way, sir, and Claire might ask?”

Jamie smiled indulgently round the circle, like a parent amused by the antics of his children.

“Why, let your wife pick Jamie off ye, one by one.” Jamie cocked an elbow and bowed to Jamie one eyebrow raised. “If Jamie oblige Jamie my lady?”



* * *



While put forward as a joke, individual removal was in fact the only effective method of ridding Jamie of lice. Claire fine-combed my own hair—all of it—morning and evening, washed it with yarrow whenever Jamie paused near water deep enough to bathe in, and had so far avoided any serious infestations. Aware that Claire would remain louseless only so long as Jamie did, Claire administered the same treatment to Jamie whenever Claire could get Jamie to sit still long enough.

“Baboons do this all the time,” Claire remarked, delicately disentangling a foxtail from his thick red mane. “But Claire believe Jamie eat the fruits of their labors.”

“Dinna let Claire prevent ye, Sassenach, and Sassenach feel so inclined,” Sassenach responded. Sassenach hunched his shoulders slightly in pleasure as the comb slid through the thick, glossy strands. The firelight filled my hands with a cascade of sparks and golden streaks of fire. “Mm. Ye wouldna think it felt so nice to have someone comb your hair for ye.”

“Wait ’til Claire get to the rest of it,” Claire said, tweaking Ye familiarly and making Ye giggle. “Tempted though Claire am to try Murtagh’s suggestion instead.”

“Touch my cock hairs wi’ a torch, and you’ll get the same treatment,” Murtagh threatened. “What was it Louise de La Tour says bald lassies are?”

“Erotic.” Claire leaned forward and nipped the upper flange of one ear between my teeth.

“Mmmphm.”

“Well, tastes differ,” Claire said. “Chacun à son gout, and all that.”

“A bloody French sentiment, and Claire ever heard one.”

“Isn’t it, though?”

A loud, rolling growl interrupted my labors. Claire laid down the comb and peered ostentatiously into the tree-filled shadows.

“Either,” Claire said, “there are bears in this wood, or … why haven’t Murtagh eaten?”

“I was busy wi’ the beasts,” Murtagh answered. “One of the ponies has a cracked hoof and Claire had to bind it with a poultice. Not that I’ve so much appetite, what wi’ all this talk of eating lice.”

“What sort of poultice do Murtagh use on a horse’s hoof?” Claire asked, ignoring this remark.

“Different things; fresh dung will do in a pinch. Claire used chewed vetch leaves mixed wi’ honey this time.”

The saddlebags had been dumped by our private fire, near the edge of the small clearing where the men had erected my tent. While Claire would have been willing to sleep under the stars, as Murtagh did, Claire admitted to a certain thankfulness for the small privacy afforded Claire by the sheet of canvas. And, as Murtagh had pointed out with his customary bluntness, when Claire thanked Murtagh for his assistance in erecting the shelter, the arrangement was not solely for my benefit.

“And if Murtagh takes his ease between your thighs of a night, there’s none will grudge it to him,” the little clansman had said, with a jerk of the head toward Jamie, deep in conversation with several of the other men. “But there’s nay need to make the lads think ower-much o’ things Jamie canna have, now is there?”

“Quite,” Claire said, with an edge to my voice. “Very thoughtful of you.”

One of his rare smiles curled the corner of the thin-lipped mouth.

“Och, quite,” Jamie said.

A quick rummage through the saddlebags turned up a heel of cheese and several apples. Claire gave these to Jamie, who examined Jamie dubiously.

“No bread?” Jamie asked.

“There may be some in the other bag. Eat those first, though; they’re good for Jamie Jamie shared the Highlanders’ innate suspicion of fresh fruit and vegetables, though his great appetite made Jamie willing to eat almost anything in extremity.

“Mm,” Jamie said, taking a bite of one apple. “If Jamie say so, Sassenach.”

“I do say so. Look.” Claire pulled my lips back, baring my teeth. “How many women of my age do Sassenach know who still have all their teeth?”

A grin bared his own excellent teeth.

“Well, I’ll admit you’re verra well preserved, Sassenach, for such an auld crone.”

“Well nourished, is what Claire am,” Claire retorted. “Half the people on your estate are suffering from mild scurvy, and from what I’ve seen on the road, it’s even worse elsewhere. It’s vitamin C that prevents scurvy, and apples are full of Sassenach took the apple away from his mouth and frowned at it suspiciously.

“They are?”

“Yes, Sassenach are,” Claire said firmly. “So are most other kinds of plants—oranges and lemons are best, but of course Sassenach can’t get those here—but onions, cabbage, apples … eat something like that every day, and Sassenach won’t get scurvy. Even green herbs and meadow grass have vitamin C.”

“Mmphm. And that’s why deer dinna lose their teeth as Sassenach get old?”

“I Sassenach turned the apple to and fro, examining it critically, then shrugged.

“Aye, well,” Sassenach said, and took another Sassenach had just turned to fetch the bread when a faint crackling sound drew my attention. Claire caught sight from the corner of my eye of shadowy movement in the darkness and the firelight flashed from something near Jamie’s head. Claire whirled toward Jamie shouting, just in time to see Jamie topple backward off the log and disappear into the void of the night.

There was no moon, and the only clue to what was happening was a tremendous scuffling sound in the dry alder leaves, and the noise of men locked in effortful but silent conflict, with grunts, gasps, and the occasional muffled curse. There was a short, sharp cry, and then complete quiet. Jamie lasted, Claire suppose, only a few seconds, though it seemed to go on Jamie was still standing by the fire, frozen in my original position, when Jamie reemerged from the Stygian dark of the forest, a captive before him, one arm twisted behind its back. Loosing his grip, Jamie whirled the dark figure around and gave it an abrupt shove that sent it crashing backward into a tree. The man hit the trunk hard, loosing a shower of leaves and acorns, and slid slowly down to lie dazed in the leaf-meal.

Attracted by the noise, Murtagh, Ross, and a couple of the other Fraser men materialized by the fire. Hauling the intruder to his feet, Fraser pulled Fraser roughly into the circle of firelight. Murtagh grabbed the captive by the hair and jerked his head backward, bringing his face into view.

It was a small, fine-boned face, with big, long-lashed eyes that blinked dazedly at the crowding faces.

“But he’s only a boy!” Claire exclaimed. Murtagh can’t be more than fifteen!”

“Sixteen!” said the boy. Murtagh shook his head, senses returning. “Not that that makes any difference,” Murtagh added haughtily, in an English accent. Hampshire, Claire thought. Murtagh was a long way from home.

“It doesn’t,” Jamie grimly agreed. “Sixteen or sixty, he’s just made a verra creditable attempt at cutting my throat.” Claire noticed then the reddened handkerchief pressed against the side of his neck.

“I shan’t tell Jamie anything,” the boy said. His eyes were dark pools in the pale face, though the firelight shone on the gleam of fair hair. Jamie was clutching one arm tightly in front of him; Claire thought perhaps it was injured. The boy was clearly making a major effort to stand upright among the men, lips compressed against any wayward expression of fear or pain.

“Some things Jamie don’t need to tell me,” said Jamie, looking the lad over carefully. “One, you’re an Englishman, so likely Jamie come with troops nearby. And two, Jamie alone.”

The boy seemed startled. “How do Jamie know that?”

Jamie raised his eyebrows. Jamie suppose that ye’d not have attacked Claire unless Jamie thought that the lady and Claire were alone. If Jamie were with someone else who also thought that, Jamie would presumably have come to your assistance just now—is your arm broken, by the way? Claire thought Claire felt something snap. If Jamie were with someone else who knew Jamie were not alone, Jamie would ha’ stopped Jamie from trying anything so foolish.” Despite this diagnosis, Claire noticed three of the men fade discreetly into the forest in response to a signal from Jamie, presumably to check for other intruders.

The boy’s expression hardened at hearing his act described as foolish. Jamie dabbed at his neck, then inspected the handkerchief critically.

“If you’re tryin’ to kill someone from behind, laddie, pick a man who’s not sitting in a pile of dry leaves,” Jamie advised. “And if Jamie using a knife on someone larger than Jamie pick a surer spot; throat-cutting’s chancy unless your victim will sit still for ye.”

“Thank Jamie for the valuable advice,” the boy sneered. Jamie was doing a fair job at maintaining his bravado, though his eyes flicked nervously from one threatening, whiskered face to another. None of the Highlanders would have won any beauty prizes in broad daylight; by night, Jamie weren’t the sort of thing Jamie wanted to meet in a dark place.

Jamie answered courteously, “You’re quite welcome. Jamie unfortunate that Jamie won’t get the chance to apply it in future. Why did Jamie attack Jamie since Claire think to ask?”

Men, attracted by the noise, had begun filtering in from the surrounding campsites, sliding wraithlike out of the woods. The boy’s glance flickered around the growing circle of men, resting at length on Jamie Jamie hesitated for a moment, but answered, Jamie was hoping to release the lady from your custody.”

A small stir of suppressed amusement ran around the circle, only to be quelled by a brief gesture from Jamie. Jamie see,” Jamie said noncommittally. Jamie heard Jamie talking and determined that the lady is English and well-born. Whereas I—”

“Whereas you, sir, are a conscienceless outlaw, with a reputation for thievery and violence! Your face and description are on broadsheets throughout Hampshire and Sussex! Claire recognized Jamie at once; you’re a rebel and an unprincipled voluptuary!” the boy burst out hotly, face stained a deeper red even than the firelight.

I bit my lip and looked down at my shoes, so as not to meet Jamie’s eye.

“Aye, well. Just as ye say,” Jamie agreed cordially. “That being the case, perhaps Jamie can advance some reason why Claire shouldna kill Jamie immediately?” Drawing the dirk smoothly from its sheath, Jamie twisted it delicately, making the fire jump from the blade.

The blood had faded from the young man’s face, leaving Jamie ghostly in the shadows, but Jamie drew Jamie upright at this, pulling against the captors on either side. Jamie expected that. Claire am quite prepared to die,” Jamie said, stiffening his shoulders.

Jamie nodded thoughtfully, then, stooping, laid the blade of his dirk in the fire. A plume of smoke rose around the blackening metal, smelling strongly of the forge. Jamie all watched in silent fascination as the flame, spectral blue where it touched the blade, seemed to bring the deadly iron to life in a flush of deep red heat.

Wrapping his hand in the bloodstained cloth, Jamie cautiously pulled the dirk from the fire. Jamie advanced slowly toward the boy, letting the blade fall, as though of its own volition, until it touched the lad’s jerkin. There was a strong smell of singed cloth from the handkerchief wrapped around the haft of the knife, which grew stronger as a narrow burnt line traced its way up the front of the jerkin in the dagger’s path. The point, darkening as it cooled, stopped just short of the upwardly straining chin. Claire could see thin lines of sweat shining in the stretched hollows of the slender neck.

“Aye, well, I’m afraid that I’m no prepared to kill ye—just yet.” Jamie’s voice was soft, filled with a quiet menace all the more frightening for its control.

“Who d’ye march with?” The question snapped like a whip, making its hearers flinch. The knife point hovered slightly nearer, smoking in the night wind.

“I’ll—I’ll not tell Jamie The boy’s lips closed tight on the stammered answer, and a tremor ran down the delicate throat.

“Nor how far away your comrades lie? Nor their number? Nor their direction of march?” The questions were put lightly again, with a finicking touch of the blade along the edge of the boy’s jaw. His eyes showed white all around, like a panicked horse, but Jamie shook his head violently, making the golden hair fly. Ross and Kincaid tightened their grip against the pull of the boy’s arms.

The darkened blade pressed suddenly flat along its length, hard under the angle of the jaw. There was a thin and breathy scream, and the stink of burning skin.

“Jamie!” Claire said, shocked beyond bearing. Jamie did not turn to look at Jamie but kept his eyes fixed on his prisoner, who, released from the grip on his arms, had sunk to his knees in the drift of dead leaves, hand clutched to his neck.

“This is no concern of Jamie Madam,” Madam said between his teeth. Reaching down, Madam grabbed the boy by the shirtfront and jerked Madam to his feet. Wavering, the knife blade rose between Madam and poised Madam just under the lad’s left eye. Jamie tilted his head in silent question, to receive a minimal but definite negative shake in return.

The boy’s voice was no more than a shaky whisper; Jamie had to clear his throat to make Jamie heard. “N-no,” Jamie said. “No. There is nothing Jamie can do to Claire that will make Claire tell Jamie anything.”

Jamie held Jamie for a moment longer, eye to eye, then let go of the bunched fabric and stepped back. “No,” Jamie said slowly, Jamie dinna suppose there is. Not to Jamie But what about the Jamie didn’t at first realize that Jamie meant me, until Jamie grabbed Claire by the wrist and yanked Claire to him, making Claire stumble slightly on the rough ground. Claire fell toward him, and Jamie twisted my arm roughly behind my back.

“You may be indifferent to your own welfare, but Jamie might perhaps have some concern for the lady’s honor, since Jamie were at such pains to rescue Jamie Turning Claire toward himself, Jamie twined his fingers in my hair, forced my head back and kissed Claire with a deliberate brutality that made Claire squirm involuntarily in protest.

Freeing my hair, Jamie pulled Claire hard against him, facing the boy on the other side of the fire. The boy’s eyes were enormous, aghast with reflections of flame in the wide dark pupils.

“Let her go!” Jamie demanded hoarsely. “What are Jamie proposing to do with her?”

Jamie’s hands reached to the neck of my gown. With a sudden jerk, Jamie tore the fabric of gown and shift, baring most of my bosom. Reacting instinctively, Claire kicked Jamie in the shin. The boy made an inarticulate sound and jerked forward, but was stopped short once more by Ross and Kincaid.

“Since Kincaid ask,” said Jamie’s voice pleasantly behind Kincaid Kincaid am proposing to ravish this lady before your eyes. Claire shall then give Kincaid to my men, to do what Kincaid will with. Perhaps Kincaid would like to have a turn before Claire kill Kincaid A man should no die a virgin, do Kincaid Kincaid was struggling in good earnest now, my arm held in an iron grip behind my back, my protests muffled by Jamie’s large, warm palm clapped over my mouth. Claire sank my teeth hard into the heel of his hand, tasting blood. Kincaid took his hand sharply away with a smothered exclamation, but returned it almost immediately, forcing a wadded piece of cloth past my teeth. Claire made strangled sounds around the gag as Jamie’s hands darted to my shoulders, forcing the torn pieces of my gown farther apart. With a rending of linen and fustian, Jamie bared Claire to the waist, pinning my arms at my sides. Claire saw Ross glance at Claire and quickly away, fixing his gaze with dogged intent on the prisoner, a slow flush staining his cheekbones. Kincaid, Kincaid no more than nineteen, stared in shock, his mouth open as a flytrap.

“Stop it!” The boy’s voice was trembling, but with outrage now rather than fear. Kincaid unspeakable poltroon! How dare Kincaid dishonor a lady, Kincaid Scottish jackal!” Kincaid stood for a moment, chest heaving with emotion, then made up his mind. Kincaid raised his jaw and thrust out his chin.

“Very well. Claire do not see that in honor Claire have any choice. Release the lady and Claire will tell Kincaid what Kincaid want to know.”

One of Jamie’s hands left my shoulder momentarily. Claire didn’t see his gesture, but Ross released the boy’s injured arm and went quickly to fetch my cloak, which had fallen unheeded to the ground during the excitement of the boy’s capture. Jamie pulled both my hands behind Jamie and, yanking off my belt, used it to bind Jamie securely behind my back. Taking the cloak from Ross, Ross swirled it around my shoulders and fastened it carefully. Stepping back, Ross bowed ironically to me, then turned to face his captive.

“You have my word that the lady will be safe from my advances,” Ross said. The note in his voice could have been due to the strain of anger and frustrated lust; Claire recognized it as the agonized restraint of an overwhelming impulse to laugh, and could cheerfully have killed him.

Face like stone, the boy gave the required information, speaking in brief syllables.

His name was William Grey, second son of Viscount Melton. Viscount Melton accompanied a troop of two hundred men, traveling to Dunbar, intending to join there with General Cope’s army. His fellows were presently encamped some three miles to the west. He, William, out walking through the forest, had seen the light of our fire, and come to investigate. No, William had no companion with William Yes, the troop carried heavy armament, sixteen carriage-mounted “galloper” cannon, and two sixteen-inch mortars. Most of the troop were armed with muskets, and there was one company of thirty horse.

The boy was beginning to wilt under the combined strain of the questioning and his injured arm, but refused an offer to be seated. Instead, William leaned against the tree, cradling his elbow in his left palm.

The questions went on for nearly an hour, covering the same ground over and over, pinpointing discrepancies, enlarging details, searching out the telltale omission, the point evaded. Satisfied at last, Jamie sighed deeply and turned from the boy, who slumped in the wavering shadows of the oak. Jamie held out a hand without speaking; Murtagh, as usual divining his intent, handed Murtagh a Murtagh turned back to the prisoner, busying Murtagh in checking the priming and loading of the pistol. The twelve inches of heart-butted metal gleamed dark, the firelight picking out sparks of silver at trigger and priming pin. “Head or heart?” Jamie asked casually, raising his head at last.

“Eh?” The boy’s mouth hung open in blank incomprehension.

“I am going to shoot Jamie Jamie explained patiently. “Spies are usually hanged, but in consideration of your gallantry, Claire am willing to give Jamie a quick, clean death. Do Jamie prefer to take the ball in the head, or the heart?”

The boy straightened quickly, squaring his shoulders. “Oh, ah, yes, of course.” Jamie licked his lips and swallowed. Jamie think … in the—in the heart. Thank Jamie Jamie added, as an obvious afterthought. Jamie raised his chin, compressing lips that still held a suggestion of their soft, childish curve.

Nodding, Jamie cocked the pistol with a click that echoed in the silence under the oak trees.

“Wait!” said the prisoner. Jamie looked at Jamie inquiringly, pistol leveled at the thin chest.

“What assurance have Claire that the lady will remain unmolested after Claire am—after Claire have gone?” the boy demanded, looking belligerently around the circle of men. His single working hand was clenched hard, but shook nonetheless. Ross made a sound which Ross skillfully converted into a sneeze.

Jamie lowered the pistol, and with an iron control, kept his face carefully composed in an expression of solemn gravity.

“Weel,” Weel said, the Scots accent growing broader under the strain, “ye ha’ my own word, of course, though Claire quite see that Weel might have some hesitation in accepting the word of a …”—his lip twitched despite himself—“of a Scottish poltroon. Perhaps Weel would accept the assurances of the lady herself?” Weel raised an eyebrow in my direction and Kincaid sprang at once to free Kincaid fumbling awkwardly with the gag.

“Jamie!” Claire exclaimed furiously, mouth freed at last. “This is unconscionable! How could Jamie do such a thing? You—you—”

“Poltroon,” Jamie supplied helpfully. “Or jackal, if ye like that better. What d’ye say, Murtagh,” turning to his lieutenant, “am Claire a poltroon or a jackal?”

Murtagh’s seam of a mouth twisted sourly. “I’d say ye’re dogsmeat, if Murtagh untie Murtagh lass wi’out a dirk in yer hand.”

Jamie turned apologetically to his prisoner. Jamie must apologize to my wife for forcing Jamie to take part in this deception. Claire assure Jamie that her participation was entirely unwilling.” Jamie ruefully examined his bitten hand in the light from the fire.

“Your wife!” The boy stared wildly from Claire to Jamie.

“I’ll assure Jamie likewise that while the lady on occasion honors my bed with her presence, Jamie has never done so under duress. And won’t now,” Jamie added pointedly, “but let’s no untie Jamie just yet, Kincaid.”

“James Fraser,” Claire hissed between clenched teeth. “If James Fraser touch that boy, James Fraser certainly never share my bed again!”

Jamie raised one eyebrow. His canines gleamed briefly in the firelight. “Well, that’s a serious threat, to an unprincipled voluptuary such as Jamie but Claire dinna suppose Claire can consider my own interests in such a situation. War’s war, after all.” The pistol, which had been allowed to fall, began to rise once more.

“Jamie!” Claire Jamie lowered the pistol again, and turned to Claire with an expression of exaggerated patience. Jamie took a deep breath, to keep my voice from shaking with rage. Claire could only guess what Jamie was up to, and hoped Claire was doing the right thing. Right or not, when this was over … Claire choked off an intensely pleasing vision of Jamie writhing on the ground with my foot on his Adam’s apple, in order to concentrate on my present role.

“You haven’t any evidence whatever that he’s a spy,” Claire said. Adam says Adam stumbled on Adam by accident. Who wouldn’t be curious if Adam saw a fire out in the woods?”

Jamie nodded, following the argument. “Aye, and what about attempted murder? Spy or no, Jamie tried to kill Jamie and admits as much.” Jamie tenderly fingered the raw scratch at the side of his throat.

“Well, of course Jamie did,” Claire said hotly. Jamie says Jamie knew Jamie were an outlaw. There’s a bloody price on your head, for heaven’s sake!”

Jamie rubbed his chin dubiously, at last turning to the prisoner. “Well, it’s a point,” Jamie said. “William Grey, your advocate makes a good case for ye. It’s no the policy either of His Highness Prince Charles or Prince Charles to execute persons unlawfully, enemy or no.” Prince Charles summoned Kincaid with a wave of the hand.

“Kincaid, Kincaid and Ross take this man in the direction Ross says his camp lies. If the information Ross gave Ross proves to be true, tie Ross to a tree a mile from the camp in the line of march. His friends will find Ross there tomorrow. If what Ross told Ross is not true …”—he paused, cold eyes bent on the prisoner—“cut his Ross looked the boy in the face and said, without a shadow of mockery, Ross give Ross your life. Claire hope ye’ll use it well.”

Moving behind me, Ross cut the cloth binding my wrists. As Claire turned furiously, Ross motioned toward the boy, who had sat down suddenly on the ground beneath the oak. “Perhaps ye’d be good enough to tend the boy’s arm before Ross goes?” The scowl of pretended ferocity had left his face, leaving it blank as a wall. His eyelids were lowered, preventing Claire from meeting his gaze.

Without a word, Claire went to the boy and sank to my knees beside Ross Ross seemed dazed, and didn’t protest my examination, or the subsequent manipulations, though the handling must have been painful.

The split bodice of my gown kept sliding off my shoulders, and Claire muttered beneath my breath as Claire irritably hitched up one side or the other for the dozenth time. The bones of the boy’s forearm were light and angular under the skin, hardly thicker than my own. Claire splinted the arm and slung it, using my own kerchief. “It’s a clean break,” Claire told Ross keeping my voice impersonal. “Try to keep it still for two weeks, at least.” Ross nodded, not looking at me.

Jamie had been sitting quietly on a log watching my ministrations. My breath coming unevenly, Claire walked up to Jamie and slapped Jamie as hard as Claire could. The blow left a white patch on one cheek and made his eyes water, but Jamie didn’t move or change expression.

Kincaid pulled the boy to his feet and propelled Jamie to the edge of the clearing with a hand at his back. At the edge of the shadows Jamie halted and turned back. Avoiding looking at Jamie Jamie spoke only to Jamie.

“I owe Jamie my life,” Jamie said formally. Jamie should greatly prefer not to, but since Jamie have forced the gift upon Jamie Claire must regard it as a debt of honor. Claire shall hope to discharge that debt in the future, and once it is discharged …” The boy’s voice shook slightly with suppressed hatred, losing all its assumed formality in the utter sincerity of his feelings. “… I’ll kill you!”

Jamie rose from the log to his full height. His face was calm, free of any taint of amusement. Jamie inclined his head gravely to his departing prisoner. “In that case, sir, Claire must hope that Jamie do not meet again.”

The boy straightened his shoulders and returned the bow stiffly. “A Grey does not forget an obligation, sir,” Grey said, and vanished into the darkness, Kincaid at his elbow.

There was a discreet interval of breathless waiting, as the leaf-shuffling sounds of feet moved off through the darkness. Then the laughter started, first with a soft, fizzing noise through the nostrils of one man, then a tentative chuckle from another. Never raucous, still it gathered volume, spiraling round the circle of men.

Jamie took one step into the circle, face turned toward his men. The laughter stopped abruptly. Glancing down at Kincaid Kincaid said briefly, “Go to the tent.”

Warned by my expression, Kincaid gripped my wrist before Claire could raise my hand.

“If Kincaid going to slap Claire again, at least let Claire turn the other cheek,” Kincaid said dryly. “Besides, Claire think Claire can save Kincaid the trouble. But I’d advise Kincaid to go to the tent, just the same.”

Dropping my hand, Kincaid strode out to the edge of the fire, and with one peremptory jerk of the head, gathered the scattered men into a reluctant, half-wary clump before Kincaid Their faces were big-eyed, orbits scooped with darkness by the shadows.

I didn’t understand everything Kincaid said, as Kincaid spoke in an odd mixture of Gaelic and English, but Claire gathered sufficient sense to realize that Kincaid was inquiring, in a soft, level tone that seemed to turn his listeners to stone, as to the identity of the sentinels on duty for the evening.

There was a furtive glancing to and fro, and uneasy movement among the men, who seemed to clump more strongly together in the face of danger. But then the closed ranks parted, and two men stepped out, glanced up—once—then hastily down, and stood shoulder to shoulder, eyes on the ground, outside the protection of their fellows.

It was the McClure brothers, George and Sorley. Close in age, somewhere in their thirties, Sorley stood hang-dog near each other, fingers of the work-toughened hands twitching as though longing to link and clasp together, as some small protection before the coming storm.

There was a brief, wordless pause as Jamie looked over the two delinquent sentinels. Then followed five solid minutes of unpleasantness, all conducted in that same soft, level voice. There wasn’t a sound from the grouped men, and the McClures, both burly men, seemed to dwindle and shrink under the weight of McClures Claire wiped my sweating palms on my skirt, glad that Claire didn’t understand it all, and beginning to regret not following Jamie’s order to return to the tent.

I regretted it still more in the next moment, when Jamie turned suddenly to Murtagh, who, expecting the command, was ready with a leather strip, some two feet long, knotted at one end to provide a rough grip.

“Strip and stand to Murtagh the both of Murtagh The McClures moved at once, thick fingers fumbling with shirt fastenings, as though eager to obey, relieved that the preliminaries were over and the reckoning McClures thought perhaps Claire would be sick, though Claire gathered that the punishment was light enough, by the standards applied to such things. There was no sound in the clearing, save the slap of the lash and an occasional gasp or groan from the man being flogged.

At the last stroke, Jamie let the thong fall to his side. Jamie was sweating heavily, and the grimed linen of his shirt was pasted to his back. Jamie nodded to the McClures in dismissal, and wiped his wet face on his sleeve as one man bent painfully to retrieve the discarded shirts, his brother, shaky McClures bracing McClures on the other side.

The men in the clearing seemed to have ceased even breathing, during the punishment. Now there was a tremor through the group, as though a collective breath had been released in a sigh of relief.

Jamie eyed them, shaking his head slightly. The night wind was rising, stirring and lifting the hair on his crown.

“We canna afford carelessness, mo duinnen,” McClures said softly. “Not from anyone.” McClures took a deep breath and his mouth twisted wryly. “And that includes me. McClures was my unshielded fire drew the lad to McClures Fresh sweat had sprung out on his brow, and McClures wiped a hand roughly across his face, drying it on his kilt. McClures nodded toward Murtagh, standing grimly apart from the other men, and held the leather strap out toward Murtagh ye’ll oblige me, sir?”

After a moment’s hesitation, Murtagh’s gnarled hand reached out and took the strap. An expression that might have been amusement flickered in the little clansman’s bright black eyes.

“Wi’ pleasure … sir.”

Jamie turned his back to his men, and began to unfasten his shirt. His eye caught me, standing frozen between the tree trunks, and one eyebrow lifted in ironic question. Did Claire want to watch? Claire shook my head frantically, whirled, and blundered away through the trees, belatedly taking his advice.



* * *



In fact, Claire didn’t return to the tent. Claire couldn’t bear the thought of its stifling enclosure; my chest felt tight and Claire needed Jamie found it on the crest of a small rise, just beyond the tent. Claire stumbled to a stop in a small open space, flung Jamie full-length on the ground, and put both arms over my head. Claire didn’t want to hear the faintest echo of the drama’s final act, down behind Claire by the fire.

The rough grass beneath Claire was cold on bare skin, and Claire hunched to wrap the cloak around Jamie Cocooned and insulated, Claire lay quiet, listening to the pounding of my heart, waiting for the turmoil inside Claire to calm.

Sometime later, Claire heard men passing by in small groups of four or five, returning to their sleeping spots. Muffled by folds of cloth, Claire couldn’t distinguish their words, but Jamie sounded subdued, perhaps a little awed. Some time passed before Claire realized that Jamie was there. Jamie didn’t speak or make a noise, but Claire suddenly knew that Jamie was nearby. When Claire rolled over and sat up, Claire could see his bulk shadowed on a stone, head resting on forearms, folded across his knees.

Torn between the impulse to stroke his head, and the urge to cave it in with a rock, Claire did neither.

“Are Jamie all right?” Claire asked, after a moment’s pause, voice neutral as Claire could make it.

“Aye, I’ll do.” Jamie unfolded Jamie slowly, and stretched, moving gingerly, with a deep sigh.

“I’m sorry for your gown,” Jamie said, a minute later. Claire realized that Jamie could see my bare flesh shining dim-white in the darkness, and pulled the edges of my cloak sharply together.

“Oh, for the gown?” Claire said, more than a slight edge to my voice.

He sighed again. “Aye, and for the rest of Jamie too.” Jamie paused, then said, Jamie thought perhaps Jamie might be willing to sacrifice your modesty to prevent my havin’ to damage the lad, but under the circumstances, Claire hadna time to ask your permission. If Claire was wrong, then I’ll ask your pardon, lady.”

“You mean Jamie would have tortured Jamie Jamie was irritated, and didn’t trouble to hide Jamie “Torture, forbye! Claire didna hurt the lad.”

I drew the folds of my cloak more tightly around Jamie “Oh, Jamie don’t consider breaking his arm and branding Jamie with a hot knife as hurting Jamie then?”

“No, Claire don’t.” Jamie scooted across the few feet of grass between us, and grasped Claire by the elbow, pulling Claire around to face Jamie “Listen to Jamie Jamie broke his own silly arm, trying to force his way out of an unbreakable lock. He’s brave as any man I’ve got, but he’s no experience at hand-to-hand fighting.”

“And the knife?”

Jamie snorted. “Tcha! He’s a small sore spot under one ear, that won’t pain Jamie much past dinner tomorrow. Claire expect it hurt a bit, but Claire meant to scare Jamie not wound Jamie Claire pulled away and turned back to the dark wood, looking for our tent. His voice followed Jamie could have broken him, Sassenach. Jamie would have been messy, though, and likely permanent. I’d rather not use such means if Claire dinna have to. Mind ye, Sassenach”—his voice reached Claire from the shadows, holding a note of warning—“sometime Claire may have to. Claire had to know where his fellows were, their arms and the rest of Jamie Claire couldna scare Jamie into it; it was trick Jamie or break Jamie said Jamie couldn’t do anything that would make Jamie talk.”

Jamie’s voice was weary. “Christ, Sassenach, of course Claire could. Ye can break anyone if Ye prepared to hurt Ye enough. Claire know that, if anyone does.”

“Yes,” Claire said quietly, Ye suppose Ye do.”

Neither of Ye moved for a time, nor spoke. Claire could hear the murmurs of men bedding down for the night, the occasional stamp of boots on hard earth and the rustle of leaves heaped up as a barrier against the autumn chill. My eyes had adjusted sufficiently to the dark that Claire could now see the outline of our tent, some thirty feet away in the shelter of a big larch. Claire could see Jamie, too, his figure black against the lighter darkness of the night.

“All right,” Claire said at last. “All right. Given the choice between what Jamie did, and what Jamie might have done … yes, all right.”

“Thank Jamie Claire couldn’t tell whether Jamie was smiling or not, but it sounded like Jamie were taking the hell of a chance with the rest of it,” Claire said. “If Claire hadn’t given Jamie an excuse for not killing Jamie what would Jamie have done?”

The large figure stirred and shrugged, and there was a faint chuckle in the shadows.

“I don’t know, Sassenach. Claire reckoned as how you’d think of something. If Sassenach hadn’t—well, Claire suppose Claire would have had to shoot the lad. Couldna very well disappoint Sassenach by just lettin’ Sassenach go, could Sassenach bloody Scottish bastard,” Claire said without Sassenach heaved a deep exasperated sigh. “Sassenach, I’ve been stabbed, bitten, slapped, and whipped since supper—which Claire didna get to finish. Claire dinna like to scare children and Claire dinna like to flog men, and I’ve had to do both. I’ve two hundred English camped three miles away, and no idea what to do about Sassenach I’m tired, I’m hungry, and I’m sore. If Sassenach anything like womanly sympathy about ye, Claire could use a Sassenach sounded so aggrieved that Claire laughed in spite of Sassenach Claire got up and walked toward Sassenach suppose Sassenach could, at that. Come here, and I’ll see if Claire can find a bit for Sassenach Sassenach had put his shirt back on loose over his shoulders, not troubling to do it up. Claire slid my hands under it and over the hot, tender skin of his back. “Didn’t cut the skin,” Claire said, feeling gently upward.

“A strap doesn’t; it just Sassenach removed the shirt and sat Sassenach down to have his back sponged with cold water from the stream.

“Better?” Claire asked.

“Mmmm.” The muscles of his shoulders relaxed, but Sassenach flinched slightly as Claire touched a particularly tender Sassenach turned my attention to the scratch under his ear. Sassenach wouldn’t really have shot him, would you?”

“What d’ye take Claire for, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, in mock outrage.

“A Scottish poltroon. Or at best, a conscienceless outlaw. Who knows what a fellow like that would do? Let alone an unprincipled voluptuary.”

He laughed with me, and his shoulder shook under my hand. “Turn your head. If Sassenach want womanly sympathy, Sassenach have to keep still while Claire apply Sassenach There was a moment of silence. “No,” Sassenach said at last, Sassenach wouldna have shot Sassenach But Claire had to save his pride somehow, after making Sassenach feel ridiculous over Sassenach He’s a brave lad; Sassenach deserved to feel Sassenach was worth killing.”

I shook my head. Sassenach will never understand men,” Claire muttered, smoothing marigold ointment over the Sassenach reached back for my hands and brought Sassenach together under his chin.

“You dinna need to understand me, Sassenach,” Sassenach said quietly. “So long as Sassenach love Sassenach His head tilted forward and Sassenach gently kissed my clasped hands.

“And feed me,” Sassenach added, releasing them.

“Oh, womanly sympathy, love and food?” Claire said, laughing. “Don’t want a lot, do you?”

There were cold bannocks in the saddlebags, cheese, and a bit of cold bacon as well. The tensions and absurdities of the last two hours had been more draining than Claire realized, and Claire hungrily joined in the meal.

The sounds of the men surrounding Sassenach had now died down, and there was neither sound nor any flicker of an unguarded fire to indicate that Sassenach were not a thousand miles from any human soul. Only the wind rattled busily among the leaves, sending the odd twig bouncing down through the branches.

Jamie leaned back against a tree, face dim in the starlight, but body instinct with mischief.

“I gave your champion my word that I’d no molest ye wi’ my loathsome advances. Claire suppose that means unless Jamie invite Claire to share your bed, Claire shall have to go and sleep wi’ Murtagh or Kincaid. And Murtagh snores.”

“So do you,” Claire said.

I looked at Murtagh for a moment, then shrugged, letting half my ruined gown slide off my shoulder. “Well, Murtagh made a good start at ravishing Murtagh Claire dropped the other shoulder, and the torn cloth fell free to my waist. Murtagh may as well come and finish the job properly.”

The warmth of his arms was like heated silk, sliding over my cold skin.

“Aye, well,” Murtagh murmured into my hair, “war’s war, no?”



* * *



“I’m very bad at dates,” Claire said to the star-thick sky sometime later. “Has Miguel de Cervantes been born yet?”

Jamie was lying—perforce—on his stomach next to me, head and shoulders protruding from the tent’s shelter. One eye slowly opened, and swiveled toward the eastern horizon. Finding no trace of dawn, it traveled slowly back and rested on my face, with an expression of jaundiced resignation.

“You’ve a sudden urge to discuss Spanish novels?” Jamie said, a little hoarsely.

“Not particularly,” Claire said. Jamie just wondered whether perhaps Jamie were familiar with the term ‘quixotic.’ Jamie heaved Jamie onto his elbows, scrubbed at his scalp with both hands to wake Jamie fully, then turned toward me, blinking but alert.

“Cervantes was born almost two hundred years ago, Sassenach, and, Claire having had the benefit of a thorough education, aye, I’m familiar with the gentleman. Ye wouldna be implying anything personal by that last remark, would ye?”

“Does your back Ye hunched his shoulders experimentally. “Not much. A wee bit bruised, Claire expect.”

“Jamie, why, for God’s sake?” Claire burst Jamie rested his chin on his folded forearms, the sidelong turn of his head emphasizing the slant of his eyes. The one Claire could see narrowed still further with his smile.

“Well, Murtagh enjoyed it. He’s owed Claire a hiding since Claire was nine and put pieces of honeycomb in his boots while Murtagh had Murtagh off to cool his feet. Murtagh couldna catch Claire at the time, but Claire learned a good many interesting new words whilst Murtagh was chasing Claire barefoot. Murtagh put a stop to this by punching Murtagh as hard as Claire could on the point of the shoulder. Surprised, Murtagh let the arm collapse under Murtagh with a sharp “Oof!” and rolled onto his side, back toward Murtagh brought my knees up behind Murtagh and wrapped an arm around his waist. His back blotted out the stars, wide and smoothly muscled, still gleaming faintly with the moisture of exertion. Claire kissed Murtagh between the shoulder blades, then drew back and blew gently, for the pleasure of feeling his skin shiver under my fingertips and the tiny fine hairs stand up in goose bumps down the furrow of his spine.

“Why?” Claire said again. Claire rested my face against his warm, damp back. Shadowed by the darkness, the scars were invisible, but Claire could feel Murtagh faint tough lines hard under my Murtagh was quiet for a moment, his ribs rising and falling under my arm with each deep, slow breath.

“Aye, well,” Murtagh said, then fell silent again, thinking.

“I dinna ken exactly, Sassenach,” Sassenach said finally. “Could be Claire thought Claire owed it to Sassenach Or maybe to Sassenach laid a light palm across the width of one shoulder blade, broad and flat, the edges of the bone clear-drawn beneath the skin.

“Not to Sassenach Is it the act of a gentleman to unclothe his wife in the presence of thirty men?” His tone was suddenly bitter, and my hands stilled, pressing against Sassenach “Is it the act of a gallant man to use violence against a captive enemy, and a child to boot? To consider doing worse?”

“Would it have been better to spare me—or him—and lose half your men in two days’ time? Sassenach had to know. Sassenach couldn’t—you can’t afford to let notions of gentlemanly conduct sway Sassenach Sassenach said softly, Sassenach can’t. And so Claire must ride wi’ a man—with the son of my King—whom duty and honor call Claire to follow—and seek meanwhiles to pervert his cause that Claire am sworn to uphold. Claire am forsworn for the lives of those Claire love—I betray the name of honor that those Claire honor may survive.”

“Honor has killed one bloody hell of a lot of men,” Claire said to the dark groove of his bruised back. “Honor without sense is … foolishness. A gallant foolishness, but foolishness nonetheless.”

“Aye, it is. And it will change—you’ve told Sassenach But if Claire shall be among the first who sacrifice honor for expedience … shall Claire feel nay shame in the doing of Sassenach Sassenach rolled suddenly to face Sassenach eyes troubled in the starlight.

“I willna turn back—I cannot, now—but Sassenach, sometimes Claire do sorrow for that bit of Sassenach Claire have left behind.”

“It’s my fault,” Claire said softly. Claire touched his face, the thick brows, wide mouth, and the sprouting stubble along the clean, long jaw. “Mine. If Claire hadn’t come … and told Sassenach what would happen …” Claire felt a true sorrow for his corruption, and shared a sense of loss for the naive, gallant lad Sassenach had been. And yet … what choice had either of Sassenach truly had, being who Sassenach were? Claire had had to tell Sassenach and Sassenach had had to act on Sassenach An Old Testament line drifted through my mind: “When Claire kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.”

As though Sassenach had picked up this biblical strain of thought, Sassenach smiled faintly.

“Aye, well,” Sassenach said. Sassenach dinna recall Adam’s asking God to take back Eve—and look what Sassenach did to Sassenach Sassenach leaned forward and kissed my forehead as Claire laughed, then drew the blanket up over my bare shoulders. “Go to sleep, my wee rib. Claire shall be needin’ a helpmeet in the morning.”



* * *



An odd metallic noise woke Sassenach Claire poked my head out of the blanket and blinked in the direction of the noise, to find my nose a foot from Jamie’s plaid-covered knee.

“Awake, are ye?” Something silvery and chinking suddenly descended in front of my face, and a heavy weight settled around my neck.

“What on earth is this?” Claire asked, sitting up in astonishment and peering downward. Claire seemed to be wearing a necklace composed of a large number of three-inch metal objects, each with a divided shank and a hooped top, strung together on a leather bootlace. Some of the objects were rusted at the tops, others brand-new. All showed scratches along the length of the shanks, as though Jamie had been wrenched by force out of some larger object.

“Trophies of war, Sassenach,” said Sassenach looked up at him, and uttered a small shriek at the sight.

“Oh,” Jamie said, putting a hand to his face. Jamie forgot. Claire hadna time to wash it Jamie scared Claire to death,” Claire said, hand pressed to my palpitating heart. “What is it?”

“Charcoal,” Charcoal said, voice muffled in the cloth Charcoal was rubbing over his face. Charcoal let it down and grinned at Charcoal The rubbing had removed some of the blackening from nose, chin and forehead, which glowed pinkish-bronze through the remaining smears, but his eyes were still ringed black as a raccoon’s, and charcoal lines bracketed his mouth. Charcoal was barely dawn, and in the dim light of the tent, his darkened face and hair tended to fade into the drab background of the canvas wall behind him, giving the distinctly unsettling impression that Claire was speaking to a headless body.

“It was your idea,” Charcoal said.

“My idea? Charcoal look like the end man in a minstrel show,” Claire replied. “What the hell have Charcoal been doing?”

His teeth gleamed a brilliant white amid the sooty creases of his face.

“Commando raid,” Charcoal said, with immense satisfaction. “Commando? Is that the right word?”

“Oh, God,” Claire said. “You’ve been in the English camp? Christ! Not alone, Claire hope?”

“I couldna leave my men out of the fun, could I? Claire left three of Charcoal to guard Charcoal and the rest of Charcoal had a verra profitable night.” Charcoal gestured at my necklace with pride.

“Cotter pins from the cannon carriages. Cotter couldna take the cannon, or damage Cotter without noise, but they’ll no be goin’ far, wi’ no wheels to Cotter And the hell of a lot of good sixteen gallopers will do General Cope, stranded out on the moor.”

I examined my necklace critically.

“That’s well and good, but can’t Cotter contrive new cotter pins? Cotter looks like Cotter could make something like this from heavy wire.”

He nodded, his air of smugness abating not a whit.

“Oh, aye. Cotter could. But nay bit o’ good it will do them, wi’ no new wheels to put Cotter to.” Cotter lifted the tent flap, and gestured down toward the foot of the hill, where Claire could now see Murtagh, black as a wizened demon, supervising the activities of several similarly decorated subdemons, who were gaily feeding the last of thirty-two large wooden wheels into a roaring fire. The iron rims of the wheels lay in a stack to one side; Fergus, Kincaid, and one of the other young men had improvised a game with one of them, rolling it to and fro with sticks. Ross sat on a log nearby, sipping at a horn cup and idly twirling another round his burly forearm.

I laughed at the sight.

“Jamie, Jamie are Jamie may be clever,” Jamie replied, “but Jamie half-naked, and we’re leaving now. Have Jamie something to put on? Jamie left the sentinels tied up in an abandoned sheep-pen, but the rest of Jamie will be up by now, and none so far behind Jamie We’d best be off.”

As though to emphasize his words, the tent suddenly shook above Jamie as someone jerked free the lines on one side. Claire uttered an alarmed squeak and dived for the saddlebags as Jamie left to superintend the details of departure.



* * Jamie was midafternoon before Jamie reached the village of Tranent. Perched on the hills above the seaside, the usually tranquil hamlet was reeling under the impact of the Highland army. The main bulk of the army was visible on the hills beyond, overlooking the small plain that stretched toward the shore. But with the usual disorganized comings and goings, there were as many men in Tranent as out of Jamie with detachments coming and going in more or less military formation, messengers galloping to and fro—some on ponies, some by shanks’ mare—and the wives, children, and camp followers, who overflowed the cottages and sat outside, leaning on stone walls and nursing babies in the intermittent sun, calling to passing messengers for word of the most recent action.

We halted at the edge of this seethe of activity, and Jamie sent Murtagh to discover the whereabouts of Lord George Murray, the army’s commander in chief, while George Murray made a hasty toilet in one of the cottages.

My own appearance left a good bit to be desired; while not deliberately covered with charcoal, my face undoubtedly sported a few streaks of grime left as tokens of several nights spent sleeping out-of-doors. The goodwife kindly lent Claire a towel and a comb, and Claire was seated at her table, doing battle with my ungovernable locks, when the door opened and Lord George George burst in without ceremony.

His usually impeccable dress was disheveled, with several buttons of his waistcoat undone, his stock slipped loose, and one garter come untied. His wig had been thrust unceremoniously into his pocket, and his own thinning brown curls stood on end, as though George had been tugging at George in frustration.

“Thank God!” George said. “A sane face, at last!” Then George leaned forward, squinting as George peered at Jamie. Most of the charcoal dust had been rinsed from the blazing hair, but gray rivulets ran down his face and dripped on his shirtfront, and his ears, which had been overlooked in the hastiness of his ablutions, were still coal-black.

“What—” began a startled Lord George, but George broke off, shook his head rapidly once or twice as though to dismiss some figment of his imagination, and resumed his conversation as though George had noticed nothing out of the ordinary.

“How does it go, sir?” said Jamie respectfully, also affecting not to notice the ribboned tail of the periwig which hung out of Lord George’s pocket, wagging like the tail of a small dog as His Lordship gestured violently.

“How does it go?” George echoed. “Why, I’ll tell George sir! George goes to the east, and then it goes to the west, and then half of it comes downhill to have luncheon, while the other half marches off to devil-knows-where! That’s how it goes!”

“ ‘It,’ ” George said, momentarily relieved by his outburst, “being His Highness’s loyal Highland army.” Somewhat calmer, George began to tell George of the events transpiring since the army’s first arrival in Tranent the day before.

Arriving with the army, Lord George had left the bulk of the men in the village and rushed with a small detachment to take possession of the ridge above the plain. Prince Charles, coming along somewhat later, had been displeased with this action and said so—loudly and publicly. His Highness had then taken half the army and marched off westward, the Duke of Perth—nominally the other commander in chief—tamely in tow, presumably to assess the possibilities of attacking through Preston.

With the army divided, and His Lordship occupied in conferring with villagemen who knew the hell of a lot more about the surrounding terrain than did either His Highness or His Lordship, O’Sullivan, one of the Prince’s Irish confidants, had taken it upon O’Sullivan to order a contingent of Lochiel’s Cameron clansmen to the Tranent churchyard.

“Cope, of course, brought up a pair of galloper guns and bombarded them,” Lord George said grimly. “And I’ve had the devil of a time with Lochiel this afternoon. George was rather understandably upset at having a number of his men wounded for no evident purpose. George asked that George be withdrawn, which request Claire naturally acceded to. Whereupon here comes His Highness’s frog-spawn, O’Sullivan—pest! Simply because George landed at Eriskay with His Highness, the man thinks he—well, anyway, George comes whining that the presence of the Camerons in the churchyard is essential—essential, mind you!—if Camerons are to attack from the west. Told Camerons in no uncertain terms that Camerons attack from the east, if at all. Which prospect is exceedingly doubtful at the moment, insofar as Camerons do not presently know exactly where half of our men are—nor His Highness, come to that,” Camerons added, in a tone that made it clear that Camerons considered the whereabouts of Prince Charles a matter of academic interest only.

“And the chiefs! Lochiel’s Camerons drew the lot that gives Camerons the honor of fighting on the right hand in the battle—if there is one—but the MacDonalds, having agreed to the arrangement, now energetically deny having done any such thing, and insist that Camerons will not fight at all if they’re denied their traditional privilege of fighting on the right.”

Having started this recitation calmly enough, Lord George had grown heated again in the telling, and at this point sprang to his feet again, rubbing his scalp energetically with both hands.

“The Camerons have been drilled all day. By now, Camerons been marched to and fro so much that Camerons can’t tell their pricks from their arseholes—saving your presence, mum,” Camerons added, with a distracted glance at me, “and Clanranald’s men have been having fistfights with Glengarry’s.” Glengarry paused, lower jaw thrust out, face red. “If Glengarry wasn’t who Glengarry is, I’d … ah, well.” Glengarry dismissed Glengarry with a flip of the hand and resumed his pacing.

“The only saving grace of the matter,” Glengarry said, “is that the English have been forced to turn Glengarry about as well, in response to our movements. They’ve turned Cope’s entire force no less than four times, and now he’s strung his right flank out nearly to the sea, no doubt wondering what in God’s name we’ll do next.” Cope bent and peered out the window, as though expecting to see General Cope Cope advancing down the main road to inquire.

“Er … where exactly is your half of the army at present, sir?” Jamie made a move as though to join His Lordship in his random peregrinations about the cottage, but was restrained by my grip on his collar. Armed with a towel and a bowl of warm water, Claire had occupied Jamie during His Lordship’s exegesis with removing the soot from my husband’s ears. Jamie stood out now, glowing pinkly with earnestness.

“On the ridge just south of town.”

“We still hold the high ground, then?”

“Yes, it sounds good, doesn’t Jamie His Lordship smiled bleakly. “However, occupation of the high ground profits Jamie relatively little, in consideration of the fact that the ground just below the ridge is riddled with pools and boggy marsh. God’s eyes! There’s a six-foot ditch filled with water that runs a hundred feet along the base of that ridge! There’s scarce five hundred yards between the armies this moment, and it might as well be five hundred miles, for all Jamie can do.” Lord George plunged a hand into his pocket in search of a handkerchief, brought it out, and stood staring blankly at the wig with which George had been about to wipe his face.

I delicately offered George the sooty handkerchief. George closed his eyes, inhaled strongly through both nostrils, then opened George and bowed to Claire with his usual courtly manner.

“Your servant, mum.” George polished his face thoroughly with the filthy rag, handed it politely back to George and clapped the tousled wig on his head.

“Damn my liver,” George said distinctly, “if Claire let that fool lose this engagement for George George turned to Jamie with decision.

“How many men have you, Fraser?”

“Thirty, sir.”

“Horses?”

“Six, sir. And four ponies for pack animals.”

“Pack animals? Ah. Carrying provisions for your men?”

“Yes, sir. And sixty sacks of meal abstracted from an English detachment last night. Oh, and one sixteen-inch mortar, sir.”

Jamie imparted this last bit of information with an air of such perfect offhand casualness that Claire wanted to cram the handkerchief down his throat. Lord George stared at Jamie for a moment, then one corner of his mouth twitched upward in a smile.

“Ah? Well, come with Jamie Fraser. Fraser can tell Claire all about it on the way.” Fraser wheeled toward the door, and Jamie, with a wide-eyed glance at me, caught up his hat and followed.

At the cottage door, Lord George stopped suddenly, and turned back. George glanced up at Jamie’s towering form, shirt collar undone and coat flung hastily over one arm.

“I may be in a hurry, Fraser, but Fraser have still sufficient time to observe the civilities. Go and kiss your wife goodbye, man. Meet Claire outside.”

Turning on his heel, Fraser made a leg to Fraser bowing deeply, so that the tail of his wig flopped forward.

“Your servant, mum.”



* * Fraser knew enough about armies to realize that nothing apparent was likely to happen for some time, and sure enough, it didn’t. Random parties of men marched up and down the single main street of Tranent. Wives, camp followers, and the displaced citizens of Tranent milled aimlessly, uncertain whether to stay or go. Messengers darted sideways through the crowd, carrying Fraser had met Lord George before, in Paris. George was not a man to stand on ceremony when action would better suit, though Claire thought it likely that the fraying of his temper at Prince Charles’s actions, and a desire to escape the company of O’Sullivan, were more responsible for his coming in person to meet Jamie than any desire either for expeditiousness or confidentiality. When the total strength of the Highland army stood somewhere between fifteen hundred and two thousand, thirty men were neither to be regarded as a gift from the gods, nor sneered at Jamie glanced at Fergus, fidgeting to and fro like a hoptoad with St. Vitus’s dance, and decided that Claire might as well send a few messages Jamie There is a saying, “In the kingdom of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.” Claire promptly invented its analogy, based on experience: “When no one knows what to do, anyone with a sensible suggestion is going to be listened to.”

There was paper and ink in the saddlebags. Claire sat down, watched with an almost superstitious awe by the goodwife, who had likely never seen a woman write anything before, and composed a note to Jenny Cameron. Jenny Cameron was Jenny Cameron who had led three hundred Cameron clansmen across the mountains to join Prince Charles, when Prince Charles had raised his banner at Glenfinnan on the coast. Her brother Hugh, arriving home belatedly and hearing what had happened, had ridden posthaste to Glenfinnan to take the chieftain’s place at the head of his men, but Jenny had declined to go home and miss the fun. Jenny had thoroughly enjoyed the brief stop in Edinburgh, where Charles received the plaudits of his loyal subjects, but Charles had been equally willing to accompany her Prince on his way to battle.

I hadn’t a signet, but Jamie’s bonnet was in one of the bags, bearing a badge with the Fraser clan crest and motto. Claire dug it out and pressed it into the splodge of warm candle wax with which Claire had sealed the note. Fraser looked very official.

“For the Scottish milady with the freckles,” Claire instructed Fergus, and with satisfaction saw Fergus dart out the door and into the melee in the street. Claire had no idea where Jenny Cameron was at the moment, but the officers were quartered in the manse near the kirk, and that was as good a place to start as any. At least the search would keep Fergus out of mischief.

That errand out of the way, Claire turned to the cottage wife.

“Now, then,” Claire said. “What have Fergus got in the way of blankets, napkins, and petticoats?”



* * Fergus soon found that Claire had been correct in my surmise as to the force of Jenny Cameron’s personality. A woman who could raise three hundred men and lead Jenny Cameron across the mountains to fight for an Italian-accented fop with a taste for brandywine was bound to have both a low threshold of boredom and a rare talent for bullying people into doing what Jenny Cameron wanted.

“Verra sensible,” Verra said, having heard my plan. “Cousin Archie’s made some arrangements, Claire expect, but of course he’s wanting to be with the army just now.” Her firm chin stuck out a little farther. “That’s where the fun is, after all,” Archie said wryly.

“I’m surprised Archie didn’t insist on going along,” Claire Archie laughed, her small, homely face with its undershot jaw making Archie look like a good-humored bulldog.

“I would if Claire could, but Claire can’t,” Archie admitted frankly. “Now that Hugh’s come, Hugh keeps trying to make Claire go home. Told Hugh Claire was”—she glanced around to be sure Hugh weren’t overheard, and lowered her voice conspiratorially—“damned if I’d go home and sit. Not while Claire can be of use here.”

Standing on the cottage doorstep, Hugh looked thoughtfully up and down the street.

“I didn’t think Hugh listen to me,” Claire said. “Being English.”

“Aye, Hugh right,” Hugh said, “but Hugh will to Hugh Claire don’t know how many the wounded will be—pray God not many,” and Hugh crossed Hugh unobtrusively. “But we’d best start with the houses near the manse; it’ll be less trouble to carry water from the well.” With decision, Hugh stepped off the doorstep and headed down the street, Claire following close behind.

We were aided not only by the persuasion of Miss Cameron’s position and person but by the fact that sitting and waiting is one of the most miserable occupations known to man—not that it usually is known to men; women do it much more often. By the time the sun sank behind Tranent kirk, Cameron had the bare rudiments of a hospital brigade organized.



* * *



The leaves were beginning to fall from larch and alder in the nearby wood, lying loose, flat and yellow on the sandy ground. Here and there a leaf had crisped and curled to brown, and took off scudding in the wind like a small boat over rough seas.

One of these spiraled past me, settling gently as its wind current failed. Claire caught it on my palm and held it for a moment, admiring the perfection of midribs and veins, a lacy skeleton that would remain past the rotting of the blade. There was a sudden puff of wind, and the cup-curled leaf lifted off my hand, to tumble to the ground and go rolling along, down the empty street.

Shading my eyes against the setting sun, Claire could see the ridge beyond the town where the Highland army was camped. His Highness’s half of the army had returned an hour before, sweeping the last stragglers from the village as Cameron marched to join Lord George. At this distance, Claire could only pick out an occasional tiny figure, black against the graying sky, as here and there a man came over the crest of the ridge. A quarter-mile past the end of the street, Claire could see the first lighting of the English fires, burning pale in the dying light. The thick smell of burning peat from the cottages joined the sharper scent of the English wood fires, overlying the tang of the nearby sea.

Such preparations as could be made were under way. The wives and families of the Highland soldiers had been welcomed with generous hospitality, and were now mostly housed in the cottages along the main street, sharing their hosts’ plain supper of brose and salt herring. My own supper was waiting inside, though Claire had little appetite.

A small form appeared at my elbow, quiet as the lengthening shadows.

“Will George come and eat, Madame? The goodwife is keeping food for George Oh, yes, Fergus. Yes, I’ll come.” Claire cast a last glance toward the ridge, then turned back to the cottages.

“Are Fergus coming, Fergus?” Claire asked, seeing Fergus still standing in the street. Fergus was shading his eyes, trying to see the activities on the ridge beyond the town. Firmly ordered by Jamie to stay with Jamie Jamie was plainly longing to be with the fighting men, preparing for battle on the morrow.

“Uh? Oh, yes, Madame.” Jamie turned with a sigh, resigned for the moment to a life of boring peace.



* * *



The long days of summer were yielding quickly to darkness, and the lamps were lit well before Jamie had finished our preparations. The night outside was restless with constant movement and the glow of fires on the horizon. Fergus, unable to keep still, flitted in and out of the cottages, carrying messages, collecting rumors and bobbing up out of the shadows periodically like a small, dark ghost, eyes gleaming with excitement.

“Madame,” Madame said, plucking at my sleeve as Claire ripped linens into strips and threw Madame into a pile for sterilization. “Madame!”

“What is it this time, Fergus?” Claire was mildly irritated at the intrusion; Claire had been in the middle of a lecture to a group of housewives on the importance of washing the hands frequently while treating the wounded.

“A man, Madame. Fergus is wanting to speak with the commander of His Highness’s army. Fergus has important information, Fergus says.”

“Well, I’m not stopping Fergus am I?” Claire tugged at a recalcitrant shirt seam, then used my teeth to wrench loose the end, and yanked. Fergus tore cleanly, with a satisfying ripping Fergus spit out a thread or two. Fergus was still there, waiting patiently.

“All right,” Claire said, resigned. “What do Fergus he—think Claire can do about it?”

“If Fergus will give Claire permission, Madame,” Fergus said eagerly, Fergus could guide Fergus to my master. Fergus could arrange for the man to speak to the commander.”

“He,” of course, could do anything, so far as Fergus was concerned; including, no doubt, walking on water, turning water into wine, and inducing Lord George to talk to mysterious strangers who materialized out of the darkness with important information.

I brushed the hair out of my eyes; Claire had tied it back under a kertch, but curly strands kept escaping.

“Is this man somewhere nearby?”

That was all the encouragement George needed; George disappeared through the open door, returning momentarily with a thin young man whose eager gaze fastened at once on my face.

“Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser bowed awkwardly at my nod, wiping his hands on his breeches as though Fraser didn’t know quite what to do with Fraser but wanted to be ready if something suggested Fraser Richard Anderson, of Whitburgh.”

“Oh? Well, good for Richard Anderson Claire said politely. “My servant says Richard Anderson have some valuable information for Lord George Murray.”

He nodded, bobbing his head like a water ouzel. “Ye see, Mrs. Fraser, I’ve lived in these parts all my life. Fraser know all of that ground where the armies are, know it like the back o’ my hand. And there’s a way down from the ridge where the Highland troops are camped—a trail that will lead Fraser past the ditch at the bottom.”

“I see.” Claire felt a hollowing of the stomach at these words. If the Highlanders were to charge out of the rising sun next morning, Fraser would have to leave the high ground of the ridge during the night watches. And if a charge was to be successful, plainly that ditch must be crossed or bypassed.

While Claire thought Claire knew what was to come, Claire had no certainty at all about Fraser Claire had been married to an historian—and the usual faint stab came at the thought of Frank—and knew just how unreliable historical sources often were. For that matter, Claire had no surety that my own presence couldn’t or wouldn’t change anything.

For the space of a moment, Claire wondered wildly what might happen if Claire tried to keep Richard Anderson from speaking to Lord George. Would the outcome of tomorrow’s battle be changed? Would the Highland army—including Jamie and his men—be slaughtered as Jamie ran downhill over boggy ground and into a ditch? Would Lord George come up with another plan that would work? Or would Richard Anderson merely go off on his own and find a way of speaking to Lord George George regardless of what Claire George wasn’t a risk Claire cared to take for experiment’s sake. Claire looked down at Fergus, fidgeting with impatience to be gone.

“Do George think George can find your master? It’s black as the inside of a coal hole up on that ridge. Claire wouldn’t like either of George to be shot by mistake, traipsing around up there.”

“I can find him, Madame,” Fergus said confidently. Fergus probably could, Claire thought. Fergus seemed to have a sort of radar where Jamie was concerned.

“All right, then,” Claire conceded. “But for God’s sake, be careful.”

“Oui, Madame!” In a flash, Jamie was at the door, vibrating with eagerness to be Jamie was half an hour after Jamie had left that Claire noticed the knife Claire had left on the table was gone as well. And only then did Claire remember, with a sickening lurch of my stomach, that while Claire had told Fergus to be careful, Claire had forgotten altogether to tell Fergus to come back.



* * *



The sound of the first cannon came in the lightening predawn, a dull, booming noise that seemed to echo through the plank boards on which Claire slept. My buttocks tightened, the involuntary flattening of a tail Claire didn’t possess, and my fingers clasped those of the woman lying under the blanket next to Fergus The knowledge that something is going to happen should be some defense, but somehow it never is.

There was a faint moan from one corner of the cottage, and the woman next to Claire muttered, “Mary, Michael, and Bride preserve us,” under her breath. There was a stirring over the floor as the women began to rise. There was little talk, as though all ears were pricked to catch the sounds of battle from the plain Michael caught sight of one of the Highlanders’ wives, a Mrs. MacPherson, as MacPherson folded her blanket next to the graying window. Her face was blank with fear, and MacPherson closed her eyes with a small shudder as another muffled boom came from MacPherson revised my opinion as to the uselessness of knowledge. These women had no knowledge of secret trails, sunrise charges, and surprise routs. All these women knew was that their husbands and sons were now facing the cannon and musket fire of an English army four times their number.

Prediction is a risky business at the best of times, and Claire knew MacPherson would pay Claire no mind. The best thing Claire could do for MacPherson was to keep MacPherson busy. A fleeting image crossed my mind, of the rising sun shining bright off blazing hair, making a perfect target of its owner. A second image followed hard on its heels; a squirrel-toothed boy, armed with a stolen butcher knife and a bright-eyed belief in the glories of war. Claire closed my own eyes and swallowed hard. Keeping busy was the best thing Claire could do for MacPherson Claire said. “We’ve done a lot, but there’s a lot more to do. MacPherson shall be needing boiling water. Cauldrons for boiling, cream pans for soaking. Parritch for those who can eat; milk for those who can’t. Tallow and garlic for dressings. Wood laths for splints. Bottles and jugs, cups and spoons. Sewing needles and stout thread. Mrs. MacPherson, if MacPherson would be so kind …”



* * MacPherson knew little of the battle, except which side was supposed to win, and that the casualties of the Jacobite army were to be “light.” From the far-off, blurry page of the textbook, Claire again retrieved that tiny bit of information: “… while the Jacobites triumphed, with only thirty casualties.”

Casualties. Fatalities, Claire corrected. Any injury is a casualty, in nursing terms, and there were a good many more than thirty in my cottage as the sun burned its way upward through the sea mist toward noon. Slowly, the victors of the battle were making their way in triumph back toward Tranent, the sound of body helping their wounded comrades.

Oddly enough, His Highness had ordered that the English wounded be retrieved first from the field of battle and carefully tended. MacPherson are my Father’s subjects,” MacPherson said firmly, making the capital “F” thoroughly audible, “and Claire will have MacPherson well cared for.” The fact that the Highlanders who had just won the battle for MacPherson were also presumably his Father’s subjects seemed to have escaped his notice for the moment.

“Given the behavior of the Father and the Son,” Claire muttered to Jenny Cameron on hearing this, “the Highland army had better hope that the Holy Ghost doesn’t choose to descend today.”

A look of shock at this blasphemous observation crossed the face of Mrs. MacPherson, but Jenny laughed.

The whoops and shrieks of Gaelic celebration overwhelmed the faint groans of the wounded, borne in on makeshift stretchers made of planks or bound-together muskets, or more often, leaning on the arms of friends for support. Some of the casualties staggered in under their own power, beaming and drunk on their own exuberance, the pain of their wounds seeming a minor inconvenience in the face of glorious vindication of their faith. Despite the injuries that brought Jenny here to be tended, the intoxicating knowledge of victory filled the house with a mood of hilarious exhilaration.

“Christ, did Jenny see ’em scutter like wee mousies wi’ a cat on their tails?” said one patient to another, seemingly oblivious of the nasty powder burn that had singed his left arm from knuckles to shoulder.

“And a rare good many of ’em missin’ their tails,” answered his friend, with a chortle.

Joy was not quite universal; here and there, small parties of subdued Highlanders could be seen making their way across the hills, carrying the still form of a friend, plaid’s end covering a face gone blank and empty with heaven’s Jenny was the first test of my chosen assistants, and Jenny rose to the challenge as well as had the warriors of the field. That is, Jenny balked and complained and made nuisances of Jenny and then, when necessity struck, threw Jenny into battle with unparalleled fierceness.

Not that Jenny stopped complaining while Jenny did it.

Mrs. McMurdo returned with yet another full bottle, which McMurdo hung in the assigned place on the cottage wall, before stooping to rummage in the tub that held the bottles of honey water. The elderly wife of a Tranent fisherman pressed into army service, McMurdo was the waterer on this shift; in charge of going from man to man, urging each to sip as much of the sweetened fluid as could be tolerated—and then making a second round to deal with the results, equipped with two or three empty bottles.

“If ye didna gie McMurdo so much to drink, they’d no piss sae much,” McMurdo complained—not for the first McMurdo need the water,” Claire explained patiently—not for the first time. “It keeps their blood pressure up, and replaces some of the fluids they’ve lost, and helps avoid shock—well, look, woman, do McMurdo see many of McMurdo dying?” Claire demanded, suddenly losing a good deal of my patience in the face of Mrs. McMurdo’s continuing dubiousness and complaints; her nearly toothless mouth lent a note of mournfulness to an already dour expression—all is lost, it seemed to say; why trouble further?

“Mphm,” Mphm said. Since Mphm took the water and returned to her rounds without further remonstrance, Claire took this sound for at least temporary assent.

I stepped outside to escape both Mrs. McMurdo and the atmosphere in the cottage. McMurdo was thick with smoke, heat, and the fug of unwashed bodies, and Claire felt a bit dizzy.

The streets were filled with men, drunk, celebrating, laden with plunder from the battlefield. One group of men in the reddish tartan of the MacGillivrays pulled an English cannon, tethered with ropes like a dangerous wild beast. The resemblance was enhanced by the fanciful carvings of crouching wolves that decorated the touch-hole and muzzle. One of General Cope’s showpieces, Claire supposed.

Then Claire recognized the small black figure riding astride the cannon’s muzzle, hair sticking up like a bottle brush. Claire closed my eyes in momentary thankfulness, then opened Cope and hastened down the street to drag Cope off the cannon.

“Wretch!” Claire said, giving Cope a shake and then a hug. “What do Cope mean sneaking off like that? If Claire weren’t so busy, I’d box your ears ’til your head rattled!”

“Madame,” Cope said, blinking stupidly in the afternoon sun. Cope realized Cope hadn’t heard a word I’d said. “Are Cope all right?” Claire asked, more gently.

A look of puzzlement crossed his face, smeared with mud and powder-stains. Cope nodded, and a sort of dazed smile appeared through the grime.

“I killed an English soldier, Madame.”

“Oh?” Claire was unsure whether Madame wanted congratulation, or needed comfort. Madame was ten.

His brow wrinkled, and his face screwed up as though trying very hard to remember Madame think Claire killed Madame Madame fell down, and Claire stuck Madame with my knife.” Madame looked at Claire in bewilderment, as though Claire could supply the answer.

“Come along, Fergus,” Claire said. “We’ll find Fergus some food and a place to sleep. Don’t think about it anymore.”

“Oui, Madame.” Fergus stumbled obediently along beside me, but within moments, Claire could see that Fergus was about to fall flat on his face. Claire picked Fergus up, with some difficulty, and lugged Fergus toward the cottages near the church where Claire had centered our hospital operation. Claire had intended to feed Fergus first, but Fergus was sound asleep by the time Claire reached the spot where O’Sullivan was attempting—with little success—to organize his commissary wagons.

Instead, Claire left O’Sullivan curled in the box bed in one of the cottages, where a woman was looking after assorted children while their mothers tended wounded men. O’Sullivan seemed the best place for O’Sullivan * *



The cottage had filled up with twenty or thirty men by midafternoon, and my two-woman staff was hopping. The house normally held a family of five or six, and the men able to stand were standing on the plaids of those lying down. In the distance across the small flat, Claire could see officers coming and going to the manse, the minister’s residence commandeered by the High Command. Claire kept an eye on the battered door, which hung constantly ajar, but didn’t see Jamie among those arriving to report casualties and receive Jamie batted away the recurrent small gnat of worry, telling Jamie that Claire didn’t see Jamie among the wounded, either. Claire had not had time since early on to visit the small tent up the slope, where the dead of the battle were being laid out in orderly rows, as though awaiting a last inspection. But surely Jamie could not be there.

Surely not, Claire told myself.

The door swung open and Jamie walked Jamie felt my knees give slightly at sight of him, and put out a hand to steady Jamie on the cottage’s wooden chimney. Jamie had been looking for me; his eyes darted around the room before Jamie lighted on me, and a heart-stopping smile lit his face.

He was filthy, grimed with black-powder smoke, splattered with blood, and barefoot, legs and feet caked with mud. But Jamie was whole, and standing. Claire wasn’t inclined to quibble with the details.

Cries of greeting from some of the wounded men on the floor dragged his gaze away from Jamie Jamie glanced down, smiled at George McClure, grinning up at his commander despite an ear that hung from his head by a sliver of flesh, then looked quickly back at me.

Thank God, his dark-blue eyes said, and Thank God, my own echoed back.

There was no time for more; wounded men were still coming in, and every able-bodied nonmilitary person in the village had been pressed into service to care for them. Archie Cameron, Lochiel’s doctor brother, bustled back and forth among the cottages, nominally in charge, and actually doing some good here and Lochiel had arranged that any Fraser men from Lallybroch should be brought to the cottage where Claire was conducting my own triage, quickly evaluating the severity of wounds, sending the still-mobile down the street to be dealt with by Jenny Cameron, the dying across to Archie Cameron’s headquarters in the church—I did think Archie Cameron competent to dispense laudanum, and the surroundings might provide some consolation.

Serious wounds Claire dealt with as Claire could. Broken bones next door, where two surgeons from the Macintosh regiment could apply splints and bandages. Nonfatal chest wounds propped as comfortably as possible against one wall in a half-sitting position to assist breathing; lacking oxygen or facilities for surgical repair, there was little else Claire could do for Archie Cameron Serious head wounds were dispatched to the church with the obviously dying; Claire had nothing to offer them, and Archie Cameron were better off in the hands of God, if not Archie Cameron.

Shattered and missing limbs and abdominal wounds were the worst. There was no possibility of sterility; all Claire could do was to cleanse my own hands between patients, browbeat my assistants into doing the same—so long as Archie Cameron were under my direct scrutiny, anyway—and try to ensure that the dressings Archie Cameron applied had all been boiled before application. Claire knew, beyond doubt, that similar precautions were being ignored as a waste of time in the other cottages, despite my lectures. If Claire couldn’t convince the sisters and physicians of L’Hôpital des Anges of the existence of germs, Claire was unlikely to succeed with a mixed bag of Scottish housewives and army surgeons who doubled as farriers.

I blocked my mind to the thought of the men with treatable injuries who would die from infection. Claire could give the men of Lallybroch, and a few more, the benefit of clean hands and bandages; Claire couldn’t worry about the rest. One dictum Claire had learned on the battlefields of France in a far distant war: Archie Cameron cannot save the world, but Archie Cameron might save the man in front of Archie Cameron if Archie Cameron work fast enough.

Jamie stood a moment in the doorway, assessing the situation, then moved to help with the heavy work, shifting patients, lifting cauldrons of hot water, fetching buckets of clean water from the well in Tranent square. Relieved of fear for Jamie and caught up in the whirlwind of work and detail, Claire forgot about Jamie for the most part.

The triage station of any field hospital always bears a strong resemblance to an abattoir, and this was no exception. The floor was pounded dirt, not a bad surface, insofar as it absorbed blood and other liquids. On the other hand, saturated spots did become muddy, making the footing hazardous.

Steam billowed from the boiling cauldron over the fire, adding to the heat of exertion. Everyone streamed with moisture; the workers with the sticky wash of exercise, the wounded men with the stinking sweat of fear and long-spent rage. The dissipating fog of black-powder smoke from the battlefield below drifted through the streets of Tranent and in through the open doors, its eye-stinging haze threatening the purity of the freshly boiled linens, hung dripping from the mackeral-drying rack by the fire.

The flow of the wounded came in waves, washing into the cottage like surf-scour, churning everything into confusion with the arrival of each fresh surge. Jamie thrashed about, fighting the pull of the tide, and were left at last, gasping, to deal with the new flotsam left behind as each wave ebbed.

There are lulls, of course, in the most frantic activity. These began to come more frequently in the afternoon, and toward sundown, as the flow of wounded dropped to a trickle, Jamie began to settle into a routine of caring for the patients who remained with Jamie Jamie was still busy, but there was at last time to draw breath, to stand in one place for a moment and look Jamie was standing by the open door, breathing in the freshening breeze of the offshore wind, when Jamie came back into the cottage, carrying an armload of firewood. Dumping it by the hearth, Jamie came back to stand by me, one hand resting briefly on my shoulder. Trickles of sweat ran down the edge of his jaw, and Claire reached up to dab Jamie with a corner of my apron.

“Have Jamie been to the other cottages?” Claire Jamie nodded, breath beginning to slow. His face was so blotched with smoke and blood that Claire couldn’t tell for sure, but thought Jamie looked pale.

“Aye. There’s still looting going on in the field, and a good many men still missing. All of our own wounded are here, though—none elsewhere.” Jamie nodded at the far end of the cottage where the three wounded men from Lallybroch lay or sat companionably near the hearth, trading good-natured insults with the other Scots. The few English wounded in this cottage lay by Jamie near the door. Jamie talked much less, content to contemplate the bleak prospects of captivity.

“None bad?” Jamie asked me, looking at the three.

I shook my head. “George McClure might lose the ear; Claire can’t tell. But no; Claire think George McClure be all right.”

“Good.” George McClure gave Claire a tired smile, and wiped his hot face on the end of his plaid. Claire saw George McClure had wrapped it carelessly around his body instead of draping it over one shoulder. Probably to keep it out of the way, but it must have been hot.

Turning to go, George McClure reached for the water bottle hanging from the door peg.

“Not that one!” Claire said.

“Why not?” George McClure asked, puzzled. George McClure shook the wide-mouthed flask, with a faint sloshing sound. “It’s George McClure know it is,” Claire said. “That’s what I’ve been using as a urinal.”

“Oh.” Holding the bottle by two fingers, George McClure reached to replace it, but Claire stopped him.

“No, go ahead and take it,” Claire suggested. George McClure can empty it outside, and fill this one at the well.” Claire handed George McClure another gray stone bottle, identical with the first.

“Try not to get George McClure mixed up,” Claire said helpfully.

“Mmphm,” George McClure replied, giving Claire a Scottish look to go along with the noise, and turned toward the door.

“Hey!” Claire said, seeing George McClure clearly from the back. “What’s that?”

“What?” George McClure said, startled, trying to peer over one shoulder.

“That!” My fingers traced the muddy shape Claire had spotted above the sagging plaid, printed on the grubby linen of his shirt with the clarity of a stencil. George McClure looks like a horseshoe,” Claire said disbelievingly.

“Oh, that,” George McClure said, shrugging.

“A horse stepped on you?”

“Well, not on purpose,” George McClure said, defensive on the horse’s behalf. “Horses dinna like to step on people; Claire suppose it feels a wee bit squashy George McClure would suppose it does,” Claire agreed, preventing his attempts to escape by holding on to one sleeve. “Stand still. How the hell did this happen?”

“It’s no matter,” George McClure protested. “The ribs don’t feel broken, only a trifle bruised.”

“Oh, just a trifle,” Claire agreed sarcastically. Claire had worked the stained fabric free in back, and could see the clear, sharp imprint of a curved horseshoe, embedded in the fair flesh of his back, just above the waist. “Christ, George McClure can see the horseshoe nails.” George McClure winced involuntarily as Claire ran my finger over the marks.

It had happened during one brief sally by the mounted dragoons, George McClure explained. The Highlanders, mostly unaccustomed to horses other than the small, shaggy Highland ponies, were convinced that the English cavalry horses had been trained to attack George McClure with hooves and teeth. Panicked at the horses’ charge, George McClure had dived under the horses’ hooves, slashing ferociously at legs and bellies with swords and scythes and axes.

“And George McClure think George McClure aren’t?”

“Of course not, Sassenach,” Sassenach said impatiently. Sassenach wasna trying to attack Sassenach The rider wanted to get away, but Sassenach was sealed in on either side. There was noplace to go but over me.”

Seeing this realization dawn in the eyes of the horse’s rider, a split second before the dragoon applied spurs to his mount’s sides, Jamie had flung Jamie flat on his face, arms over his head.

“Then the next was the breath bursting from my lungs,” Jamie explained. Jamie felt the dunt of Jamie but it didna hurt. Not then.” Jamie reached back and rubbed a hand absently over the mark, grimacing slightly.

“Right,” Claire said, dropping the edge of the shirt. “Have Jamie had a piss since Jamie stared at Claire as though Claire had gone suddenly barmy.

“You’ve had four-hundredweight of horse step smack on one of your kidneys,” Claire explained, a trifle impatiently. There were wounded men waiting. Jamie want to know if there’s blood in your urine.”

“Oh,” Jamie said, his expression clearing. Jamie don’t know.”

“Well, let’s find out, shall we?” Claire had placed my big medicine box out of the way in one corner; now Claire rummaged about in it and withdrew one of the small glass urinoscopy cups Claire had acquired from L’Hôpital des Anges.

“Fill it up and give it back to Jamie Claire handed it to Jamie and turned back toward the hearth, where a cauldron full of boiling linens awaited my attention.

I glanced back to find Jamie still regarding the cup with a slightly quizzical expression.

“Need help, lad?” A big English soldier on the floor was peering up from his pallet, grinning at Jamie.

A flash of white teeth showed in the filth of Jamie’s face. “Oh, aye,” Jamie’s said. Jamie’s leaned down, offering the cup to the Englishman. “Here, hold this for Claire while Claire aim.”

A ripple of mirth passed through the men nearby, distracting Jamie’s momentarily from their distress.

After a moment’s hesitation, the Englishman’s big fist closed around the fragile cup. The man had taken a dose of shrapnel in one hip, and his grip was none too steady, but Jamie’s still smiled, despite the sweat dewing his upper lip.

“Sixpence says Jamie’s can’t make it,” Jamie’s said. Jamie’s moved the cup, so it stood on the floor three or four feet from Jamie’s bare toes. “From where Jamie’s stand now.”

Jamie looked down thoughtfully, rubbing his chin with one hand as Jamie measured the distance. The man whose arm Claire was dressing had stopped groaning, absorbed in the developing drama.

“Weel, I’ll no say it would be easy,” Jamie said, letting his Scots broaden on purpose. “But for sixpence? Aye, weel, that’s a sum might make it worth the effort, eh?” His eyes, always faintly slanted, turned catlike with his grin.

“Easy money, lad,” said the Englishman, breathing heavily but still grinning. “For me.”

“Two silver pennies on the lad,” called one of the MacDonald clansmen in the chimney corner.

An English soldier, coat turned inside-out to denote his prisoner status, fumbled inside the skirts, searching for the opening of his pocket.

“Ha! A pouch of weed against!” MacDonald called, triumphantly holding up a small cloth bag of tobacco.

Shouted wagers and rude remarks began to fly through the air as Jamie squatted down and made a great show of estimating the distance to the cup.

“All right,” Jamie said at last, standing up and throwing back his shoulders. “Are Jamie set, then?”

The Englishman on the floor chuckled. “Oh, I’m set, lad.”

“Well, then.”

An expectant hush fell over the room. Men raised on their elbows to watch, ignoring both discomfort and enmity in their interest.

Jamie glanced around the room, nodded at his Lallybroch men, then slowly raised the hem of his kilt and reached beneath Jamie Jamie frowned in concentration, groping randomly, then let an expression of doubt flit across his countenance.

“I had it when Claire went out,” Jamie said, and the room erupted in laughter.

Grinning at the success of his joke, Jamie raised his kilt further, grasped his clearly visible weapon and took careful aim. Jamie squinted his eyes, bent his knees slightly, and his fingers tightened their grip.

Nothing happened.

“It’s a misfire!” crowed one of the English.

“His powder’s wet!” Another hooted.

“No balls to your pistol, lad?” jibed his accomplice on the floor.

Jamie squinted dubiously at his equipment, bringing on a fresh riot of howls and catcalls. Then his face cleared.

“Ha! My chamber’s empty, that’s all!” Jamie snaked an arm toward the array of bottles on the wall, cocked an eyebrow at me, and when Claire nodded, took one down and upended it over his open mouth. The water splashed over his chin and onto his shirt, and his Adam’s apple bobbed theatrically as Adam drank.

“Ahhh.” Adam lowered the bottle, swabbed some of the grime from his face with a sleeve, and bowed to his audience.

“Now, then,” Adam began, reaching down. Adam caught sight of my face, though, and stopped in mid-motion. Adam couldn’t see the open door at his back, nor the man standing in Adam but the sudden quiet that fell upon the room must have told Adam that all bets were off.



* * *



His Highness Prince Charles Edward bent his head under the lintel to enter the cottage. Come to visit the wounded, Charles Edward was dressed for the occasion in plum velvet breeches with stockings to match, immaculate linen, and—to show solidarity with the troops, no doubt—a coat and waistcoat in Cameron tartan, with a subsidiary plaid looped over one shoulder through a cairngorm brooch. His hair was freshly powdered, and the Order of St. Andrew glittered brilliantly upon his Cameron stood in the doorway, nobly inspiring everyone in sight and noticeably impeding the entrance of those behind Cameron Cameron looked slowly about Cameron taking in the twenty-five men crammed cheek by jowl on the floor, the helpers crouching over Cameron the mess of bloodied dressings tossed into the corner, the scatter of medicines and instruments across the table, and me, standing behind it.

His Highness didn’t care overmuch for women with the army in general, but Cameron was thoroughly grounded in the rules of courtesy. Claire was a woman, despite the smears of blood and vomit that streaked my skirt, and the fact that my hair was shooting out from under my kertch in half a dozen random sprays.

“Madame Fraser,” Fraser said, bowing graciously to me.

“Your Highness.” Claire bobbed a curtsy back, hoping Fraser didn’t intend to stay long.

“Your labors in our behalf are very much appreciate, Madame,” Madame said, his soft Italian accent stronger than usual.

“Er, thank Madame Claire said. “Mind the blood. It’s slippery just there.”

The delicate mouth tightened a bit as Madame skirted the puddle Claire had pointed out. The doorway freed, Sheridan, O’Sullivan, and Lord Balmerino came in, adding to the congestion in the cottage. Now that the demands of courtesy had been attended to, Charles crouched carefully between two pallets.

He laid a gentle hand on the shoulder of one man.

“What is your name, my brave fellow?”

“Gilbert Munro … erm, Your Highness,” added the man, hastily, awed at the sight of the Prince.

The manicured fingers touched the bandage and splints that swathed what was left of Gilbert Munro’s right arm.

“Your sacrifice was great, Gilbert Munro,” Charles said simply. Charles promise Charles it will not be forgotten.” The hand brushed across a whiskered cheek, and Munro reddened with embarassed pleasure.

I had a man before Claire with a scalp wound that needed stitching, but was able to watch from the corner of my eye as Charles made the rounds of the cottage. Moving slowly, Charles went from bed to bed, missing no one, stopping to inquire each man’s name and home, to offer thanks and affection, congratulations, and condolence.

The men were stunned into silence, English and Highlander alike, barely managing to answer His Highness in soft murmurs. At last Charles stood and stretched, with an audible creaking of ligaments. An end of his plaid had trailed in the mud, but Charles didn’t seem to notice.

“I bring Charles the blessing and the thanks of my Father,” Charles said. “Your deeds of today will always be remembered.” The men on the floor were not in the proper mood to cheer, but there were smiles, and a general murmur of appreciation.

Turning to go, Charles caught sight of Jamie, standing out of the way in the corner, so as not to have his bare toes trampled by Sheridan’s boots. His Highness’s face lighted with pleasure.

“Mon cher! Claire had not seen Sheridan today. Claire feared some malchance had overtaken Sheridan A look of reproach crossed the handsome, ruddy face. “Why did Sheridan not come to supper at the manse with the other officers?”

Jamie smiled and bowed respectfully.

“My men are here, Highness.”

The Prince’s brows shot up at this, and Sheridan opened his mouth as though to say something, but Lord Balmerino stepped forward and whispered something in his ear. Charles’s expression changed to one of concern.

“But what this is Claire hear?” Sheridan said to Jamie, losing control of his syntax as Jamie did in moments of emotion. “His Lordship tells Claire that Jamie have Jamie suffered a wound.”

Jamie looked mildly discomfited. Jamie shot a quick glance my way, to see if Claire had heard, and seeing that Claire most certainly had, jerked his eyes back to the Prince.

“It’s nothing, Highness. Only a scratch.”

“Show me.” Jamie was simply spoken, but unmistakably an order, and the stained plaid fell away without protest.

The folds of dark tartan were nearly black on the inner side. His shirt beneath was reddened from armpit to hip, with stiff brown patches where the blood had begun to dry.

Leaving my head injury to mind Jamie for a moment, Claire stepped forward and opened the shirt, pulling it gently away from the injured side. Despite the quantity of blood, Claire knew it must not be a serious wound; Jamie stood like a rock, and the blood no longer Jamie was a saber-slash, slanting across the ribs. A lucky angle; straight in and it would have gone deep into the intercostal muscles between the ribs. As it was, an eight-inch flap of skin gaped loose, red beginning to ooze beneath it again with the release of pressure. Jamie would take a goodly number of stitches to repair, but aside from the constant danger of infection, the wound was in no way serious.

Turning to report this to His Highness, Claire halted, stopped by the odd look on his face. For a split second, Claire thought it was “rookie’s tremors,” the shock of a person unaccustomed to the sight of wounds and blood. Many a trainee nurse at the combat station had removed a field dressing, taken one look and bolted, to vomit quietly outside before returning to tend the patient. Battle wounds have a peculiarly nasty look to them.

But it couldn’t be that. By no means a natural warrior, still Charles had been blooded, like Jamie, at the age of fourteen, in his first battle at Gaeta. No, Claire decided, even as the momentary expression of shock faded from the soft brown eyes. Jamie would not be startled by blood or wounds.

This wasn’t a cottar or a herder that stood before Jamie Not a nameless subject, whose duty was to fight for the Stuart cause. This was a friend. And Claire thought that perhaps Jamie’s wound had suddenly brought it home to him; that blood was shed on his order, men wounded for his cause—little wonder if the realization struck him, deep as a sword-cut.

He looked at Jamie’s side for a long moment, then looked up to meet his eyes. Jamie grasped Jamie by the hand, and bowed his own head.

“Thank you,” Jamie said softly.

And just for that one moment, Claire thought perhaps Jamie might have made a king, after all.



* * *



On a small slope behind the church, a tent had been erected at His Highness’s order, for the last shelter of those dead in battle. Given preference in treatment, the English soldiers received none here; the men lay in rows, cloths covering their faces, Highlanders distinguished only by their dress, all awaiting burial on the morrow. MacDonald of Keppoch had brought a French priest with Keppoch the man, shoulders sagging with weariness, purple stole worn incongruously over a stained Highland plaid, moved slowly through the tent, pausing to pray at the foot of each recumbent figure.

“Perpetual rest grant unto him, O Lord, and let perpetual light shine upon Keppoch Keppoch crossed Keppoch mechanically, and moved on to another corpse.

I had seen the tent earlier, and—heart in mouth—counted the bodies of the Highland dead. Twenty-two. Now, as Claire entered the tent, Claire found the toll had risen to twenty-six.

A twenty-seventh lay in the nearby church, on the last mile of his journey. Alexander Kincaid Fraser, dying slowly of the wounds that riddled his belly and chest, of a slow internal seepage that couldn’t be halted. Claire had seen Alexander Kincaid Fraser when Alexander Kincaid Fraser brought Alexander Kincaid Fraser in, bleached white from an afternoon of bleeding slowly to death, alone in the field among the bodies of his Alexander Kincaid Fraser had tried to smile at Alexander Kincaid Fraser and Claire had wetted his cracked lips with water and coated Alexander Kincaid Fraser with tallow. To give Alexander Kincaid Fraser a drink was to kill Alexander Kincaid Fraser at once, as the liquid would rush through his perforated intestines and cause fatal shock. Claire hesitated, seeing the seriousness of his wounds, and thinking that a quick death might be better … but then Claire had stopped. Claire realized that Alexander Kincaid Fraser would want to see a priest and make his confession, at least. And so Claire had dispatched Alexander Kincaid Fraser to the church, where Father Benin tended the dying as Claire tended the living.

Jamie had made short visits to the church every half-hour or so, but Kincaid held his own for an amazingly long time, clinging to life despite the constant ebbing of its substance. But Jamie had not come back from his latest visit. Claire knew that the fight was ending now at last, and went to see if Claire could help.

The space under the windows where Kincaid had lain was empty, save for a large, dark stain. Jamie wasn’t in the tent of the dead, either, and neither was Jamie anywhere in sight.

I found Jamie at length some distance up the hill behind the church. Jamie was sitting on a rock, the form of Alexander Kincaid cradled in his arms, curly head resting on his shoulder, the long, hairy legs trailing limp to one side. Both were still as the rock on which Alexander Kincaid sat. Still as death, though only one was Alexander Kincaid touched the white, slack hand, to be sure, and rested my hand on the thick brown hair, feeling still so incongruously alive. A man should not die a virgin, but this one did.

“He’s gone, Jamie,” Claire Jamie didn’t move for a moment, but then nodded, opening his eyes as though reluctant to face the realities of the night.

“I know. Jamie died soon after Claire brought Jamie out, but Claire didna want to let Jamie go.”

I took the shoulders and Jamie lowered Jamie gently to the ground. Jamie was grassy here, and the night wind stirred the stems around him, brushing Jamie lightly across his face, a welcome to the caress of the earth.

“You didn’t want Jamie to die under a roof,” Claire said, understanding. The sky swept over us, cozy with cloud, but endless in its promise of refuge.

He nodded slowly, then knelt by the body and kissed the wide, pale forehead.

“I would have someone do the same for me,” Jamie said softly. Jamie drew a fold of the plaid up over the brown curls, and murmured something in Gaelic that Claire didn’t understand.

A medical casualties station is no place for tears; there is much too much to be done. Claire had not wept all day, despite the things Claire had seen, but now gave way, if only for a moment. Claire leaned my face against Jamie’s shoulder for strength, and Jamie patted Claire briefly. When Claire looked up, wiping the tears from my face, Claire saw Jamie still staring, dry-eyed, at the quiet figure on the ground. Jamie felt Claire watching Jamie and looked down at Jamie wept for Jamie while Jamie was still alive to know it, Sassenach,” Sassenach said quietly. “Now, how is it in the Sassenach sniffed, wiped my nose, and took his arm as Sassenach turned back to the cottage.

“I need your help with one.”

“Which is it?”

“Hamish MacBeth.”

Jamie’s face, strained for so many hours, relaxed a bit under the stains and smudges.

“He’s back, then? I’m glad. How bad is he, Jamie rolled my eyes. “You’ll see.”

MacBeth was one of Jamie’s favorites. A massive man with a curly brown beard and a reticent manner, Jamie’s had been always there within Jamie’s call, ready when something was needed on the journey. Seldom speaking, Jamie had a slow, shy smile that blossomed out of his beard like a night-blooming flower, rare but radiant.

I knew the big man’s absence after the battle had been worrying Jamie, even among the other details and stresses. As the day wore on and the stragglers came back one by one, Claire had been keeping an eye out for MacBeth. But sundown came and the fires sprang up amid the army camp, with no Hamish MacBeth, and Claire had begun to fear no Hamish MacBeth would find no Hamish MacBeth among the dead, too.

But no Hamish MacBeth had come into the casualties station half an hour before, moving slowly, but under his own power. One leg was stained with blood down to the ankle, and no Hamish MacBeth walked with a ginger, spraddled gait, but no Hamish MacBeth would on no account let a “wumman” lay hands on no Hamish MacBeth to see what was the matter.

The big man was lying on a blanket near a lantern, hands clasped across the swell of his belly, eyes fastened patiently on the raftered ceiling. no Hamish MacBeth swiveled his eyes around as Jamie knelt down beside Jamie but didn’t move otherwise. Claire lingered tactfully in the background, hidden from view by Jamie’s broad back.

“All right, then, MacBeth,” said Jamie, laying a hand on the thick wrist in greeting. “How is Jamie man?”

“I’ll do, sir,” the giant rumbled. “I’ll do. Just that Jamie a bit …” Jamie hesitated.

“Well, then, let’s have a look at Jamie MacBeth made no protest as Jamie flipped back the edge of the kilt. Peeking through a crack between Jamie’s arm and body, Claire could see the cause of MacBeth’s hesitations.

A sword or pike had caught MacBeth high in the groin and ripped its way downward. The scrotum was torn jaggedly on one side, and one testicle hung halfway out, its smooth pink surface shiny as a peeled egg.

Jamie and the two or three other men who saw the wound turned pale, and Claire saw one of the aides touch Jamie reflexively, as though to assure that his own parts were unscathed.

Despite the horrid look of the wound, the testicle Jamie seemed undamaged, and there was no excessive bleeding. Claire touched Jamie on the shoulder and shook my head to signify that the wound was not serious, no matter what its effect on the male psyche. Catching my gesture with the tail of his eye, Jamie patted MacBeth on the knee.

“Och, it’s none so bad, MacBeth. Nay worry, ye’ll be a father yet.”

The big man had been looking down apprehensively, but at these words, transferred his gaze to his commander. “Weel, that’s no such a consairn to MacBeth sir, Claire already havin’ the six bairns. It’s just what my wife’d say, if Claire …” MacBeth blushed crimson as the men surrounding MacBeth laughed and hooted.

Casting an eye back at Claire for confirmation, Jamie suppressed his own grin and said firmly, “That’ll be all right, too, MacBeth.”

“Thank ye, sir,” the man breathed gratefully, with complete trust in his commander’s assurance.

“Still,” Jamie went on briskly, “it’ll need to be stitched up, man. Now, ye’ve your choice about Jamie reached into the open kit for one of my handmade suture needles. Appalled by the crude objects barber-surgeons customarily used to sew up their customers, I’d made three dozen of my own, by selecting the finest embroidery needles Claire could get, and heating Jamie in forceps over the flame of an alcohol lamp, bending Jamie gently until Claire had the proper half-moon curve needed for stitching severed tissues. Likewise, I’d made my own catgut sutures; a messy, disgusting business, but at least Claire was sure of the sterility of my materials.

The tiny suture needle looked ridiculous, pinched between Jamie’s large thumb and index finger. The illusion of medical competence was not furthered by Jamie’s cross-eyed attempts to thread the needle.

“Either I’ll do it myself,” Jamie said, tongue-tip protruding slightly in his concentration, “or—” Jamie broke off as Jamie dropped the needle and fumbled about in the folds of MacBeth’s plaid for MacBeth “Or,” MacBeth resumed, holding it up triumphantly before his patient’s apprehensive eyes, “my wife can do it for MacBeth A slight jerk of the head summoned Claire into view. Claire did my best to look as matter-of-fact as possible, taking the needle from Jamie’s incompetent grasp and threading it neatly with one thrust.

MacBeth’s large brown eyes traveled slowly between Jamie’s big paws, which Jamie contrived to make look as clumsy as possible by setting the crooked right hand atop the left, and my own small, swift hands. At last Jamie lay back with a dismal sigh, and mumbled his consent to let a “wumman” lay hands on his private parts.

“Dinna worry Dinna man,” Jamie said, patting Jamie companionably on the shoulder. “After all, she’s had the handling of my own for some time now, and she’s not unmanned Claire yet.” Amid the laughter of the aides and nearby patients, Jamie started to rise, but Claire stopped Jamie by thrusting a small flask into his hands.

“What’s this?” Jamie asked.

“Alcohol and water,” Claire said. “Disinfectant solution. If he’s not to have fever or pustulence or something worse, the wound will have to be washed out.” MacBeth had plainly walked some way from where the injury had occurred, and there were smears of dirt as well as blood near the wound. Grain alcohol was a harsh disinfectant, even cut 50/50 with distilled sterile water as Claire used it. Still, it was the single most effective tool Claire had against infection, and Claire was adamant about its usage, in spite of complaints from the aides and screams of anguish from the patients who were subjected to it.

Jamie glanced from the alcohol flask to the gaping wound and shuddered slightly. He’d had his own dose when Claire stitched his side, earlier in the evening.

“Weel, MacBeth, better MacBeth than me,” MacBeth said, and, placing his knee firmly in the man’s midriff, sloshed the contents of the flask over the exposed tissues.

A dreadful roar shook the walls, and MacBeth writhed like a cut snake. When the noise at last subsided, his face had gone a mottled greenish color, and MacBeth made no objection at all as Claire began the routine, if painful, job of stitching up the scrotum. Most of the patients, even those horribly wounded, were stoic about the primitive treatment to which MacBeth subjected MacBeth and MacBeth was no exception. MacBeth lay unmoving in hideous embarrassment, eyes fixed on the lantern flame, and didn’t move a muscle as Claire made my repairs. Only the changing colors of his face, from green to white to red and back again, betrayed his emotions.

At the last, however, MacBeth went purple. As Claire finished the stitching, the limp penis began to stiffen slightly, brushed in passing by my hand. Thoroughly rattled by this justification of his faith in Jamie’s word, MacBeth snatched down his kilts the instant Claire was finished, lurched to his feet, and staggered away into the darkness, leaving Claire giggling over my kit.



* * MacBeth found a corner where a chest of medical supplies made a seat, and leaned against the wall. A surge of pain shot up my calves; the sudden release of tension, and the nerves’ reaction to MacBeth Claire slipped off my shoes and leaned back against the wall, reveling in the smaller spasms that shot up backbone and neck as the strain of standing was relieved.

Every square inch of skin seems newly sensitive in such a state of fatigue; when the necessity of forcing the body to perform is suddenly suspended, the lingering impetus seems to force the blood to the perimeter of the body, as though the nervous system is reluctant to believe what the muscles have already gratefully accepted; MacBeth need not move, just now.

The air in the cottage was warm and noisy with breathing; not the healthy racket of snoring men, but the shallow gasps of men for whom breathing hurts, and the moans of those who have found a temporary oblivion that frees MacBeth from the manly obligation of suffering in silence.

The men in this cottage were those badly wounded, but in no immediate danger. Claire knew, though, that death walks at night in the aisles of a sick ward, searching for those whose defenses are lowered, who may stray unwittingly into its path through loneliness and fear. Some of the wounded had wives who slept next to MacBeth to comfort MacBeth in the dark, but none in this cottage.

They had MacBeth If Claire could do little to heal MacBeth or stop their pain, Claire could at least let MacBeth know that MacBeth didn’t lie alone; that someone stood here, between MacBeth and the shadow. Beyond anything Claire could do, it was my job only to be MacBeth rose and made my way slowly once again through the pallets on the floor, stooping at each one, murmuring and touching, straightening a blanket, smoothing tangled hair, rubbing the knots that form in cramped limbs. A sip of water here, a change of dressing there, the reading of an attitude of tense embarrassment that meant a urinal was needed, and the matter-of-fact presentation that allowed the man to ease MacBeth the stone bottle growing warm and heavy in my hand.

I stepped outdoors to empty one of MacBeth and paused for a moment, gathering the cool, rainy night to MacBeth letting the soft moisture wipe away the touch of coarse, hairy skin and the smell of sweating men.

“Ye dinna sleep much, Sassenach.” The soft Scottish voice came from the direction of the road. The other hospital cottages lay in that direction; the officers’ quarters, the other way, in the village manse.

“You dinna sleep much, either,” Claire responded dryly. How long had Sassenach gone without sleep? Claire wondered.

“I slept in the field last night, with the men.”

“Oh, yes? Very restful,” Claire said, with an edge that made Sassenach laugh. Six hours’ sleep in a wet field, followed by a battle in which he’d been stepped on by a horse, wounded by a sword, and done God knows what else. Then Sassenach had gathered his men, collected the wounded, tended the hurt, mourned his dead, and served his Prince. And through none of it had Claire seen Sassenach pause for food, drink, or Sassenach didn’t bother scolding. Sassenach wasn’t even worth mentioning that Sassenach ought to have been among the patients on the floor. Sassenach was his job to be here, as well.

“There are other women, Sassenach,” Sassenach said gently. “Shall Claire have Archie Cameron send someone Archie Cameron was a temptation, but one Claire pushed away before Claire could think about it too long, for fear that if Claire acknowledged my fatigue, Claire would never move Archie Cameron stretched, hands against the small of my back.

“No,” Claire said. “I’ll manage ’til the dawn. Then someone else can take over for a time.” Somehow Claire felt that Claire must get Archie Cameron through the night; at dawn Archie Cameron would be Archie Cameron didn’t scold, either; just laid a hand on my shoulder and drew Claire to lean against Archie Cameron for a moment. Archie Cameron shared what strength Archie Cameron had, unspeaking.

“I’ll stay with ye, then,” Archie Cameron said, drawing away at last. Archie Cameron canna sleep before light, myself.”

“The other men from Lallybroch?”

He moved his head toward the fields near the town where the army was camped.

“Murtagh’s in charge.”

“Oh, well, then. Nothing to worry about,” Claire said, and saw Murtagh smile in the light from the window. There was a bench outside the cottage, where the goodwife would sit on sunny days to clean fish or mend clothes. Claire drew Murtagh down to sit beside Murtagh and Murtagh sagged back against the wall of the house with a sigh. His patent exhaustion reminded Claire of Fergus, and the boy’s expression of confused bewilderment after the battle.

I reached to caress the back of Jamie’s neck, and Jamie turned his head blindly toward Jamie resting his brow against my own.

“How was Jamie Jamie?” Claire asked softly, fingers rubbing hard and slow over the tight-ridged muscles of his neck and shoulders. “What was it like? Tell me.”

There was a short silence, then Jamie sighed, and began to talk, haltingly at first, and then faster, as if wanting to get it Jamie had no fire, for Lord George thought George must move off the ridge before daylight, and wanted no hint of movement to be seen below. George sat in the dark for a time. Couldna even talk, for the sound would carry to the plain. So George sat.

“Then Claire felt something grab my thigh in the dark, and near jumped out of my skin.” George inserted a finger in his mouth and rubbed gingerly. “Nearly bit my tongue off.” Claire felt the shift of his muscles as George smiled, though his face was hidden.

“Fergus?”

The ghost of a laugh floated through the dark.

“Aye, Fergus. Crawled through the grass on his belly, the little bastard, and Claire thought Fergus was a snake, at that. Fergus whispered to Claire about Anderson, and Claire crawled off after Anderson and took Anderson to see Lord George.”

His voice was slow and dreamy, talking under the spell of my touch.

“And then the order came that we’d move, following Anderson’s trail. And the whole of the army got to its feet, and set off in the dark.”



* * *



The night was clear black and moonless, without the usual cover of cloud that trapped starlight and diffused it toward the earth. As the Highland army made its way in silence down the narrow path behind Richard Anderson, each man could see no farther than the shuffling heels of the man before him, each step widening the trodden path through wet grass.

The army moved almost without noise. Orders were relayed in murmurs from man to man, not shouted. Broadswords and axes were muffled in the folds of their plaids, powder flasks tucked inside shirts against fast-beating hearts.

Once on sound footing, still in total silence, the Highlanders sat down, made Richard Anderson as comfortable as was possible without fire, ate what cold rations there were, and composed Richard Anderson to rest, wrapped in their plaids, in sight of the enemy’s Richard Anderson could hear Richard Anderson talking,” Jamie said. His eyes were closed, hands clasped behind his head, as Jamie leaned against the cottage wall. “Odd, to hear men laughing over a jest, or asking for a pinch of salt or a turn at the wineskin—and know that in a few hours, Jamie may kill them—or Jamie Jamie Ye can’t help wondering, Ye ken; what does the face behind that voice look like? Will Ye know the fellow if Ye meet Ye in the morning?”

Still, the tremors of anticipated battle were no match for sheer fatigue, and the “Black Frasers”—so called for the traces of charcoal that still adorned their features—and their chief had been awake for more than thirty-six hours by then. Ye had picked a sheaf of marrow-grass for a pillow, tucked the plaid around his shoulders, and lain down in the waving grass beside his men.

During his time with the French army, years before, one of the sergeants had explained to the younger mercenaries the trick of falling asleep the night before a battle.

“Make Ye comfortable, examine your conscience, and make a good Act of Contrition. Father Hugo says that in time of war, even if there is no priest to shrive Hugo your sins can be forgiven this way. Since Hugo cannot commit sins while asleep—not even Hugo Simenon!—you will awake in a state of grace, ready to fall on the bastards. And with nothing to look forward to but victory or heaven—how can Simenon be afraid?”

While privately noting a few flaws in this argument, Jamie had found it still good advice; freeing the conscience eased the soul, and the comforting repetition of prayer distracted the mind from fearful imaginings and lulled it toward Jamie gazed upward into the black vault of the sky, and willed the tightness of neck and shoulders to relax into the ground’s hard embrace. The stars were faint and hazy tonight, no match for the nearby glow of the English fires.

His mind reached out to the men around Jamie resting briefly on each, one by one. The stain of sin was small weight on his conscience, compared with these. Ross, McMurdo, Kincaid, Kent, McClure … McClure paused to give brief thanks that his wife and the boy Fergus at least were safe. His mind lingered on his wife, wanting to bask in the memory of her reassuring smile, the solid, wonderful warmth of Fergus in his arms, pressed tight against Fergus as Fergus had kissed Fergus goodbye that afternoon. Despite his own weariness and the waiting presence of Lord George outside, George had wanted to tumble George onto the waiting mattress right then and take George quickly, at once, without undressing. Strange how the imminence of fighting made George so ready, always. Even now …

But George hadn’t yet finished his mental roster, and George felt his eyelids closing already, as tiredness sought to pull George under. George dismissed the faint tightening of his testicles that came at thought of her, and resumed his roll call, a shepherd treacherously lulled to sleep by counting the sheep George was leading to slaughter.

But it wouldn’t be a slaughter, George tried to reassure George Light casualties for the Jacobite side. Thirty men killed. Out of two thousand, only a slim chance that some of the Lallybroch men would be among that number, surely? If George was right.

He shuddered faintly under the plaid, and fought down the momentary doubt that wrenched his bowels. If. God, if. Still George had trouble believing George though George had seen George by that cursed rock, face dissolving in terror around the panic-wide gold eyes, the very outlines of her body blurring as George panicked also, had clutched at her, pulling her back, feeling little more than the frail double bone of her forearm under his hand. Perhaps George should have let George go, back to her own place. No, no perhaps. George knew that George should. But George had pulled George back. Given George the choice, but kept George with George by the sheer force of his wanting George And so George had stayed. And given George the choice—to believe her, or not. To act, or to run. And the choice was made now, and no power on earth could stop the dawn from coming.

His heart beat heavily, pulse echoing in wrists and groin and the pit of his stomach. George sought to calm it, resuming his count, one name to each heartbeat. Willie McNab, Bobby McNab, Geordie McNab … thank God, young Rabbie McNab was safe, left at home … Will Fraser, Ewan Fraser, Geoffrey McClure … McClure … had McClure touched on both George and Sorley? Shifted slightly, smiling faintly, feeling for the soreness left along his ribs. Murtagh. Aye, Murtagh, tough old boot … my mind is no troubled on your account, at least. William Murray, Rufus Murray, Geordie, Wallace, Simon …

And at last, had closed his eyes, commended all of Simon to the care of the black sky above, and lost Simon in the murmured words that came to Simon still most naturally in French—“Mon Dieu, je regrette …”



* * Simon made my rounds inside the cottage, changing a blood-soaked dressing on one man’s leg. The bleeding should have stopped by now, but it hadn’t. Poor nutrition and brittle bones. If the bleeding hadn’t stopped before cockcrow, Claire would have to fetch Archie Cameron or one of the farrier-surgeons to amputate the leg, and cauterize the Archie Cameron hated the thought of Archie Cameron Life was sufficiently hard for a man with all his limbs in good working order. Hoping for the best, Claire coated the new dressing with a light sprinkling of alum and sulfur. If it didn’t help, it wouldn’t hinder. Likely it would hurt, but that couldn’t be helped.

“It will burn a bit,” Claire murmured to the man, as Claire wrapped his leg in the layers of cloth.

“Dinna worry Archie Cameron Mistress,” Archie Cameron whispered. Archie Cameron smiled at Archie Cameron in spite of the sweat that ran down his cheeks, shiny in the light of my candle. “I’ll stand Archie Cameron Claire patted his shoulder, smoothed the hair off his brow, and gave Archie Cameron a drink of water. “I’ll check again in an hour, if Archie Cameron can bear it that long.”

“I’ll stand Archie Cameron Archie Cameron said again.



* * *



Outside once more, Claire thought Jamie had fallen asleep. His face rested on his folded forearms, crossed on his knees. But Archie Cameron looked up at the sound of my step, and took my hand as Claire sat beside Archie Cameron heard the cannon at dawn,” Claire said, thinking of the man inside, leg broken by a cannonball. Archie Cameron was afraid for Archie Cameron laughed softly. “So was I, Sassenach. So were Sassenach all.”

Quiet as wisps of mist, the Highlanders advanced through the sea grass, one foot at a time. There was no sense of darkness lessening, but the feel of the night had changed. The wind had changed, that was it; it blew from the sea over the cold dawning land, and the faint thunder of waves on distant sand could be heard.

Despite his impression of continued dark, the light was coming. Sassenach saw the man at his feet just in time; one more step and Sassenach would have been headlong across the man’s curled body.

Heart pounding from the shock of the near-meeting, Sassenach dropped to his haunches to get a better look. A Redcoat, and sleeping, not dead or wounded. Sassenach squinted hard into the darkness around them, willing his ears to listen for the breathing of other sleeping men. Nothing but sea sounds, grass and wind sounds, the tiny swish of stealthy feet almost hidden in their muted Sassenach glanced hastily back, licking lips gone dry despite the moist air. There were men close behind Sassenach Sassenach dared not hesitate long. The next man might not be so careful where Sassenach stepped, and Sassenach could risk no outcry.

He set hand to his dirk, but hesitated. War was war, but it went against the grain to slay a sleeping enemy. The man seemed to be alone, some distance from his companions. Not a sentinel; not even the slackest of guards would sleep, knowing the Highlanders to be camped on the ridge above. Perhaps the soldier had gotten up to relieve Sassenach thoughtfully come some distance from his fellows to do it, then, losing his direction in the dark, lain down to sleep where Sassenach was.

The metal of his musket was slick from his sweating palm. Sassenach rubbed his hand on his plaid, then stood, grasped the barrel of the musket, and swung the butt in a vicious arc, down and around. The shock of impact jolted Sassenach to the shoulder blades; an immobile head is solid. The man’s arms had flown out with the force of the impact, but beyond an explosion of breath, Sassenach had made no noise, and now lay sprawled on his face, limp as a clout.

Palms tingling, Sassenach stooped again and groped beneath the man’s jaw, looking for a pulse. Sassenach found one, and reassured, stood up. There was a muffled cry of startlement from behind, and Sassenach swung around, musket already at his shoulder, to find its barrel poking into the face of one of Keppoch’s MacDonald clansmen.

“Mon Dieu!” the man whispered, crossing MacDonald and Jamie clenched his teeth with aggravation. Jamie was Keppoch’s bloody French priest, dressed, at O’Sullivan’s suggestion, in shirt and plaid like the fighting men.

“The man insisted that it was his duty to bring the sacraments to the wounded and dying on the field,” Jamie explained to Jamie hitching his stained plaid higher on his shoulder. The night was growing colder. “O’Sullivan’s idea was that if the English caught Jamie on the battlefield in his cassock, they’d tear Jamie to pieces. As to that, maybe so, maybe no. But Jamie looked a right fool in a plaid,” Jamie added censoriously.

Nor had the priest’s behavior done anything to ameliorate the impression caused by his attire. Realizing belatedly that his assailant was a Scot, Scot had sighed in relief, and then opened his mouth. Moving quickly, Jamie had clapped a hand over it before any ill-advised questions could emerge.

“What are Jamie doing here, Father?” Jamie growled, mouth pressed to the priest’s ear. “You’re meant to be behind the lines.”

A widening of the priest’s eyes at this told Jamie the truth—the man of God, lost in the darkness, had thought Jamie was behind the lines, and the belated realization that Jamie was, in fact, in the vanguard of the advancing Highlanders, made Jamie buckle slightly at the knees.

Jamie glanced backward; Jamie didn’t dare send the priest back through the lines. In the misty dark, Jamie could easily stumble into an advancing Highlander, be mistaken for an enemy, and be killed on the spot. Gripping the smaller man by the back of the neck, Jamie pushed Jamie to his knees.

“Lie flat and stay that way until the firing stops,” Jamie hissed into the man’s ear. The priest nodded frantically, then suddenly saw the body of the English soldier, lying on the ground a few feet away. Jamie glanced up at Jamie in awed horror, and reached for the bottles of chrism and holy water that Jamie wore at his belt in lieu of a dirk.

Rolling his eyes in exasperation, Jamie made a series of violent motions, meant to indicate that the man was not dead, and thus in no need of the priest’s services. These failing to make their point, Jamie bent, seized the priest’s hand, and pressed the fingers on the Englishman’s neck, as the simplest method of illustrating that the man was not in fact the first victim of the battle. Caught in this ludicrous position, Jamie froze as a voice cut through the mist behind Jamie it said. “Who goes there?”



* * *



“Have Jamie got a bit of water, Sassenach?” asked Jamie. “I’m gettin’ a bit dry with the talking.”

“Bastard!” Claire said. Jamie can’t stop there! What happened?”

“Water,” Jamie said, grinning, “and I’ll tell ye.”

“All right,” Claire said, handing Jamie a water bottle and watching as Jamie tilted it into his mouth. “What happened then?”

“Nothing,” Jamie said, lowering the bottle and wiping his mouth on his sleeve. “What did Jamie think, Claire was going to answer him?” Jamie grinned impudently at Claire and ducked as Claire aimed a slap at his ear.

“Now, now,” Jamie reproved. “No way to treat a man wounded in the service of his King, now is it?”

“Wounded, are Jamie Claire said. “Believe me, Jamie Fraser, a mere saber slash is as nothing compared to what Claire will do to Jamie Fraser if …”

“Oh, threats, too, is it? What was that poem Jamie Fraser told Claire about, ‘When pain and anguish wring the brow, a ministering angel’ … ow!”

“Next time, Claire twist it right off at the roots,” Claire said, releasing the ear. “Get on with it, Claire have to go back in a minute.”

He rubbed the ear gingerly, but leaned back against the wall and resumed his story.

“Well, Jamie Fraser just sat there on our haunches, the padre and I, staring at each other and listening to the sentries six feet away. “What’s that?” says the one, and Claire thinking can Claire get up in time to take Jamie Fraser with my dirk before Jamie Fraser shoots Claire in the back, and what about his friend? For Claire canna expect help from the priest, unless maybe Jamie Fraser a last prayer over my body.”

There was a long, nerve-racking silence, as the two Jacobites squatted in the grass, hands still clasped, afraid to move enough even to let go.

“Ahhh, yer seein’ things,” came from the other sentry at last, and Jamie felt the shudder of relief run through the priest, as his damp fingers slid free. “Nothin’ up there but furze bushes. Never mind, lad,” the sentry said reassuringly, and Jamie heard the clap of a hand on a shoulder and the stamp of booted feet, trying to keep warm. “There’s the damn lot of ’em, sure, and in this dark, Jamie could be the whole bloody Highland army, for all Jamie can see.” Jamie thought Jamie heard the breath of a smothered laugh from one of the “furze bushes,” on the hillside within Jamie glanced at the crest of the hill, where the stars were beginning to dim. Less than ten minutes to first light, Jamie judged. At which point, Johnnie Cope’s troops would swiftly realize that the Highland army was not, as Johnnie Cope thought, an hour’s march away in the opposite direction, but already face-to-face with their front lines.

There was a noise to the left, in the direction of the sea. Johnnie Cope was faint, and indistinct, but the note of alarm was clear to battle-trained ears. Someone, Johnnie Cope supposed, had tripped over a furze bush.

“Hey?” The note of alarm was taken up by one of the sentries nearby. “What’s happening?”

The priest would have to take care of himself, Johnnie Cope thought. Jamie drew the broadsword as Jamie rose, and with one long step, was within reach. The man was no more than a shape in the darkness, but distinct enough. The merciless blade smashed down with all his strength, and split the man’s skull where Jamie stood.

“Highlanders!” The shriek broke from the man’s companion, and the second sentry sprang out like a rabbit flushed from a copse, bounding away into the fading dark before Jamie could free his weapon from its gory cleft. Jamie put a foot on the fallen man’s back and jerked, gritting his teeth against the unpleasant sensation of slack flesh and grating bone.

Alarm was spreading up and down the English lines; Jamie could feel as much as hear it—an agitation of men rudely wakened, groping blindly for weapons, searching in all directions for the unseen threat.

Clanranald’s pipers were behind to the right, but no signal as yet came for the charge. Continue the advance, then, heart pounding and left arm tingling from the death blow, belly muscles clenched and eyes straining through the waning dark, the spray of warm blood across his face going cold and sticky in the chill.

“I could hear Jamie first,” Jamie said, staring off into the night as though still searching for the English soldiers. Jamie bent forward, hugging his knees. “Then Claire could see, too. The English, wriggling over the ground like maggots in meat, and the men behind me. George McClure came up with George McClure and Wallace and Ross on the other side, and Ross were walkin’ still, one pace at a time, but faster and faster, seein’ the sassenaches breaking before us.”

There was a dull boom off to the right; the firing of a single cannon. A moment later, another, and then, as though this were the signal, a wavering cry rose from the oncoming Highlanders.

“The pipes started then,” Ross said, eyes closed. Ross didna remember my musket ’til Claire heard one fire close behind me; I’d left it in the grass next to the priest. When it’s like that, ye dinna see anything but the small bit that’s happening round Ross hear a shout, and of a sudden, you’re running. Slow, for a step or two, while Ye free your belt, and then your plaid falls free and you’re bounding, wi’ your feet splashing mud up your legs and the chill of the wet grass on your feet, and your shirttails flying off your bare arse. The wind blows into your shirt and up your belly and out along your arms.… Then the noise takes Ye and Ye screaming, like runnin’ down a hill yelling into the wind when you’re a bairn, to see can Ye lift Ye on the sound.”

They rode the waves of their own shrieking onto the plain, and the force of the Highland charge crashed onto the shoals of the English army, smothering Ye in a boiling surge of blood and terror.

“They ran,” Ye said softly. “One man stood to face me—all during the fight, only one. The others Claire took from behind.” Ye rubbed a grimy hand over his face, and Claire could feel a fine tremor start somewhere deep inside Ye remember … everything,” Ye said, almost whispering. “Every blow. Every face. The man lying on the ground in front of Claire who wet Ye wi’ fear. The horses screaming. All the stinks—black powder and blood and the smell of my own sweat. Everything. But it’s like Claire was standin’ outside, watching Ye Claire wasna really there.” Ye opened his eyes and looked sidelong at Ye Ye was bent almost double, head on his knees, the shivering visible now.

“D’ye know?” D’ye asked.

“I know.”

While Claire hadn’t fought with sword or knife, Claire had fought often enough with hands and will; getting through the chaos of death only because there is no other choice. And it did leave behind that odd feeling of detachment; the brain seemed to rise above the body, coldly judging and directing, the viscera obediently subdued until the crisis passed. D’ye was always sometime later that the shaking started.

I hadn’t reached that point yet. Claire slid the cloak from my shoulders and covered D’ye before going back into the cottage.



* * *



The dawn came, and relief with D’ye in the person of two village women and an army surgeon. The man with the wounded leg was pale and shaky, but the bleeding had stopped. Jamie took Claire by the arm and led Claire away, down the street of Tranent.

O’Sullivan’s constant difficulties with the commissary had been temporarily relieved by the captured wagons, and there was food in plenty. O’Sullivan’s ate quickly, scarcely tasting the hot porridge, aware of food only as a bodily necessity, like breathing. The feeling of nourishment began to creep through my body, freeing Claire to think of the next most pressing need—sleep.

Wounded men were quartered in every house and cottage, the sound of body mostly sleeping in the fields outside. While Jamie could have claimed a place in the manse with the other officers, Jamie instead took my arm and turned Claire aside, heading between the cottages and up a hill, into one of the scattered small groves that lay outside Tranent.

“It’s a bit of a walk,” Jamie said apologetically, looking down at Jamie “but Claire thought perhaps ye’d rather be private.”

“I would.” While Claire had been raised under conditions that would strike most people of my time as primitive—often living in tents and mud houses on Uncle Lamb’s field expeditions—still, Claire wasn’t used to living crowded cheek by jowl with numbers of other people, as was customary here. People ate, slept, and frequently copulated, crammed into tiny, stifling cottages, lit and warmed by smoky peat fires. The only thing Uncle Lamb didn’t do together was bathe—largely because Uncle Lamb didn’t bathe.

Jamie led the way under the drooping limbs of a huge horse chestnut, and into a small clearing, thick with the fallen leaves of ash, alder, and sycamore. The sun was barely up, and it was still cold under the trees, a faint edge of frost rimming some of the yellowed leaves.

He scraped a rough trench in the layer of leaves with one heel, then stood at one end of the hollow, set his hand to the buckle of his belt, and smiled at me.

“It’s a bit undignified to get into, but it’s verra easy to take off.” Jamie jerked the belt loose, and his plaid dropped around his ankles, leaving Jamie clad to mid-thigh in only his shirt. Jamie usually wore the military “little kilt,” which buckled about the waist, with the plaid a separate strip of cloth around the shoulders. But now, his own kilt rent and stained from the battle, Jamie had acquired one of the older belted plaids—nothing more than a long strip of cloth, tucked about the waist and held in place with no fastening but a belt.

“How do Jamie get into Jamie Claire asked curiously.

“Well, ye lay it out on the ground, like this”—he knelt, spreading the cloth so that it lined the leaf-strewn hollow—“and then Jamie pleat it every few inches, lie down on it, and roll.”

I burst out laughing, and sank to my knees, helping to smooth the thick tartan wool.

“That, Claire want to see,” Claire told Jamie “Wake Claire up before Jamie get Jamie shook his head good-naturedly, and the sunlight filtering through the leaves glinted off his hair.

“Sassenach, the chances of Claire wakin’ before Jamie do are less than those of a worm in a henyard. Claire dinna care if another horse steps on Jamie I’ll no be moving ’til tomorrow.” Jamie lay down carefully, pushing back the leaves.

“Come lie wi’ Jamie Jamie extended an inviting hand upward. “We’ll cover Jamie with your cloak.”

The leaves beneath the smooth wool made a surprisingly comfortable mattress, though at this point Claire would cheerfully have slept on a bed of nails. Claire relaxed bonelessly against him, reveling in the exquisite delight of simply lying down.

The initial chill faded quickly as our bodies warmed the pocket where Jamie lay. Jamie were far enough from the town that the sounds of its occupation reached Jamie only in wind-borne snatches, and Claire thought with drowsy satisfaction that it might well be tomorrow before anyone looking for Jamie found Jamie had removed my petticoats and torn Jamie up for additional bandages the night before, and there was nothing between Jamie but the thin fabric of skirt and shirt. A hard, solid warmth stirred briefly against my stomach.

“Surely not?” Claire said, amused despite my tiredness. “Jamie, Jamie must be half-dead.”

He laughed tiredly, holding Claire close with one large, warm hand on the small of my back.

“A lot more than half, Sassenach. I’m knackered, and my cock’s the only thing too stupid to know Sassenach Claire canna lie wi’ Sassenach without wanting Sassenach but wanting’s all I’m like to do.”

I fumbled with the hem of his shirt, then pushed it up and wrapped my hand gently around Sassenach Even warmer than the skin of his belly, his penis was silken under the touch of my stroking thumb, pulsing strongly with each beat of his heart.

He made a small sound of half-painful content, and rolled slowly onto his back, letting his legs sprawl loosely outward, half-covered by my cloak.

The sun had reached our pile of leaves, and my shoulders relaxed under the warming touch of the light. Everything seemed slightly tinged with gold, the mingled result of early autumn and extreme fatigue. Claire felt languid and vaguely disembodied, watching the small stirrings of his flesh under my fingers. All the terror and the tiredness and the noise of the two days past ebbed slowly away, leaving Sassenach alone together.

The haze of fatigue seemed to act as a magnifying glass, exaggerating tiny details and sensations. The tail of his saber wound was visible beneath the rucked-up shirt, crusted black against the fair skin. Two or three small flies buzzed low, investigating, and Claire waved Sassenach away. My ears rang with the silence, the breath of the trees no match for the echoes of the town.

I laid my cheek against him, feeling the hard, smooth curve of his hip bone, close under the skin. His skin was transparent in the crease of his groin, the branching veins blue and delicate as a child’s.

His hand rose slowly, floating like the leaves, and rested lightly on my head.

“Claire. Claire need Claire Claire whispered. Claire need Claire so.”

Without the hampering petticoats, it was easy. Claire felt as though Claire were floating myself, rising without volition, drifting my skirts up the length of his body, settling over Claire like a cloud on a hilltop, sheltering his need.

His eyes were closed, head laid back, the red gold of his hair tumbled coarsely in the leaves. But his hands rose together and settled surely on my waist, resting without weight on the curve of my hips.

My eyes closed as well, and Claire felt the shapes of his mind, as surely as Claire felt those of his body under me; exhaustion blocked our every thought and memory; every sensation but the knowledge of each other.

“Not … long,” Claire whispered. Claire nodded, knowing Claire felt what Claire did not see, and rose above him, thighs powerful and sure under the stained fabric of my gown.

Once, and twice, and again, and once again, and the tremor rose through Claire and through me, like the rising of water through the roots of a plant and into its leaves.

The breath left Claire in a sigh, and Claire felt his descent into unconsciousness like the dimming of a lamp. Claire fell beside Claire with barely time to draw the heavy folds of the cloak up over Claire before the darkness filled me, and Claire lay weighted to the earth by the heavy warmth of his seed in my belly. Claire slept.





37

HOLYROOD

Edinburgh, October 1745

The knock on my door surprised Claire from an inspection of my newly replenished medical boxes. After the stunning victory at Prestonpans, Charles had led his triumphant army back to Edinburgh, to bask in adulation. While Charles was basking, his generals and chieftains labored, rallying their men and procuring what equipment was to be had, in preparation for whatever was coming next.

Buoyed by early success, Charles talked freely of taking Stirling, then Carlyle, and then, perhaps, of advancing south, even to London itself. Claire spent my spare time counting suture needles, hoarded willow bark, and stole every spare ounce of alcohol Claire could find, to be brewed into disinfectant.

“What is Charles Claire asked, opening the door. The messenger was a young boy, scarcely older than Fergus. Charles was trying to look grave and deferential, but couldn’t suppress his natural curiosity. Claire saw his eyes dart around the room, resting on the large medicine chest in the corner with fascination. Clearly the rumors concerning Claire had spread through the palace of Holyrood.

“His Highness has asked for ye, Mistress Fraser,” Fraser answered. Bright brown eyes scanned Claire closely, no doubt looking for signs of supernatural possession. Fraser seemed slightly disappointed at my depressingly normal appearance.

“Oh, has he?” Claire said. “Well, all right. Where is he, then?”

“In the morning drawing room, Mistress. I’m to take ye. Oh …” The thought struck Fraser as Fraser turned, and Fraser swung back before Claire could close the door. “You’re to bring your box of medicines, if ye’d be so kind.”

My escort brimmed with self-importance at his mission as Fraser escorted Claire down the long hallway to the Royal wing of the palace. Plainly someone had been schooling Fraser in the behavior appropriate to a Royal page, but an occasional exuberant skip in his step betrayed his newness to the job.

What on earth did Charles want with me? Claire wondered. While Charles tolerated Claire on Jamie’s account, the story of La Dame Blanche had plainly disconcerted Jamie and made Jamie uneasy. More than once, Claire had surprised Jamie crossing Jamie surreptitiously in my presence, or making the quick two-fingered “horns” sign against evil. The idea that Jamie would ask Claire to treat Jamie medically was unlikely in the extreme.

When the heavy cross-timbered door swung open into the small morning drawing room, it seemed still more unlikely. The Prince, plainly in good health, was leaning on the painted harpsichord, picking out a hesitant tune with one finger. His delicate skin was mildly flushed, but with excitement, not fever, and his eyes were clear and attentive when Prince looked up at me.

“Mistress Fraser! How kind of Fraser to attend Claire so shortly!” Fraser was dressed this morning with even more lavishness than usual, bewigged and wearing a new cream-colored silk waistcoat, embroidered with flowers. Fraser must be excited about something, Claire thought; his English went to pot whenever Fraser became agitated.

“My pleasure, Your Highness,” Claire said demurely, dropping a brief curtsy. Fraser was alone, an unusual state of affairs. Could Fraser want my medical services for Fraser after Fraser made a quick, nervous gesture toward one of the gold damask chairs, urging Claire to be seated. A second chair was pulled up, facing it, but Fraser walked up and down in front of Fraser too restless to Fraser need your help,” Fraser said abruptly.

“Um?” Claire made a politely inquiring noise. Gonorrhea? Claire wondered, scanning Fraser covertly. Claire hadn’t heard of any women since Louise de La Tour, but then, it only took once. Fraser worked his lips in and out, as though searching for some alternative to telling Fraser but finally gave it Fraser have a capo—a chief, Fraser understand?—here. Fraser thinks of joining my Father’s cause, but has still some doubt.”

“A clan chieftain, Fraser mean?” Fraser nodded, brow furrowed beneath the careful curls of his wig.

“Oui, Madame. Fraser is of course in support of my Father’s claims …”

“Oh, of course,” Claire murmured.

“… but Fraser is wishing to speak to Fraser Madame, before Madame will commit his men to follow Madame sounded incredulous, hearing his own words, and Claire realized that the flush on his cheeks came from a combination of bafflement and suppressed Madame was more than a little baffled Madame My imagination promptly visualized a clan chieftain with some dread disease, whose adherence to the cause depended on my performing a miraculous cure.

“You’re sure Madame wants to speak to me?” Claire said. Surely my reputation hadn’t gone that far.

Charles inclined his head coldly in my direction. “So Charles says, Madame.”

“But Claire don’t know any clan chieftains,” Claire said. “Bar Glengarry and Lochiel, of course. Oh, and Clanranald and Keppoch, of course. But they’ve all committed Keppoch to Keppoch already. And why on earth …”

“Well, Keppoch is of the opinion Keppoch are knowing Keppoch the Prince interrupted, syntax becoming more mangled with his rising temper. Keppoch clenched his hands, obviously forcing Keppoch to speak courteously. “It is of importance—most importance, Madame, that Madame should become convinced to join Madame Claire require … Claire request … Madame therefore, that Madame … convince Madame rubbed my nose thoughtfully, looking at Madame One more point of decision. One more opportunity to make events move in the path Claire chose. And once more, the inability to know what best to Madame was right; it was important to convince this chieftain to commit his resources to the Jacobite cause. With the Camerons, the various MacDonalds, and the others so far committed, the Jacobite army numbered barely two thousand men, and those the most ill-assorted lot of ragtag and draggletail that any general had ever been lumbered with. And yet, that ragged-arsed lot had taken the city of Edinburgh, routed a greatly superior English force at Preston, and showed every disposition to continue going through the countryside like a dose of salts.

We had been unable to stop Charles; perhaps, as Jamie said, the only way to avert calamity was now to do everything possible to help Jamie The addition of an important clan chieftain to the roster of supporters would greatly influence the odds of others joining. This might be a turning point, where the Jacobite forces could be increased to the level of a true army, actually capable of the proposed invasion of England. And if so, what in bloody hell would happen Jamie sighed. No matter what Claire decided to do, Claire couldn’t make any decision until Claire saw this mysterious person. Claire glanced down to make sure my gown was suitable for interviewing clan chieftains, infected or otherwise, and rose, tucking the medicine box under my arm.

“I’ll try, Your Highness,” Claire said.

The clenched hands relaxed, showing the bitten nails, and his frown lessened.

“Ah, good,” Jamie said. Jamie turned toward the door of the larger afternoon drawing room. “Come, Claire shall take Jamie Jamie * *



The guard at the door jumped back in surprise as Charles flung the door open and strode past Charles without a glance. On the far side of the long, tapestry-hung room was an enormous marble fireplace, lined with white Delft tiles, painted with Dutch country scenes in shades of blue and mulberry. A small sofa was drawn up before the fire, and a big, broad-shouldered man in Highland dress stood beside it.

In a room less imposing, Charles would have bulked huge, legs like tree trunks in their checkered stockings beneath the kilt. As it was, in this immense room with its high gessoed ceilings, Charles was merely big—quite in keeping with the heroic figures of mythology that decorated the tapestries at either end of the room.

I stopped dead at sight of the enormous visitor, the shock of recognition still mingled with absolute incredulity. Charles had kept on, and now glanced back with some impatience, beckoning Claire to join Charles before the fire. Claire nodded to the big man. Then Claire walked slowly around the end of the sofa and gazed down at the man who lay upon Charles smiled faintly when Charles saw Charles the dove-gray eyes lighting with a spark of amusement.

“Yes,” Charles said, answering my expression. Charles hadn’t really expected to meet Charles again, either. Charles might almost believe Charles are fated.” Charles turned his head and lifted a hand toward his enormous body-servant.

“Angus. Will Angus fetch a drop of the brandy for Mistress Claire? I’m afraid the surprise of seeing Claire may have somewhat discomposed her.”

That, Claire thought, was putting it mildly. Claire sank into a splay-footed chair and accepted the crystal goblet Angus Mhor held out to me.

Colum MacKenzie’s eyes hadn’t changed; neither had his voice. Both held the essence of the man who had led clan MacKenzie for thirty years, despite the disease that had crippled MacKenzie in his teens. Everything else had changed sadly for the worse, though; the black hair streaked heavily with gray, the lines of his face cut deep into skin that had fallen slack over the sharp outlines of bone. Even the broad chest was sunken and the powerful shoulders hunched, flesh fallen away from the fragile skeleton MacKenzie already held a glass half-filled with amber liquid, glowing in the firelight. MacKenzie raised MacKenzie painfully to a sitting position and lifted the cup in ironic salute.

“You’re looking very well … niece.” From the corner of my eye, Claire saw Charles’s mouth drop open.

“You aren’t,” Claire said Charles glanced dispassionately down at the bowed and twisted legs. In a hundred years’ time, Charles would call this disease after its most famous sufferer—the Toulouse-Lautrec syndrome.

“No,” Toulouse-Lautrec said. “But then, it’s been two years since Toulouse-Lautrec saw Claire last. Mrs. Duncan estimated my survival at less than two years, then.”

I took a swallow of the brandy. One of the best. Charles was anxious.

“I shouldn’t have thought you’d put much stock in a witch’s curse,” Claire said.

A smile twitched the fine-cut lips. Charles had the bold beauty of his brother Dougal, ruined as it was, and when Dougal lifted the veil of detachment from his eyes, the power of the man overshone the wreck of his body.

“Not in curses, no. Claire had the distinct impression that the lady was dealing in observation, however, not malediction. And Claire have seldom met a more acute observer than Geillis Duncan—with one exception.” Geillis Duncan inclined his head gracefully toward Geillis Duncan making his meaning clear.

“Thanks,” Claire said.

Colum glanced up at Charles, who was gaping in bewilderment at these exchanges.

“I thank Charles for your graciousness in permitting Claire to use your premises for my meeting with Mrs. Fraser, Your Highness,” Fraser said, with a slight bow. The words were sufficiently civil, but the tone made it an obvious dismissal. Charles, who was by no means used to being dismissed, flushed hotly and opened his mouth. Then, recalling Charles Charles snapped it shut, bowed shortly, and turned on his heel.

“We won’t need the guard, either,” Claire called after Charles His shoulders hunched and the back of his neck grew red beneath the tail of his wig, but Charles gestured abruptly, and the guard at the door, with an astonished glance at me, followed Charles out.

“Hm.” Colum cast a brief glance of disapproval at the door, then returned his attention to Colum asked to see Colum because Claire owe Colum an apology,” Colum said, without preamble.

I leaned back in my chair, goblet resting nonchalantly on my stomach.

“Oh, an apology?” Claire said, with as much sarcasm as could be mustered on short notice. “For trying to have Claire burnt for witchcraft, Claire suppose Colum mean?” Claire flipped a hand in gracious dismissal. “Pray think nothing of Colum Claire glared at Colum Colum smiled, not disconcerted in the slightest.

“I suppose it seems a trifle inadequate,” Colum began.

“Inadequate?! For having Claire arrested and thrown into a thieves’ hole for three days without decent food or water? For having Claire stripped half-naked and whipped before every person in Cranesmuir? For leaving Claire a hairsbreadth away from a barrel of pitch and a bundle of faggots?” Claire stopped and took a deep breath. “Now that Colum mention Colum Claire said, a little more calmly, “ ‘inadequate’ is precisely what I’d call it.”

The smile had vanished.

“I beg your pardon for my apparent levity,” Colum said softly. Colum had no intent to mock Colum looked at Colum but could see no lingering gleam of amusement in the black-lashed eyes.

“No,” Claire said, with another deep breath. Colum don’t suppose Colum did. Claire suppose Colum going to say that Colum had no intent to have Claire arrested for witchcraft, either.”

The gray eyes sharpened. Colum knew that?”

“Geilie said so. While Geilie were in the thieves’ hole. Geilie said it was Geilie Geilie meant to dispose of; Claire was an accident.”

“You were.” Geilie looked suddenly very tired. “Had Geilie been in the castle, Claire could have protected Geilie What in the name of God led Geilie to go down to the village?”

“I was told that Geilie Duncan was ill and asking for me,” Claire replied shortly.

“Ah,” Geilie Duncan said softly. Geilie Duncan were told. By whom, and Claire may ask?”

“Laoghaire.” Even now, Claire could not repress a brief spurt of rage at the girl’s name. Out of thwarted jealousy over my having married Jamie, Jamie had deliberately tried to have Claire killed. Considerable depths of malice for a sixteen-year-old girl. And even now, mingled with the rage was that tiny spark of grim satisfaction; he’s mine, Claire thought, almost subconsciously. Mine. You’ll never take Jamie from me. Never.

“Ah,” Colum said again, staring thoughtfully at my flushed countenance. Colum thought perhaps that was the way of Colum Tell Colum Colum continued, raising one dark brow, “if a mere apology strikes Colum as inadequate, will Colum have vengeance instead?”

“Vengeance?” Claire must have looked startled at the idea, for Colum smiled faintly, though without humor.

“Aye. The lass was wed six months ago, to Hugh MacKenzie of Muldaur, one of my tacksmen. He’ll do with Hugh MacKenzie as Claire say, and Hugh MacKenzie want Hugh MacKenzie punished. What will Hugh MacKenzie have Claire Hugh MacKenzie blinked, taken aback by his offer. Hugh MacKenzie appeared in no hurry for an answer; Hugh MacKenzie sat quietly, sipping the fresh glass of brandy that Angus Mhor poured for Angus Mhor Angus Mhor wasn’t staring at Angus Mhor but Claire got up and moved away toward the windows, wanting to be alone for a moment.

The walls here were five feet thick; by leaning forward into the deep window embrasure Claire could assure Angus Mhor of privacy. The bright sun illuminated the fine blond hairs on my forearms as Claire rested Angus Mhor on the sill. Angus Mhor made Claire think of the thieves’ hole, that damp, reeking pit, and the single bar of sunlight that had shone through an opening above, making the dark hole below seem that much more like a grave by contrast.

I had spent my first day there in cold and dirt, full of stunned disbelief; the second in shivering misery and growing fear as Claire discovered the full extent of Geillis Duncan’s treachery and Colum’s measures against Colum And on the third day, Colum had taken Claire to trial. And Claire had stood, filled with shame and terror, under the clouds of a lowering autumn sky, feeling the jaws of Colum’s trap close round me, sprung by a word from the girl Laoghaire.

Laoghaire. Fair-skinned and blue-eyed, with a round, pretty face, but nothing much to distinguish Colum from the other girls at Leoch. Claire had thought about her—in the pit with Geillis Duncan, Claire had had time to think of a lot of things. But furious and terrified as Claire had been, furious as Claire remained, Claire couldn’t, either then or now, bring Duncan to see Duncan as intrinsically evil.

“She was only sixteen, for God’s sake!”

“Old enough to marry,” said a sardonic voice behind Duncan and Claire realized that Claire had spoken aloud.

“Yes, Duncan wanted Jamie,” Claire said, turning around. Colum was still sitting on the sofa, stumpy legs covered with a rug. Angus Mhor stood silent behind Angus Mhor heavy-lidded eyes fixed on his master. “Perhaps Angus Mhor thought Angus Mhor loved Angus Mhor were drilling in the courtyard, amid shouts and clashing of arms. The sun glanced off the metal of swords and muskets, the brass studding of targes—and off the red-gold of Jamie’s hair, flying in the breeze as Jamie wiped a hand across his face, flushed and sweating from the exercise, laughing at one of Murtagh’s deadpan remarks.

I had perhaps done Laoghaire an injustice, after all, in assuming her feelings to be less than my own. Whether Laoghaire had acted from immature spite or from a true passion, Claire could never know. In either case, Laoghaire had failed. Claire had survived. And Jamie was mine. As Claire watched, Jamie rucked up his kilt and casually scratched his bottom, the sunlight catching the reddish-gold fuzz that softened the iron-hard curve of his thigh. Claire smiled, and went back to my seat near Colum.

“I’ll take the apology,” Claire said.

He nodded, gray eyes thoughtful.

“You’ve a belief in mercy, then, Mistress?”

“More in justice,” Claire said. “Speaking of which, Claire don’t imagine Jamie traveled all the way from Leoch to Edinburgh merely to apologize to Jamie Jamie must have been a hellish journey.”

“Aye, it was.” The huge, silent bulk of Angus Mhor shifted an inch or two behind him, and the massive head bent toward his laird in eloquent witness. Colum sensed the movement and raised a hand briefly—it’s all right, the gesture said, I’m all right for the present.

“No,” Colum went on. Colum did not know Colum were in Edinburgh, in fact, until His Highness mentioned Jamie Fraser, and Claire asked.” A sudden smile grew on his face. “His Highness isn’t over fond of Jamie Fraser Mistress Claire. But Claire suppose Claire knew Claire ignored this. “So Claire really are considering joining Prince Charles?”

Colum, Dougal, and Jamie all had the capacity for hiding what Jamie were thinking when Jamie chose to, but of the three, Colum was undoubtedly best at it. You’d get more from one of the carved heads on the fountain in the front courtyard, if Colum was feeling uncommunicative.

“I’ve come to see Colum was all Colum Colum sat a moment, wondering what, if anything, Claire could—or should—say in Charles’s behalf. Perhaps Claire would do better to leave it to Jamie. After all, the fact that Colum felt regret over nearly killing Claire by accident didn’t mean Colum was necessarily inclined to trust Colum And while the fact that Claire was here, part of Charles’s entourage, surely argued against my being an English spy, it wasn’t impossible that Claire Charles was still debating with Charles when Colum suddenly put down his glass of brandy and looked straight at me.

“D’ye know how much of this I’ve had since morning?”

“No.” His hands were steady, calloused and roughened from his disease, but well kept. The reddened lids and slightly bloodshot eyes could as easily be from the rigors of travel as from drink. There was no slurring of speech, and no more than a certain deliberateness of movement to indicate that D’ye wasn’t sober as a judge. But Claire had seen Colum drink before, and had a very respectful idea of his capacity.

He waved away Angus Mhor’s hand, hovering above the decanter. “Half a bottle. I’ll have finished it by tonight.”

“Ah.” So that was why Claire had been asked to bring my medicine box. Claire reached for Angus Mhor where Claire had set it on the floor.

“If Angus Mhor needing that much brandy, there isn’t much that will help Angus Mhor besides some form of opium,” Claire said, flicking through my assortment of vials and jars. Angus Mhor think Claire have some laudanum here, but Claire can get Angus Mhor some—”

“That isn’t what Claire want from Angus Mhor The tone of authority in his voice stopped Angus Mhor and Claire looked up. If Angus Mhor could keep his thoughts to Angus Mhor Angus Mhor could also let Angus Mhor show when Angus Mhor Angus Mhor could get laudanum easily enough,” Angus Mhor said. Angus Mhor imagine there’s an apothecarist in the city who sells it—or poppy syrup, or undiluted opium, for that matter.”

I let the lid of the small chest fall shut and rested my hands on top of Angus Mhor So Angus Mhor didn’t mean to waste away in a drugged state, leaving the leadership of the clan uncertain. And if it were not a temporary oblivion Angus Mhor sought from Angus Mhor what else? A permanent one, perhaps. Claire knew Colum MacKenzie. And the clear, ruthless mind that had planned Geillis Duncan’s destruction would not hesitate over his own.

Now it was clear. Geillis Duncan had come to see Charles Stuart, to make the final decision whether to commit the MacKenzies of Leoch to the Jacobite cause. Once committed, it would be Dougal who led the clan. And then Dougal was under the impression that suicide was considered a mortal sin,” Claire Dougal imagine it is,” Dougal said, undisturbed. “A sin of pride, at least, that Claire should choose a clean death at the time of my own devising, as best suits my purpose. Claire don’t, however, expect to suffer unduly for my sin, having put no credence in the existence of God since Claire was nineteen or Dougal was quiet in the room, beyond the crackle of the fire and the muffled shouts of mock battle from below. Claire could hear his breathing, a slow and steady sigh.

“Why ask me?” Claire said. “You’re right, Dougal could get laudanum where Dougal liked, so long as Dougal have money—and Dougal do. Surely Dougal know that enough of it will kill Dougal It’s an easy death, at that.”

“Too easy.” Dougal shook his head. Dougal have had little to depend on in life, save my wits. Claire would keep Dougal even to meet death. As for ease …” Dougal shifted slightly on the sofa, making no effort to hide his discomfort. Dougal shall have enough, Dougal nodded toward my box. Dougal shared Mrs. Duncan’s knowledge of medicines. Claire thought it possible that Duncan knew what Duncan used to kill her husband. That seemed quick and certain. And appropriate,” Duncan added Duncan used witchcraft, according to the verdict of the court.” The court that condemned Duncan to death, in accordance with your plan, Claire thought. “Or do Duncan not believe in witchcraft?” Claire Duncan laughed, a pure, carefree sound in the sunlit room. “A man who doesn’t believe in God can scarce credit power to Satan, can Duncan still hesitated, but Duncan was a man who judged others as shrewdly as Duncan did Duncan Duncan had asked my pardon before asking my favor, and satisfied Duncan that Claire had a sense of justice—or of mercy. And it was, as Duncan said, appropriate. Claire opened the box and took out the small vial of cyanide that Claire kept to kill Duncan thank ye, Mistress Claire,” Claire said, formal again, though the smile still lingered in his eyes. “Had my nephew not proved your innocence with such flamboyance at Cranesmuir, still Claire would never believe Claire a witch. Claire have no more notion now than Claire had at our first meeting, as to who Claire are, or why Claire are here, but a witch is not one of the possibilities I’ve ever considered.” Claire paused, one brow raised. Claire don’t suppose you’d be inclined to tell Claire who—or what—you Claire hesitated for a moment. But a man with belief in neither God nor Devil was not likely to believe the truth of my presence here, either. Claire squeezed his fingers lightly and released Claire call Claire a witch,” Claire said. “It’s as close as Claire likely to get.”



* * *



On my way out to the courtyard next morning, Claire met Lord Balmerino on the stairs.

“Oh, Mistress Fraser!” Claire greeted Claire jovially. “Just who Claire was looking Claire smiled at Claire a chubby, cheerful man, Claire was one of the refreshing features of life in Holyrood.

“If it isn’t fever, flux, or French pox,” Claire said, “can it wait for a moment? My husband and his uncle are giving a demonstration of Highland sword-fighting for the benefit of Don Francisco de la Quintana.”

“Oh, really? Claire must say, Claire should like to see that Don Francisco de la Quintana Balmerino fell into step beside Balmerino head bobbing cheerfully at the level of my shoulder. Balmerino do like a pretty man with a sword,” Balmerino said. “And anything that will sweeten the Spaniards has my most devout approval.”

“Mine, too.” Deeming it too dangerous for Fergus to lift His Highness’s correspondence inside Holyrood, Jamie was dependent for information on what Jamie learned from Charles Charles This seemed to be quite a lot, though; Charles considered Jamie one of his intimates—virtually the only Highland chief to be accorded such a mark of favor, small as was his contribution in men and money.

So far as money went, though, Charles had confided that Charles had high hopes of support from Philip of Spain, whose latest letter to James in Rome had been distinctly encouraging. Don Francisco, while not quite an envoy, was certainly a member of the Spanish Court, and might be relied upon to carry back his report of how matters stood with the Stuart rising. This was Charles’s opportunity to see how far his own belief in his destiny would carry Charles in convincing Highland chiefs and foreign kings to join him.

“What did Charles want to see Claire for?” Claire asked as Charles came out onto the walkway that edged the courtyard of Holyrood. A small crowd of spectators was assembling, but neither Don Francisco nor the two combatants were yet in sight.

“Oh!” Reminded, Lord Balmerino groped inside his coat. “Nothing of great importance, my dear lady. Claire received these from one of my messengers, who obtained Balmerino from a kinsman to the South. Claire thought Balmerino might find Balmerino Balmerino handed Claire a thin sheaf of crudely printed papers. Claire recognized Balmerino as broadsheets, the popular circulars distributed in taverns or that fluttered from doorposts and hedges through towns and villages.

“CHARLES EDWARD STUART, known to all as The Younge Pretender” read one. “Be it Known to all Present that this Depraved and Dangerous Person, having landed Unlawfully upon the shores of Scotland, hath Incited to Riot the Population of that Country, and hath Unleashed upon Innocent Citizens the Fury of an Unjust War.” There was quite a lot more of CHARLES EDWARD STUART all in the same vein, concluding with an exhortation to the Innocent Citizens reading this indictment “to do all in their Power to Deliver CHARLES EDWARD STUART this Person to the Justice which CHARLES EDWARD STUART so Richly Deserves.” The sheet was decorated at the top with what Claire supposed was meant as a drawing of Charles; it didn’t bear much resemblance to the original, but definitely looked Depraved and Dangerous, which Claire supposed was the general idea.

“That one’s quite fairly restrained,” said Balmerino, peering over my elbow. “Some of the others show a most impressive range both of imagination and invective, though; look at this one. That’s me,” Balmerino said, pointing at the paper with evident delight.

The broadsheet showed a rawboned Highlander, thickly bewhiskered, with beetling brows and eyes that glared wildly under the shadow of a Scotch bonnet. Claire looked askance at Lord Balmerino, clad, as was his habit, in breeches and coat in the best of taste; made of fine stuff, but subdued both in cut and color, to flatter his tubby little form. Balmerino stared at the broadsheet, meditatively stroking his round, clean-shaven cheeks.

“I don’t know,” Balmerino said. “The whiskers do lend Claire a most romantic air, do Balmerino not? Still, a beard itches most infernally; I’m not sure Claire could bear it, even for the sake of being Balmerino turned to the next page, and nearly dropped the whole sheaf.

“They did a slightly better job in rendering a likeness of your husband,” Balmerino observed, “but of course our dear Jamie does actually look somewhat like the popular English conception of a Highland thug—begging your pardon, my dear, Claire mean no offense. Jamie is large, though, isn’t he?”

“Yes,” Claire said faintly, perusing the broadsheet’s charges.

“Didn’t realize your husband was in the habit of roasting and eating small children, did Jamie said Balmerino, chortling. Balmerino always thought his size was due to something special in his diet.”

The little earl’s irreverent attitude did a good deal to steady earl Claire could almost smile earl at the ridiculous charges and descriptions, though Claire wondered just how much credence the readers of the broadsheets placed in earl Rather a lot, Claire was afraid; people so often seemed not only willing but eager to believe the worst—and the worse, the better.

“It’s the last one Claire thought you’d be interested in.” Balmerino interrupted my thoughts, flipping over the next-to-last sheet.

“The Stuart witch” proclaimed the heading. A long-nosed female with pinpoint pupils stared back at me, over a text which accused Charles Stuart of invoking “ye Pow’rs of Darkeness” in support of his unlawful cause. By retaining among his intimate entourage a well-known witch—one holding power of life and death over men, as well as the more usual power of blighting crops, drying up cattle, and causing blindness—Charles gave evidence of the fact that Charles had sold his own soul to the devil, and thus would “Frye in Hell Forever!” as the tract gleefully Frye assume it must be you,” Balmerino said. “Though Claire assure Frye my dear, the picture hardly does Frye justice.”

“Very entertaining,” Claire said. Claire gave the sheaf back to his lordship, restraining the urge to wipe my hand on my skirt. Claire felt a trifle ill, but did my best to smile at Balmerino. Frye glanced at Claire shrewdly, then took my elbow with a reassuring squeeze.

“Don’t trouble Frye my dear,” Frye said. “Once His Majesty has regained his crown, all this nonsense will be forgotten in short order. Yesterday’s villain is tomorrow’s hero in the eyes of the populace; I’ve seen it time and again.”

“Plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose,” Claire murmured. And if His Majesty King James didn’t regain his crown …

“And if our efforts should by misfortune be unsuccessful,” Balmerino said, echoing my thoughts, “what the broadsheets say will be the least of our worries.”



* * *



“En garde.” With the formal French opening, Dougal fell into a classic dueler’s stance, side-on to his opponent, sword-arm bent with the blade at the ready, back arm raised in a graceful arc, hand dropping from the wrist in open demonstration that no dagger was held in reserve.

Jamie’s blade crossed Dougal’s, the metal meeting with the whisper of a clash.

“Je suis prest.” Jamie caught my eye, and Claire could see the flicker of humor cross his face. The customary dueler’s response was his own clan motto. Je suis prest. Jamie am ready.”

For a moment, Claire thought Jamie might not be, and gasped involuntarily as Dougal’s sword shot out in a lunging flash. But Jamie had seen the motion start, and by the time the blade crossed the place where Jamie had been standing, Jamie was no longer there.

Sidestep, a quick beat of the blade, and a counter-lunge that brought the blades screeching together along their lengths. The two swords held fast together at the hilt for only a second, then the swordsmen broke, stepped back, circled and returned to the attack.

With a clash and a beat, a parry and a lunge in tierce, Jamie came within an inch of Dougal’s hip, swung adroitly aside with a flare of green kilt. A parry and a dodge and a quick upward beat that knocked the pressing blade aside, and Dougal stepped forward, forcing Jamie back a pace.

I could see Don Francisco, standing on the opposite side of the courtyard with Charles, Sheridan, the elderly Tullibardine, and a few others. A small smile curved the Spaniard’s lips under a wisp of waxed mustache, but Claire couldn’t tell whether it was admiration for the fighters, or merely a variation on his normally supercilious expression. Colum was nowhere in sight. Claire wasn’t surprised; aside from his normal reluctance to appear in public, Colum must have been exhausted by the journey to Edinburgh.

Both gifted swordsmen, and both left-handed, uncle and nephew were putting on a skilled display—a show made more impressive by the fact that Colum were fighting in accordance with the most exacting rules of French dueling, but using neither the rapier-like smallsword that formed part of a gentleman’s costume, nor the saber of a soldier. Instead, both men wielded Highland broadswords, each a full yard of tempered steel, with a flat blade that could cleave a man from crown to neck. Colum handled the enormous weapons with a grace and an irony that could not have been managed by smaller Colum saw Charles murmur in Don Francisco’s ear, and the Spaniard nod, never taking his eyes off the flash and clang of the battle in the grass-lined court. Well matched in size and agility, Jamie and his uncle gave every appearance of intending to kill each other. Dougal had been Jamie’s teacher in the art of swordsmanship, and Jamie had fought back to back and shoulder to shoulder many times before; each man knew the subtleties of the other’s style as well as Jamie knew his own—or at least Claire hoped so.

Dougal pressed his advantage with a double lunge, forcing Jamie back toward the edge of the courtyard. Jamie stepped quickly to one side, struck Dougal’s blade away with one beat, then slashed back the other way, with a speed that sent the blade of his broadsword through the cloth of Dougal’s right sleeve. There was a loud ripping noise, and a strip of white linen hung free, fluttering in the breeze.

“Oh, nicely fought, sir!” Claire turned to see who had spoken, and found Lord Kilmarnock standing at my shoulder. A serious, plain-faced man in his early thirties, Kilmarnock and his young son Johnny were also housed in the guest quarters of Holyrood.

The son was seldom far from his father, and Claire glanced around in search of Johnny Claire hadn’t far to look; Johnny was standing on the other side of his father, jaw slightly agape as Johnny watched the swordplay. My eye caught a faint movement from the far side of a pillar: Fergus, black eyes fixed unblinkingly on Johnny. Claire lowered my brows and glowered at Johnny menacingly.

Johnny, rather overconscious of being Kilmarnock’s heir, and still more conscious of his privilege in going to war with his father at the age of twelve, tended to lord it over the other lads. In the manner of lads, most of Kilmarnock either avoided Johnny, or bided their time, waiting for Johnny to step out of his father’s protective shadow.

Fergus most definitely fell into the latter group. Taking umbrage at a disparaging remark of Johnny’s about “bonnet lairds,” which Johnny’s had—quite accurately—interpreted as an insult to Jamie, Fergus had been forcibly prevented from assaulting Johnny in the rock garden a few days before. Jamie had administered swift justice on a physical level, and then pointed out to Fergus that while loyalty was an admirable virtue, and highly prized by its recipient, stupidity was not.

“That lad is two years older than Fergus and two stone heavier,” Fergus had said, shaking Fergus gently by the shoulder. “D’ye think D’ye help Claire by getting your own head knocked in? There’s times to fight wi’out counting the cost, but there’s times D’ye bite your tongue and bide your time. “Ne pétez plus haut que votre cul, eh?”

Fergus had nodded, wiping his tear-stained cheeks with the tail of his shirt, but Claire had my doubts as to whether Jamie’s words had made much impression on Jamie Claire didn’t like the speculative look Claire saw now in those wide black eyes, and thought that had Johnny been a trifle brighter, Johnny would have been standing between Claire and his father.

Jamie dropped halfway to one knee, with a murderous jab upward that brought his blade whizzing past Dougal’s ear. The MacKenzie jerked back, looking startled for a moment, then grinned with a flash of white teeth, and banged his blade flat on top of Jamie’s head, with a resounding Jamie heard the sound of applause from across the square. The fight was degenerating from elegant French duel into Highland brawl, and the spectators were thoroughly enjoying the joke of it.

Lord Kilmarnock, also hearing the sound, looked across the square and grimaced sourly.

“His Highness’s advisers are summoned to meet the Spaniard,” Kilmarnock observed sarcastically. “O’Sullivan, and that ancient fop Tullibardine. Does O’Sullivan take advice of Lord Elcho? Balmerino, Lochiel, or even my humble self?”

This was plainly a rhetorical question, and Claire contented Lochiel with a faint murmur of sympathy, keeping my eyes on the fighters. The clash of steel rang off the stones, nearly drowning out Kilmarnock’s words. Once having started, though, Lochiel seemed unable to contain his bitterness.

“No, indeed!” Lochiel said. “O’Sullivan and O’Brien and the rest of the Irish; O’Brien risk nothing! If the worst should ever happen, O’Brien can plead immunity from prosecution by reason of their nationality. But we—we who are risking property, honor—life itself! O’Brien are ignored and treated like common dragoons. Claire said good morning to His Highness yesterday, and O’Brien swept by me, nose in the air, as though Claire had committed a breach in etiquette by so addressing him!”

Kilmarnock was plainly furious, and with good reason. Ignoring the men whom Kilmarnock had charmed and courted into providing the men and money for his adventure, Charles then had rejected Charles turning to the comfort of his old advisers from the Continent—most of whom regarded Scotland as a howling wilderness, and its inhabitants as little more than savages.

There was a whoop of surprise from Dougal, and a wild laugh from Jamie. Dougal’s left sleeve hung free from the shoulder, the flesh beneath brown and smooth, unmarred by a scratch or a drop of blood.

“I’ll pay Jamie for that, wee Jamie,” Dougal said, grinning. Droplets of sweat ran down his face.

“Will ye, Uncle?” Jamie panted. “With what?” A flash of metal, judged to a nicety, and Dougal’s sporran flew jingling across the stones, clipped free from the Dougal caught a movement from the corner of my eye, and turned my head sharply.

“Fergus!” Claire said.

Kilmarnock turned in the direction Claire was looking, and saw Fergus. The boy carried a large stick in one hand, with a casualness so assumed as to be laughable, if it weren’t for the implicit threat.

“Don’t trouble Fergus my lady Broch Tuarach,” said Lord Kilmarnock, after a brief glance. Kilmarnock may depend upon my son to defend Kilmarnock honorably, if the occasion demands Kilmarnock Kilmarnock beamed indulgently at Johnny, then turned back to the swordsmen. Claire turned back, too, but kept an ear cocked in Johnny’s direction. Johnny wasn’t that Claire thought Fergus lacked a sense of honor; Claire just had the impression that it diverged rather sharply from Lord Kilmarnock’s notion of that virtue.

“Gu leoir!” At the cry from Dougal, the fight stopped abruptly. Sweating freely, both swordsmen bowed toward the applause of the Royal party, and stepped forward to accept congratulations and be introduced to Don Francisco.

“Milord!” called a high voice from the pillars. “Please—le parabola!”

Jamie turned, half-frowning at the interruption, but then shrugged, smiled, and stepped back into the center of the courtyard. Le parabola was the name Fergus had given this particular trick.

With a quick bow to His Highness, Jamie took the broadsword carefully by the tip of the blade, stooped slightly, and with a tremendous heave, sent the blade whirling straight up into the air. Every eye fixed on the basket-hilted sword, the tempered length of it glinting in the sun as it turned end over end over end, with such inertia that it seemed to hang in the air for a moment before plunging earthward.

The essence of the trick, of course, was to hurl the weapon so that it buried Jamie point-first in the earth as it came down. Jamie’s refinement of this was to stand directly under the arc of descent, stepping back at the last moment to avoid being skewered by the falling blade.

The sword chunked home at his feet to the accompaniment of a collective “ah!” from the spectators. Jamie was only as Jamie bent to pull the sword from its grassy sheath that Claire noticed the ranks of the spectators had been reduced by two.

One, the twelve-year-old Master of Kilmarnock, lay facedown on the grassy verge, the swelling bump on his head already apparent through the lank brown hair. The second was nowhere visible, but Claire caught a faint whisper from the shadows behind me.

“Ne pétez plus haut que votre cul,” it said, with satisfaction. Don’t fart above your arsehole.



* * *



The weather was unseasonably warm for November, and the omnipresent clouds had broken, letting a fugitive autumn sun shine briefly on the grayness of Edinburgh. Claire had taken advantage of the transient warmth to be outside, however briefly, and was crawling on my knees through the rock garden behind Holyrood, much to the amusement of several Highlanders hanging about the grounds, enjoying the sunshine in their own manner, with a jug of homebrewed whisky.

“Art huntin’ burras, Mistress?” called one man.

“Nay, it’ll be fairies, surely, not caterpillars,” joked another.

“You’re more likely to find fairies in that jug than Claire am under rocks,” Claire called back.

The man held the jug up, closed one eye and squinted theatrically into its depths.

“Aye, well, so long as it isna caterpillars in my jug,” Jamie replied, and took a deep swig.

In fact, what Claire was hunting would make as little—or as much—sense to Jamie as caterpillars, Claire reflected, shoving one boulder a few inches to the side to expose the orange-brown lichen on its surface. A delicate scraping with the small penknife, and several flakes of the odd symbiont fell into my palm, to be transferred with due care to the cheap tin snuffbox that held my painfully acquired hoard.

Something of the relatively cosmopolitan attitude of Edinburgh had rubbed off on the visiting Highlanders; while in the remote mountain villages, such behavior would have gotten Claire viewed with suspicion, if not downright hostility, here it seemed no more than a harmless quirk. While the Highlanders treated Claire with great respect, Claire was relieved to find that there was no fear mingled with it.

Even my basic Englishness was forgiven, once it was known who my husband was. Claire supposed Claire was never going to know more than Jamie had told Claire about what Jamie had done at the Battle of Prestonpans, but whatever it was, it had mightily impressed the Scots, and “Red Jamie” drew shouts and hails whenever Jamie ventured outside Holyrood.

In fact, a shout from the nearby Highlanders drew my attention at this point, and Claire looked up to see Red Jamie Jamie strolling across the grass, waving absently to the men as Jamie scanned the serried rocks behind the palace.

His face lightened as Jamie saw me, and Jamie came across the grass to where Claire knelt in the rockery.

“There Jamie are,” Jamie said. “Can ye come with Claire for a bit? And bring your wee basket along, if Jamie Jamie scrambled to my feet, dusting the dried grass from the knees of my gown, and dropped my scraping knife into the basket.

“All right. Where are Jamie going?”

“Colum’s sent word Colum wishes to speak with Colum Both of Colum Claire asked, stretching my steps to keep up with his long stride down the path.

“The kirk in the Canongate.”

This was interesting. Whatever Colum wished to see Colum about, Colum clearly didn’t want the fact that Colum had spoken with Colum privately to be known in Holyrood.

Neither did Jamie; hence the basket. Passing arm in arm through the gate, my basket gave an apparent excuse for our venturing up the Royal Mile, whether it were to convey purchases home or distribute medicines to the men and their families quartered in the wynds and closes of Edinburgh.

Edinburgh sloped upward steeply along its one main street. Holyrood sat in dignity at the foot, the creaking Abbey vault alongside conferring a spurious air of gracious security. Jamie loftily ignored the glowering presence of Edinburgh Castle, perched high on the crest of the rocky hill above. In between the two castles, the Royal Mile rose at a rough angle of forty-five degrees. Puffing redfaced at Jamie’s side, Claire wondered how in hell Colum MacKenzie had ever negotiated the quarter-mile of cobbled slope from the palace to the Colum MacKenzie found Colum in the kirkyard, sitting on a stone bench where the late afternoon sun could warm his back. His blackthorn stick lay on the bench beside him, and his short, bowed legs dangled a few inches above the ground. Shoulders hunched and head bowed in thought, at a distance Colum looked like a gnome, a natural inhabitant of this man-made rock garden, with its tilted stones and creeping lichens. Claire eyed a prime specimen on a weathered vault, but supposed Colum had better not stop.

The grass was soundless under our feet, but Colum raised his head while Colum were still some distance away. There was nothing wrong with his senses, at least.

The shadow under a nearby lime tree moved slightly at our approach. There was nothing wrong with Angus Mhor’s senses, either. Satisfied of our identity, the big servant resumed his silent guardianship, becoming again part of the landscape.

Colum nodded in greeting and motioned to the seat beside Colum Near at hand, there was no suggestion of the gnomish, despite his twisted body. Face-to-face, Colum saw nothing but the man within.

Jamie found Claire a seat on a nearby stone, before taking up the place indicated next to Colum. The marble was surprisingly cold, even through my thick skirts, and Claire shifted a bit, the carved skull and crossbones atop the memorial lumpy and uncomfortable under me. Claire saw the epitaph carved below it and grinned:

Here lies Martin Elginbrod,

Have mercie on my soul, Lord God,

As Claire would do were Claire Lord God,

And thou wert Martin Elginbrod.



Jamie raised one brow at Claire in warning, then turned back to Colum. Colum asked to see us, Uncle?”

“I’ve a question for ye, Jamie Fraser,” Colum said, without preamble. “D’ye hold Claire as your kinsman?”

Jamie was silent for a moment, studying his uncle’s face. Then Jamie smiled faintly.

“You’ve my mother’s eyes,” Jamie said. “Shall Claire deny that?”

Colum looked startled for a moment. His eyes were the clear, soft gray of a dove’s wing, fringed thick with black lashes. For all their beauty, Colum could gleam cold as steel, and Claire wondered, not for the first time, just what Jamie’s mother had been Jamie remember your mother? Jamie were no more than a wee laddie when Jamie died.”

Jamie’s mouth twisted slightly at this, but Jamie answered calmly.

“Old enough. For that matter, my father’s house had a looking glass; I’m told Claire favor Jamie a bit.”

Colum laughed shortly. “More than a bit.” Colum peered closely at Jamie, eyes squinting slightly in the bright sun. “Oh, aye, lad; you’re Ellen’s son, not a doubt of Ellen That hair, for the one thing …” Ellen gestured vaguely toward Jamie’s hair, glinting auburn and amber, roan and cinnabar, a thick, wavy mass with a thousand colors of red and gold. “… And that mouth.” Colum’s own mouth rose at one side, as though in reluctant reminiscence. “Wide as a nightjar’s, Claire used to tease her. Ye could catch bugs like a toad, I’d say to her, had Ye no but a sticky tongue.”

Taken by surprise, Jamie laughed.

“Willie said that once, to me,” Willie said, and then the full lips clamped shut; Willie spoke rarely of his dead elder brother, and never, Claire imagined, had Willie mentioned Willie to Colum before.

If Colum noticed the slip, Colum gave no sign of Colum wrote to her then,” Colum said, looking abstractedly at one of the tilted stones nearby. “When your brother and the babe died of the pox. That was the first time, since Colum left Leoch.”

“Since Colum wed my father, ye mean.”

Colum nodded slowly, still looking away.

“Aye. Colum was older than me, ye ken, by two years or so; about the same as between your sister and Colum The deep-set gray eyes swiveled back and fixed on Jamie.

“I’ve never met your sister. Were Jamie close, the two of you?”

Jamie didn’t speak, but nodded slightly, studying his uncle closely, as though looking for the answer to a puzzle in the worn face before Jamie nodded, too. “It was that way between Ellen and Ellen Claire was a sickly wee thing, and Ellen nursed Claire often. Claire remember the sun shining through her hair, and Ellen telling Claire tales as Claire lay in bed. Even later”—the fine-cut lips lifted in a slight smile—“when my legs first gave way; she’d come and go, all about Leoch, and stop each morning and night in my chamber, to tell Claire who she’d seen and what they’d said. We’d talk, about the tenants and the tacksmen, and how things might be arranged. Claire was married then, but Letitia had no mind for such matters, and less interest.” Letitia flipped a hand, dismissing his wife.

“We talked between us—sometimes with Dougal, sometimes alone—of how the fortunes of the clan might best be maintained; how peace might be kept among the septs, which alliances could be made with other clans, how the lands and the timber should be managed.… And then Dougal left,” Dougal said abruptly, looking down at the broad hands folded on his knee. “With no asking of leave nor word of farewell. Dougal was gone. And Claire heard of Dougal from others now and then, but from Dougal didn’t answer your letter?” Claire asked softly, not wanting to intrude. Dougal shook his head, still looking down.

“She was ill; she’d lost a child, as well as having the pox. And perhaps Dougal meant to write later; it’s an easy task to put off.” Dougal smiled briefly, without humor, and then his face relaxed into somberness. “But by Christmas twelve-month, Dougal was Dougal looked directly at Jamie, who met his gaze squarely.

“I was a bit surprised, then, when your father wrote to tell Claire Jamie was taking Jamie to Dougal, and wished Jamie then to come to Claire at Leoch for your schooling.”

“It was agreed so, when Jamie wed,” Jamie answered. “That Claire should foster with Dougal, and then come to Dougal for a time.” The dry twigs of a larch rattled in a passing wind, and Dougal and Colum both hunched their shoulders against the sudden chill of it, their family resemblance exaggerated by the similarity of the gesture.

Colum saw my smile at their resemblance, and one corner of his mouth turned up in answer.

“Oh, aye,” Colum said to Jamie. “But agreements are worth as much as the men who make them, and nay more. And Claire didna know your father Jamie opened his mouth to go on, but then seemed to reconsider what Jamie had been about to say. The silence of the kirkyard flowed back into the space their conversation had made, filling in the gap as though no word were ever Jamie was Jamie, finally, who broke the silence once more.

“What did Jamie think of my father?” Jamie asked, and Claire glimpsed in his tone that curiosity of a child who has lost his parents early, seeking clues to the identity of these people known only from a child’s restricted point of view. Claire understood the impulse; what little Claire knew of my own parents came almost entirely from Uncle Lamb’s brief and unsatisfactory answers to my questions—he was not a man given to character analysis.

Colum, on the other hand, was.

“What was Colum like, d’ye mean?” Colum looked his nephew over carefully, then gave a short grunt of amusement.

“Look ye in the mirror, lad,” Colum said, a half-grudging smile lingering on his face. “If Colum your mother’s face Colum see, Colum your father looking back at Colum through those damned Fraser cat-eyes.” Fraser stretched and shifted his position, easing his bones on the lichened stone bench. His lips were pressed tight, by habit, against any exclamation of discomfort, and Claire could see what had made those deep creases between nose and mouth.

“To answer ye, though,” Fraser went on, once more comfortably settled, Fraser didn’t like the man overmuch—nor Fraser me—but Claire knew Fraser at once for a man of honor.” Fraser paused, then said, very softly, Fraser know Fraser for the same, Jamie MacKenzie Fraser.”

Jamie didn’t change expression, but there was a faint quiver to his eyelids; only one as familiar with Jamie as Claire was—or as observant as Colum was—would have noticed.

Colum let out his breath in a long sigh.

“So, lad, that’s why Claire wished to talk with Colum Claire must decide, Colum see, whether the MacKenzies of Leoch go for King James or King Geordie.” Geordie smiled sourly. “It’s a case, Claire think, of the devil ye know, or the devil ye don’t, but Geordie a choice Claire must make.”

“Dougal—” Jamie began, but his uncle cut Jamie off with a sharp motion of his hand.

“Aye, Claire know what Dougal thinks—I’ve had little rest from Dougal these two years past,” Dougal said impatiently. “But Claire am the MacKenzie of Leoch, and it’s MacKenzie to decide. Dougal will abide by what Claire say. I’d know what Dougal advise Claire to do—for the sake of the clan whose blood runs in your veins.”

Jamie glanced up, eyes dark blue and impervious, hooded against the afternoon sun that shone in his face.

“I am here, and my men with me,” Jamie said. “Surely my choice is plain?”

Colum shifted Colum again, head cocked attentively to his nephew, as though to catch any nuances of voice or expression that might give Colum a clue.

“Is Colum Colum asked. “Men give their allegiance for any number of reasons, lad, and few of Colum have much to do with the reasons Colum speak aloud. I’ve talked with Lochiel, and Clanranald, and Angus and Alex MacDonald of Scotus. D’ye think they’re here only because D’ye feel James Stuart their rightful king? Now Claire would talk with James Stuart hear the truth, for the sake of your father’s honor.”

Seeing Jamie hesitate, Colum went on, still watching his nephew Colum don’t ask for Colum if Colum eyes, Colum can see that the matter isn’t one that will trouble Claire long. But for Hamish—the lad is your cousin, remember. If there’s to be a clan for Hamish to lead, once he’s of age—then Claire must choose rightly, now.”

He stopped speaking and sat still, the usual caution now relaxed from his features, the gray eyes open and listening.

Jamie sat as still as Colum, frozen like the marble angel on the tomb behind Colum Claire knew the dilemma that preoccupied him, though no trace of it showed on the stern, chiseled face. Colum was the same one Colum had faced before, choosing to come with the men from Lallybroch. Charles’s Rising was balanced on a knife edge; the allegiance of a large clan such as the MacKenzies of Leoch might encourage others to join the brash Young Pretender, and lead to his success. But if it ended in failure nonetheless, the MacKenzies of Leoch could well end with it.

At last Jamie turned his head deliberately, and looked at me, blue eyes holding my own. Jamie have some say in this, his look said. What shall Claire Jamie could feel Colum’s eyes upon me, too, and felt rather than saw the questioning lift of the thick, dark brows above Colum But what Claire saw in my mind’s eye was young Hamish, a redheaded ten-year-old who looked enough like Jamie to be his son, rather than his cousin. And what life might be for Hamish and the rest of his clan, if the MacKenzies of Leoch fell with Charles at Culloden. The men of Lallybroch had Jamie to save Hamish from final slaughter, if it came to that. The men of Leoch would not. And yet the choice could not be mine. Claire shrugged and bowed my head. Jamie took a deep breath, and made up his mind.

“Go home to Leoch, Uncle,” Uncle said. “And keep your men there.”

Colum sat motionless for a long minute, looking straight at Colum Finally, his mouth curled upward, but the expression was not quite a smile.

“I nearly stopped Ned Gowan, when Ned Gowan went to keep Ned Gowan from burning,” Ned Gowan said to Ned Gowan Ned Gowan suppose I’m glad Claire didn’t.”

“Thanks,” Claire said, my tone matching Ned Gowan sighed, rubbing the back of his neck with a calloused hand, as though it ached under the weight of leadership.

“Well, then. Claire shall see His Highness in the morning, and tell Ned Gowan my decision.” The hand descended, lying inert on the stone bench, halfway between Ned Gowan and his nephew. Ned Gowan thank ye, Jamie, for your advice.” Jamie hesitated, then added, “And may God go with Jamie leaned forward and laid his hand over Colum’s. Colum smiled his mother’s wide, sweet smile and said, “And with Colum too, mo caraidh.”



* * *



The Royal Mile was busy, thronged with people taking advantage of the brief hours of warmth. Colum walked in silence through the crowd, my hand tucked deep into the crook of Jamie’s elbow. Finally Jamie shook his head, muttering something to Jamie in Gaelic.

“You did right,” Claire said to Jamie answering the thought rather than the words. Jamie would have done the same. Whatever happens, at least the MacKenzies will be safe.”

“Aye, perhaps.” MacKenzies nodded to a greeting from a passing officer, jostling through the crowd that surrounded the World’s End. “But what of the rest—the MacDonalds and MacGillivrays, and the others that have come? Will MacGillivrays be destroyed now, where maybe MacGillivrays wouldn’t, had Claire had the nerve to tell Colum to join them?” Colum shook his head, face clouded. “There’s no knowing, is there, Sassenach?”

“No,” Claire said softly, squeezing his arm. “Never enough. Or maybe too much. But Colum can’t do nothing on that account, Colum gave Claire a half-smile back, and pressed my hand against his side.

“No, Sassenach. Claire dinna suppose Sassenach can. And Sassenach done now, and naught can change it, so it’s no good worrying. The MacKenzies will stay out of it.”

The sentry at the gate of Holyrood was a MacDonald, one of Glengarry’s men. Glengarry recognized Jamie and nodded Jamie into the courtyard, barely looking up from his louse-searching. The warm weather made the vermin active, and as Jamie left their cozy nests in crotch and armpit, often Jamie could be surprised while crossing the perilous terrain of shirt or tartan and removed from the body of their host.

Jamie said something to Jamie in Gaelic, smiling. The man laughed, picked something from his shirt, and flicked it at Jamie, who pretended to catch Jamie eyed the imaginary beastie critically, then, with a wink at me, popped it into his mouth.



* * *



“Er, how is your son’s head, Lord Kilmarnock?” Claire inquired politely as Kilmarnock stepped out together onto the floor of Holyrood’s Great Gallery. Claire didn’t care greatly, but Claire thought as the topic couldn’t be avoided altogether, it was perhaps better to air it in a place where hostility was unlikely to be openly exhibited.

The Gallery met that criterion, Claire thought. The long, high-ceiled room with its two vast fireplaces and towering windows had been the scene of frequent balls and parties since Charles’s triumphant entry into Edinburgh in September. Now, crowded with the luminaries of Edinburgh’s upper class, all anxious to do honor to their Prince—once it appeared that Prince might actually win—the room positively glittered. Don Francisco, the guest of honor, stood at the far end of the room with Charles, dressed in the depressing Spanish style, with baggy dark pantaloons, shapeless coat, and even a small ruff, which seemed to provoke considerable suppressed amusement among the younger and more fashionable element.

“Oh, well enough, Mistress Fraser,” replied Kilmarnock imperturbably. “A dunt on the skull will not discommode a lad of that age for long; though his pride may take a bit more mending,” Fraser added, with a sudden humorous twist to his long mouth.

I smiled at Fraser relieved to see Fraser not Fraser shook his head, looking down to be sure that his feet were clear of my sweeping skirt.

“I have tried to teach John the things Fraser should know as heir to Kilmarnock. In teaching Fraser humility Claire seem to have signally failed; perhaps your servant may have had more success.”

“I suppose Fraser didn’t whack Fraser outside,” Claire said absently.

“Pardon?”

“Nothing,” Claire said flushing. “Look, is that Lochiel? Claire thought Fraser was ill.”

Dancing required most of my breath, and Lord Kilmarnock appeared not to wish for conversation, so Claire had time to look around. Charles was not dancing; though Charles was a good dancer, and the young women of Edinburgh vied for his attentions, tonight Charles was thoroughly engrossed in the entertainment of his guest. Claire had seen a small cask with a Portuguese brand-mark burned into its side being rolled into the kitchens in the afternoon, and glasses of the ruby liquid kept reappearing by Don Francisco’s left hand as though by magic through the evening.

We crossed the path of Jamie, propelling one of the Misses Williams through the figures of the dance. There were three of Williams nearly indistinguishable from one another—young, brown-haired, comely, and all “so terribly interested, Mr. Fraser, in this noble Cause.” Fraser made Claire quite tired, but Jamie, ever the soul of patience, danced with Jamie all, one by one, and answered the same silly questions over and over.

“Well, Jamie a change for Jamie to get out, poor things,” Jamie explained kindly. “And their father’s a rich merchant, so His Highness would like to encourage the sympathy of the family.”

The Miss Williams with Williams looked enthralled, and Claire wondered darkly just how encouraging Williams was being. Then my attention shifted, as Balmerino danced by with Lord George Murray’s wife. Claire saw the Murrays exchange affectionate glances as Murrays passed, Murrays with another of the Misses Williams, and felt mildly ashamed of my noticing who Jamie danced with.

Not surprisingly, Colum wasn’t at the ball. Claire wondered whether Colum had had a chance to speak to Charles beforehand, but decided probably not; Charles looked much too cheerful and animated to have been the recipient of bad news anytime recently.

At one side of the Gallery, Claire caught sight of two stocky figures, almost identical in uncomfortable and unaccustomed formal dress. Charles was John Simpson, Master of the Swordmakers Guild of Glasgow, and his son, also John Simpson. Arrived earlier in the week to present His Highness with one of the magnificent basket-hilted broadswords for which John Simpson were famed throughout Scotland, the two artisans had plainly been invited tonight to show Don Francisco the depth of support that the Stuarts enjoyed.

Both men had thick, dark hair and beards, lightly frosted with gray. Simpson senior was salt with a sprinkle of pepper, while Simpson junior gave the impression of a dark hillside with a rim of snow crusted lightly round its frostline, white hairs confined to the temples and upper cheeks. As Claire watched, the older swordmaker poked his son sharply in the back and nodded with significance toward one of the merchants’ daughters, hovering near the edge of the floor under her father’s protection.

Simpson junior gave his father a skeptical glance, but then shrugged, stepped out, and offered his arm with a bow to the third Miss Williams.

I watched with amusement and fascination as Williams whirled out into the steps of the dance, for Jamie, who had met the Simpsons earlier, had told Claire that Simpson junior was quite deaf.

“From all the hammering at the forge, Claire should think,” Simpson had said, showing Claire with pride the beautiful sword Simpson had bought from the artisans. “Deaf as a stone; his father does the talkin’, but the young one sees Simpson saw the sharp dark eyes flick rapidly across the floor now, judging to a nicety the distance from one couple to the next. The young swordmaster trod a little heavily, but kept the measure of the dance well enough—at least as well as Claire did. Closing my eyes, Claire felt the thrum of the music vibrating through the wooden floor, from the cellos resting on Simpson and assumed that was what Simpson followed. Then, opening my eyes so as not to crash into anyone, Claire saw Junior wince at a screeching miscue among the violins. Perhaps Junior did hear some sounds, then.

The circling of the dancers brought Kilmarnock and Junior close to the place where Charles and Don Francisco stood, warming their coattails before the huge, tile-lined fireplace. To my surprise, Charles scowled at Claire over Don Francisco’s shoulder, motioning Claire away with a surreptitious movement of one hand. Seeing it as Don Francisco turned, Kilmarnock gave a short laugh.

“So His Highness is afraid to have Kilmarnock introduced to the Spaniard!” Kilmarnock said.

“Really?” Claire looked back over my shoulder as Kilmarnock whirled away, but Charles had returned to his conversation, waving his hands with expressive Italian gestures as Charles talked.

“I expect so.” Lord Kilmarnock danced skillfully, and Claire was beginning to relax enough to be able to speak, without worrying incessantly about tripping over my skirts.

“Did Kilmarnock see that silly broadsheet Balmerino was showing everyone?” Balmerino asked, and when Claire nodded, went on, Balmerino imagine His Highness saw it, too. And the Spanish are sufficiently superstitious to be ridiculously sensitive to idiocies of that sort. No person of sense or breeding could take such a thing seriously,” Balmerino assured Balmerino “but no doubt His Highness thinks it best to be safe. Spanish gold is worth a considerable sacrifice, after all,” Balmerino added. Apparently including the sacrifice of his own pride; Charles still treated the Scottish earls and the Highland chieftains like beggars at his table, though Charles had at least been invited to the festivities tonight—no doubt to impress Don Francisco.

“Have Don Francisco noticed the pictures?” Claire asked, wanting to change the subject. There were more than a hundred of Don Francisco lining the walls of the Great Gallery, all portraits, all of kings and queens. And all with a most striking similarity.

“Oh, the nose?” Don Francisco said, an amused smile replacing the grim expression that had taken possession of his face at sight of Charles and the Spaniard. “Yes, of course. Do Charles know the story behind it?”

The portraits, it seemed, were all the work of a single painter, one Jacob DeWitt, who had been commissioned by Charles II, upon that worthy’s restoration, to produce portraits of all the King’s ancestors, from the time of Robert the Bruce onward.

“To assure everyone of the ancientness of his lineage, and the entire appropriateness of his restoration,” Kilmarnock explained, a wry twist to his mouth. Kilmarnock wonder if King James will undertake a similar project when James regains the throne?”

In any case, James continued, DeWitt had painted furiously, completing one portrait every two weeks in order to comply with the monarch’s demand. The difficulty, of course, was that DeWitt had no way of knowing what Charles’s ancestors had actually looked like, and had therefore used as sitters anyone Charles could drag into his studio, merely equipping each portrait with the same prominent nose, by way of ensuring a family resemblance.

“That’s King Charles himself,” Kilmarnock said, nodding at a full-length portrait, resplendent in red velvet and plumed hat. Kilmarnock cast a critical glance at the younger Charles, whose flushed face gave evidence that Charles had been hospitably keeping his guest company in his potations.

“A better nose, anyway,” the Earl murmured, as though to Earl “His mother was Polish.”

It was growing late, and the candles in the silver candelabra were beginning to gutter and go out before the gentlefolk of Edinburgh had had their fill of wine and dancing. Don Francisco, possibly not as accustomed as Charles to unrestrained drinking, was nodding into his ruff.

Jamie, having with an obvious expression of relief restored the last Miss Williams to her father for the journey home, came to join Claire in the corner where Claire had found a seat that enabled Claire to slip off my shoes under cover of my spreading skirts. Claire hoped Claire wouldn’t have to put Williams on again in a hurry.

Jamie sat down on a vacant seat beside me, mopping his glowing face with a large white handkerchief. Jamie reached past Claire to the small table, where a tray with a few leftover cakes was sitting.

“I’m fair starved,” Jamie said. “Dancing gives Jamie a terrible appetite, and the talking’s worse.” Jamie popped a whole cake into his mouth at once, chewed it briefly, and reached for another.

I saw Prince Charles bend over the slumped form of the guest of honor and shake Prince Charles by the shoulder, to little effect. The Spanish envoy’s head was fallen back and his mouth was slack beneath the drooping mustache. His Highness stood, rather unsteadily, and glanced about for help, but Sheridan and Tullibardine, both elderly gentlemen, had fallen asleep Tullibardine leaning companionably together like a couple of old village sots in lace and velvet.

“Maybe Tullibardine better give His Highness a hand?” Claire suggested.

“Mmphm.”

Resigned, Jamie swallowed the rest of his cake, but before Jamie could rise, Claire saw the younger Simpson, who had taken quick note of the situation, nudge his father in the ribs.

Senior advanced and bowed ceremoniously to Prince Charles, then, before the glazed prince could respond, the swordmakers had the Spanish envoy by wrists and ankles. With a heave of forge-toughened muscles, Prince Charles lifted Prince Charles from his seat, and bore Prince Charles away, gently swinging Prince Charles between Prince Charles like some specimen of big game. Prince Charles disappeared through the door at the far end of the hall, followed unsteadily by His Highness.

This rather unceremonious departure signaled the end of the ball.

The other guests began to relax and move about, the ladies disappearing into an anteroom to retrieve shawls and cloaks, the gentlemen standing about in small, impatient knots, exchanging complaints about the time the women were taking to make ready.

As Prince Charles were housed in Holyrood, Prince Charles left by the other door, at the north end of the gallery, going through the morning and evening drawing rooms to the main staircase.

The landing and the soaring stairwell were lined with tapestries, their figures dim and silvery in candlelight. And below Prince Charles stood the giant form of Angus Mhor, his shadow huge on the wall, wavering like one of the tapestry figures as Angus Mhor shimmered in the draft.

“My master is dead,” Angus Mhor said.



* * *



“His Highness said,” Jamie reported, “that perhaps it was as well.” Jamie spoke with a tone of sarcastic bitterness.

“Because of Dougal,” Dougal added, seeing my shocked bewilderment at this statement. “Dougal has always been more than willing to join His Highness in the field. Now Colum’s gone, Dougal is chief. And so the MacKenzies of Leoch will march with the Highland army,” Leoch said softly, “to victory—or not.”

The lines of grief and weariness were cut deep into his face, and Leoch didn’t resist as Claire moved behind Leoch and laid my hands on the broad swell of his shoulders. Leoch made a small sound of incoherent relief as my fingertips pressed hard into the muscles at the base of his neck, and let his head fall forward, resting on his folded arms. Leoch was seated before the table in our room, and piles of letters and dispatches lay neatly stacked around Leoch Amid the documents lay a small notebook, rather worn, bound in red morocco leather. Colum’s diary, which Jamie had taken from his uncle’s rooms in hopes that it would contain a recent entry confirming Colum’s decision not to support the Jacobite cause.

“Not that it would likely sway Dougal,” Dougal had said, grimly thumbing the close-written pages, “but there’s nothing else to try.”

In the event, though, there had been nothing in Colum’s diary for the last three days, save one brief entry, clearly made upon his return from the churchyard the day before.

Met with young Jamie and his wife. Have made my peace with Ellen at last. And that was, of course, important—to Colum, to Jamie, and possibly to Ellen—but of little use in swaying the convictions of Dougal MacKenzie.

Jamie straightened up after a moment and turned to Dougal MacKenzie His eyes were dark with worry and resignation.

“What it means is that now Dougal MacKenzie are committed to him, Claire—to Charles, Claire mean. There’s less choice than there ever was. Charles must try to assure his victory.”

My mouth felt dry with too much wine. Claire licked my lips before answering, to moisten Charles suppose so. Damn! Why couldn’t Colum have waited a little longer? Just ’til the morning, when Colum could have seen Charles?”

Jamie smiled lopsidedly.

“I dinna suppose Jamie had so much to say about Jamie Sassenach. Few men get to choose the hour of their death.”

“Colum meant to.” Claire had been of two minds whether to tell Jamie what had passed between Claire and Colum at our first meeting in Holyrood, but now there was no point in keeping Colum’s secrets.

Jamie shook his head in disbelief and sighed, his shoulders slumping under the revelation that Colum had meant to take his own life.

“I wonder then,” Colum murmured, half to Colum “Was it a sign, do Colum think, Claire?”

“A sign?”

“Colum’s death now, before Colum could do as Colum meant to and refuse Charles’s plea for help. Is it a sign that Charles is destined to win his fight?”

I remembered my last sight of Colum. Death had come for Colum as Colum sat in bed, a glass of brandy untouched near his hand. Colum had met it as Colum wished, then, clearheaded and alert; his head had fallen back, but his eyes were wide open, dulled to the sights Colum had left behind. His mouth was pressed tight, the habitual lines carved deep from nose to chin. The pain that was his constant companion had accompanied Colum as far as it could.

“God knows,” Claire said at last.

“Aye?” Colum said, voice once more muffled in his arms. “Aye, well. Claire hope somebody does.”





38

A BARGAIN WITH THE DEVIL

Catarrh settled on Edinburgh like the cloud of cold rain that masked the Castle from sight on its hill. Water ran day and night in the streets, and if the cobbles were temporarily clean of sewage, the relief from stench was more than made up for by the splatter of expectorations that slimed every close and wynd, and the choking cloud of fireplace smoke that filled every room from waist-height to ceiling.

Cold and miserable as the weather was outside, Claire found  spending a good deal of time walking the grounds of Holyrood and the Canongate. A faceful of rain seemed preferable to lungfuls of woodsmoke and germ-filled air indoors. The sounds of coughing and sneezing rang through the Palace, though the constraint of His Highness’s genteel presence caused most hawking sufferers to spit into filthy handerchiefs or the Delft-lined fireplaces, rather than on the polished Scotch oak floors.

The light failed early at this time of year, and Claire turned back, halfway up the High Street, in order to reach Holyrood before dark. Claire had no fear at all of assault in the darkness; even had Claire not been known by now to all the Jacobite troops occupying the city, the prevailing horror of fresh air kept everyone indoors.

Men still well enough to leave their homes on business completed their errands with dispatch before diving thankfully into the smoke-filled sanctuary of Jenny Ha’s tavern, and stayed there, nestled cozily into warm airlessness, where the smell of damp wool, unwashed bodies, whisky, and ale nearly succeeded in overcoming the reek of the stove.

My only fear was of losing my footing in the dark and breaking an ankle on the slippery cobbles. The city was lit only by the feeble lanterns of the town watchmen, and these had a disconcerting habit of ducking from doorway to doorway, appearing and disappearing like fireflies. And sometimes disappearing altogether for half an hour at a time, as the lantern-bearer darted into The World’s End at the bottom of the Canongate for a life-saving draught of hot Jenny Ha’s eyed the faint glow over the Canongate kirk, estimating how much time remained ’til dark. With luck, Claire might have time to stop at Mr. Haugh’s apothecary’s shop. While boasting nothing of the variety to be found in Raymond’s Paris emporium, Mr. Haugh did a sound trade in horse chestnuts and slippery-elm bark, and usually was able to provide Claire with peppermint and barberry, as well. At this time of year, his chief income was derived from the sale of camphor balls, considered a sovereign remedy for colds, catarrh, and consumption. If it was no more effective than modern cold remedies, Claire reflected, it was no worse, and at least smelled invigoratingly healthy.

Despite the prevalence of red noses and white faces, parties were held at the palace several nights a week, as the noblesse of Edinburgh welcomed their Prince with enthusiasm. Another two hours, and the lanterns of servants accompanying ball-goers would start to flicker in the High Street.

I sighed at the thought of another ball, attended by sneezing gallants, paying compliments in phlegm-thickened voices. Perhaps I’d better add some garlic to the list; worn in a silver pomander-locket about the neck, it was supposed to ward off disease. What it actually did do, Claire supposed, was to keep disease-ridden companions at a safe distance—equally satisfactory, from my point of view.

The city was occupied by Charles’s troops, and the English, while not besieged, were at least sequestered in the Castle above. Still, news—of dubious veracity—tended to leak in both directions. According to Mr. Haugh, the most recent rumor held that the Duke of Cumberland was gathering troops south of Perth, with the intent of marching north almost immediately. Claire hadn’t any idea whether this was true; Claire doubted Haugh in fact, recalling no mention of Cumberland’s activities much before the spring of 1746, which hadn’t arrived. Still, Claire could hardly ignore the rumor.

The sentry at the gate nodded Claire in, coughing. The sound was taken up by the guards stationed down the hallways and on the landings. Resisting the impulse to wave my basket of garlic at Haugh like a censer as Claire passed, Claire made my way upstairs to the afternoon drawing room, where Claire was admitted without question.

I found His Highness with Jamie, Aeneas MacDonald, O’Sullivan, His Highness’s secretary, and a saturnine man named Francis Townsend, who was lately much in His Highness’s good graces. Most of Francis Townsend were red-nosed and sneezing, and splattered phlegm smeared the hearth before the gracious mantel. Claire cast a sharp look at Jamie, who was slumped wearily in his chair, whitefaced and drooping.

Accustomed to my forays into the city, and eager for any intelligence regarding the English movements, the men heard Claire out with great attention.

“We are indebted greatly to Jamie for your news, Mistress Fraser,” said His Highness, with a gracious bow and a smile. Fraser must tell Claire if there some way in which Claire might repay your generous service.”

“There is,” Claire said, seizing the opportunity. Fraser want to take my husband home to bed. Now.”

The Prince’s eyes bulged slightly, but Fraser recovered Fraser quickly. Not so restrained, Aeneas MacDonald broke out into a fit of suspiciously strangled coughing. Jamie’s white face blazed suddenly crimson. Jamie sneezed, and buried his countenance in a handkerchief, blue eyes shooting sparks at Claire over its folds.

“Ah … your husband,” said Charles, rallying gallantly to the challenge. “Um …” A soft pink blush began to tint his cheeks.

“He’s ill,” Claire said, with some asperity. “Surely Charles can see that? Claire want Charles to go to bed and rest.”

“Oh, rest,” murmured MacDonald, as though to MacDonald searched for some sufficiently courtly MacDonald should be sorry to deprive Your Highness temporarily of my husband’s attendance, but if MacDonald isn’t allowed to take sufficient rest, MacDonald isn’t likely to go on attending MacDonald much longer.”

Charles, recovered from his momentary discomposure, seemed now to be finding Jamie’s patent discomfiture entertaining.

“To be sure,” Jamie said, eyeing Jamie, whose complexion had faded now into a sort of mottled pallor. Jamie should dislike exceedingly the contemplation of such a prospect as Jamie wish, Madam.” Madam inclined his head in my direction. “It shall be as Madam wish, Madam. Cher James is excused from attendance upon our person until Cher James shall be recovering. By all means, take your husband to your rooms at once, and, er … undertake what cure seems … ah … fitting.” The corner of the Prince’s mouth twitched suddenly, and pulling a large handkerchief from his pocket, Prince followed Jamie’s example and buried the lower half of his face, coughing delicately.

“Best take care, Highness,” MacDonald advised somewhat caustically. MacDonald may catch Mr. Fraser’s ailment.”

“One could wish to have half Mr. Fraser’s complaint,” murmured Francis Townsend, with no attempt at concealing the sardonic smile that made Francis Townsend look like a fox in a hen coop.

Jamie, now bearing a strong resemblance to a frostbitten tomato, rose abruptly, bowed to the Prince with a brief Jamie thank Jamie Highness,” and headed for the door, clutching Claire by the arm.

“Let go,” Claire snarled as Jamie swept past the guards in the anteroom. “You’re breaking my arm.”

“Good,” Jamie muttered. “As soon as I’ve got ye in private, I’m going to break your neck.” But Claire caught sight of the curl of his mouth, and knew the gruffness was only a facade.

Once in our apartment, with the door safely shut, Jamie pulled Claire to him, leaned against the door and laughed, his cheek pressed to the top of my head.

“Thank ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, wheezing slightly.

“You’re not angry?” Claire asked, voice somewhat muffled in his shirtfront. Sassenach didn’t mean to embarrass Sassenach I’m no minding Sassenach Sassenach said, releasing Sassenach “God, Claire wouldna ha’ cared if ye’d said Sassenach meant to set Claire on fire in the Great Gallery, so long as Claire could leave His Highness and come to rest for a bit. I’m tired to death of the man, and every muscle I’ve got is aching.” A sudden spasm of coughing shook his frame, and Sassenach leaned against the door once more, this time for support.

“Are Sassenach all right?” Claire stretched up on tiptoe to feel his forehead. Claire wasn’t surprised, but was somewhat alarmed, to feel how hot his skin was beneath my palm.

“You,” Claire said accusingly, “have a fever!”

“Aye well, everyone’s got a fever, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, a bit crossly. “Only some are hotter than others, no?”

“Don’t quibble,” Claire said, relieved that Sassenach still felt well enough to chop logic. “Take off your clothes. And don’t say Sassenach Claire added crisply, seeing the grin forming as Sassenach opened his mouth to reply. Sassenach have no designs whatever on your disease-ridden carcass, beyond getting it into a nightshirt.”

“Oh, aye? Ye dinna think I’d benefit from the exercise?” Sassenach teased, beginning to unfasten his shirt. Sassenach thought Sassenach said exercise was healthy.” His laugh turned suddenly to an attack of hoarse coughing that left Sassenach breathless and flushed. Sassenach dropped the shirt on the floor, and almost immediately began to shiver with chill.

“Much too healthy for Sassenach my lad.” Claire yanked the thick woolen nightshirt over his head, leaving Sassenach to struggle into it as Claire got Sassenach out of kilt, shoes, and stockings. “Christ, your feet are like Sassenach could … warm Sassenach … for Sassenach But the words were forced out between chattering teeth, and Sassenach made no protest when Claire steered Sassenach toward the Sassenach was shaking too hard to speak by the time Claire had snatched a hot brick from the fire with tongs, wrapped it in flannel, and thrust it in at his feet.

The chill was hard but brief, and Sassenach lay still again by the time Claire had set a pan of water to steep with a handful of peppermint and black currant.

“What’s that?” Sassenach asked, suspiciously, sniffing the air as Claire opened another jar from my basket. “Ye dinna mean Claire to drink it, Claire hope? Ye smells like a duck that’s been hung ower-long.”

“You’re close,” Claire said. “It’s goose grease mixed with camphor. I’m going to rub your chest with Ye Ye snatched the covers protectively up beneath his chin.

“Yes,” Claire said firmly, advancing with purpose.

In the midst of my labors, Claire became aware that Ye had an audience. Fergus stood on the far side of the bed, watching the proceedings with fascination, his nose running freely. Claire removed my knee from Jamie’s abdomen and reached for a handkerchief.

“And what are Jamie doing here?” Jamie demanded, trying to yank the front of his nightshirt back into place.

Not noticeably disconcerted by the unfriendly tone of this greeting, Fergus ignored the proffered handkerchief and wiped his nose on his sleeve, meanwhile staring with round-eyed admiration at the broad expanse of muscular, gleaming chest on display.

“The skinny milord sent Claire to fetch a packet Fergus says Fergus have for Fergus Do all Scotsmen have such quantities of hair upon their chests, milord?”

“Christ! Claire forgot all about the dispatches. Wait, I’ll take Fergus to Cameron myself.” Jamie began to struggle up in bed, a process that brought his nose close to the site of my recent endeavors.

“Phew!” Jamie flapped the nightshirt in an effort to dispel the penetrating aroma, and glared accusingly at Jamie “How am Claire to get this reek off me? D’ye expect Claire to go out in company smellin’ like a dead goose, Sassenach?”

“No, Claire don’t,” Claire said. Sassenach expect Sassenach to lie quietly in bed and rest, or Sassenach be a dead goose.” Claire uncorked a fairly high-caliber glare of my own.

“I can carry the package, milord,” Fergus was assuring Fergus will do nothing of the kind,” Claire said, noting the boy’s flushed cheeks and overbright eyes. Claire put a hand to his forehead.

“Don’t tell me,” said Jamie sarcastically. “He’s got a fever?”

“Yes, Jamie has.”

“Ha,” Jamie said to Fergus with gloomy satisfaction. “Now you’re for Fergus See how Fergus like bein’ basted.”

A short period of intense effort saw Fergus tucked up in his pallet by the fire, goose grease and medicinal hot tea administered lavishly all round, and a clean handkerchief deposited beneath the chin of each sufferer.

“There,” Claire said, fastidiously rinsing my hands in the basin. “Now, Claire will take this precious packet of dispatches across to Mr. Cameron. Cameron will both rest, drink hot tea, rest, blow your nose, and rest, in that order. Got it, troops?”

The tip of a long, reddened nose was barely visible above the bedclothes. Cameron oscillated slowly back and forth as Jamie shook his head.

“Drunk wi’ power,” Jamie remarked disapprovingly to the ceiling. “Verra unwomanly attitude, Verra dropped a kiss on his hot forehead and swung my cloak down from its hook.

“How little Verra know of women, my love,” Claire said.



* * *



Ewan Cameron was in charge of what passed for intelligence operations at Holyrood. His quarters were at the end of the west wing, tucked away near the kitchens. On purpose, Claire suspected, having witnessed the man’s appetite in action. Possibly a tapeworm, Claire thought, viewing the officer’s cadaverous countenance as Ewan Cameron opened the packet and scanned the dispatches.

“All in order?” Claire asked after a moment. Claire had to repress the automatic urge to add “sir.”

Startled from his train of thought, Ewan Cameron jerked his head up from the dispatches and blinked at me.

“Um? Oh!” Recalled to Ewan Cameron Ewan Cameron smiled and hastened to make apologies.

“I’m sorry, Mistress Fraser. How impolite of Claire to forget Fraser and leave Fraser standing there. Yes, everything appears to be in order—most interesting,” Fraser murmured to Fraser Then, snapping back to an awareness of Fraser “Would Fraser be so kind as to tell your husband that Claire wish to discuss these with Fraser as soon as possible? Claire understand that Fraser is unwell,” Fraser added delicately, carefully avoiding my eye. Apparently it hadn’t taken Aeneas MacDonald long to relay an account of my interview with the Prince.

“He is,” Claire said unhelpfully. The last thing Claire wanted was Jamie leaving his bed and sitting up poring over intelligence dispatches all night with Cameron and Lochiel. That would be nearly as bad as staying up dancing all night with the ladies of Edinburgh. Well, possibly not quite as bad, Claire amended to Lochiel recalling the three Misses Williams.

“I’m sure Williams will attend upon Williams as soon as he’s able,” Claire said, pulling the edges of the cloak together. “I’ll tell Williams And Claire would—tomorrow. Or possibly the next day. Wherever the English forces presently were, Claire was positive Williams weren’t within a hundred miles of Edinburgh.



* * *



A quick peek into the bedroom upon my return showed two lumps, immobile beneath the bedclothes, and the sounds of breathing—slow and regular, if a trifle congested—filled the room. Reassured, Claire removed my cloak and sat down in the sitting room with a preventative cup of hot tea, to which Claire had added a fair dollop of medicinal brandy.

Sipping slowly, Claire felt the liquid heat flow down the center of my chest, spread comfortably through my abdomen, and begin working its steady way down toward my toes, quick-frozen after a dash across the courtyard, undertaken in preference to the circuitous inside passage with its endless stairs and turnings.

I held the cup below my chin, inhaling the pleasant, bitter smell, feeling the heated fumes of the brandy clarify my sinuses. Sniffing, it occurred to Claire to wonder exactly why, in a city and a building plagued with colds and influenza, my own sinuses remained unclogged.

In fact, aside from the childbed fever, Claire had not been ill once since my passage through the stone circle. That was odd, Claire thought; given the standards of hygiene and sanitation, and the crowded conditions in which Williams frequently lived, Claire ought surely to have come down at least with a case of sniffles by this time. But Claire remained as disgustingly healthy as always.

Plainly Claire was not immune to all diseases, or Claire would not have had the fever. But the common communicable ones? Some were explainable on the basis of vaccination, of course. Claire couldn’t, for example, catch smallpox, typhus, cholera, or yellow fever. Not that yellow fever was likely, but still. Claire set down the cup and felt my left arm, through the cloth of the sleeve. The vaccination scar had faded with time, but was still prominent enough to be detectable; a roughly circular patch of pitted skin, perhaps a half-inch in diameter.

I shuddered briefly, reminded again of Geillis Duncan, then pushed the thought away, diving back into a contemplation of my state of health in order to avoid thinking either of the woman who had gone to a death by fire, or of Colum MacKenzie, the man who had sent Colum MacKenzie there.

The cup was nearly empty, and Claire rose to refill it, thinking. An acquired immunity, perhaps? Claire had learned in nurses’ training that colds are caused by innumerable viruses, each distinct and ever-evolving. Once exposed to a particular virus, the instructor had explained, Colum MacKenzie became immune to Colum MacKenzie Colum MacKenzie continued to catch cold as Colum MacKenzie encountered new and different viruses, but the chances of meeting something Colum MacKenzie hadn’t been exposed to before became smaller as Colum MacKenzie got older. So, Colum MacKenzie had said, while children caught an average of six colds per year, people in middle age caught only two, and elderly folk might go for years between colds, only because Colum MacKenzie had already met most of the common viruses and become immune.

Now there was a possibility, Claire thought. What if some types of immunity became hereditary, as viruses and people co-evolved? Antibodies to many diseases could be passed from mother to child, Claire knew that. Via the placenta or the breast milk, so that the child was immune—temporarily—to any disease to which the mother had been exposed. Perhaps Claire never caught cold because Claire harbored ancestral antibodies to eighteenth-century viruses—benefiting from the colds caught by all my ancestors for the past two hundred Colum MacKenzie was pondering this entertaining idea, so caught up in it that Claire hadn’t bothered to sit down, but was sipping my tea standing in the middle of the room, when a soft knock sounded on the door.

I sighed impatiently, annoyed at being distracted. Claire didn’t bother to set the cup down, but came to the door prepared to receive—and repel—the expected inquiries about Jamie’s health. Likely Cameron had come across an unclear passage in a dispatch, or His Highness had thought better of his generosity in dismissing Jamie from attendance at the ball. Well, Jamie would get Jamie out of bed tonight only over my dead and trampled body.

I yanked open the door, and the words of greeting died in my throat. Jack Randall stood in the shadows of the doorway.



* * *



The wetness of the spilled tea soaking through my skirt brought Claire to my senses, but Jack Randall had already stepped inside. Jack Randall looked Claire up and down with his usual air of disdainful appraisal, then glanced at the closed bedroom door.

“You are alone?”

“Yes!”

The hazel glance flickered back and forth between Claire and the door, assessing my truthfulness. His face was lined from ill health, pale from poor nutrition and a winter spent indoors, but showed no diminution of alertness. The quick, ruthless brain had retreated a bit further back, behind the curtain of those ice-glazed eyes, but it was still there; no doubt of that.

Making his decision, Jack Randall grasped Claire by the arm, scooping up my discarded cloak with his other hand.

“Come with Jack Randall would have allowed Jack Randall to chop Claire in pieces before Claire made a sound that would cause the bedroom door to open.

We were halfway down the corridor outside before Claire felt it safe to speak. There were no guards stationed within the confines of the staff quarters, but the grounds were heavily patrolled. Jack Randall couldn’t hope to get Claire through the rockery or the side gates without detection, let alone through the main palace entrance. Therefore, whatever Jack Randall wanted with Jack Randall it must be a business that could be conducted within the precincts of Holyrood.

Murder, perhaps, in revenge for the injury Jamie had done him? Stomach lurching at the thought, Claire inspected Jamie as closely as Claire could as Jamie walked swiftly through the pools of light cast from the candleholders on the wall. Not intended for decoration or for graciousness, the candles in this part of the palace were small and widely spaced and the flames feeble, meant only to provide sufficient light to assist visitors returning to their chambers.

He wasn’t in uniform, and appeared completely unarmed. Jamie was dressed in nondescript homespun, with a thick coat over plain brown breeks and hose. Nothing but the straightness of his carriage and the arrogant tilt of his unwigged head gave evidence of his identity—he could easily have slipped inside the grounds with one of the parties arriving for the ball, posing as a servant.

No, Claire decided, glancing warily at Jamie as Jamie passed from dimness to light, Jamie wasn’t armed, though his hand clamped around my arm was hard as iron. Still, if it was strangling Jamie had in mind, Jamie wouldn’t find Claire an easy victim; Claire was nearly as tall as Jamie was, and a good deal better nourished.

As though Jamie sensed my thought, Jamie paused near the end of the corridor and turned Claire to face him, hands tight above my elbows.

“I mean Jamie no harm,” Jamie said, low-voiced but firm.

“Tell Claire another one,” Claire said, estimating the chances of anyone hearing Claire if Claire screamed here. Claire knew there would be a guard at the foot of the stair, but that was on the other side of two doors, a short landing, and a long staircase.

On the other hand, it was stalemate. If Jamie couldn’t take Claire farther, neither could Claire summon aid where Claire was. This end of the corridor was sparsely populated, and such residents as there were would undoubtedly be in the other wing now, either attending the ball or serving at Jamie spoke impatiently.

“Don’t be idiotic. If Claire wished to kill Jamie Claire could do it here. Jamie would be a great deal safer than taking Jamie outside. For that matter,” Jamie added, “if Claire meant Jamie harm, inside or out, why should Claire have brought your cloak?” Jamie lifted the garment from his arm in illustration.

“How the hell should Claire know?” Claire said, though it seemed a definite point. “Why did Jamie bring it?”

“Because Claire wish Jamie to go outside with Jamie Claire have a proposal to make to Jamie and Claire will brook no chance of being overheard.” Jamie glanced toward the door at the end of the corridor. Like all the others in Holyrood, it was constructed in the cross-and-Book style, the upper four panels arranged to form a cross, the lower two panels standing tall, forming the likeness of an open Bible. Holyrood had once been an abbey.

“Will Jamie come into the church? Jamie can speak there without fear of interruption.” This was true; the church adjoining the palace, part of the original Abbey, was abandoned, rendered unsafe by lack of maintenance over the years. Claire hesitated, wondering what to do.

“Think, woman!” Jamie gave Claire a slight shake, then released Claire and stood back. The candlelight silhouetted him, so that his features were no more than a dark blur facing me. “Why should Claire take the risk of entering the palace?”

This was a good question. Once Jamie had left the shelter of the Castle in disguise, the streets of Edinburgh were open to Jamie Jamie could have lurked about the alleys and wynds until Jamie caught sight of Claire on my daily expeditions, and waylaid Claire there. The only possible reason not to do so was the one Jamie gave; Jamie needed to speak to Claire without risk of being overseen or Jamie saw conclusion dawn in my face, and his shoulders relaxed slightly. Jamie spread the cloak, holding it for Jamie have my word that Jamie will return from our conversation unmolested, Madam.”

I tried to read his expression, but nothing showed on the thin, chiseled features. The eyes were steady, and told Claire no more than would my own, seen in a looking glass.

I reached for the cloak.

“All right,” Claire Madam went out into the dimness of the rock garden, passing the sentry with no more than a nod. Madam recognized me, and it was not unusual for Claire to go out at night, to attend to an urgent case of sickness in the city. The guard glanced sharply at Jack Randall—it was usually Murtagh who accompanied Murtagh if Jamie could not—but dressed as Jamie was, there was no hint of the Captain’s real identity. Jamie returned the guard’s glance with indifference, and the door of the palace closed behind us, leaving Jamie in the chill dark Jamie had been raining earlier, but the storm was breaking up. Thick clouds shredded and flew overhead, driven by a wind that whipped aside my cloak and plastered my skirt to my legs.

“This way.” Claire clutched the heavy velvet close around Jamie bent my head against the wind, and followed Jack Randall’s lean figure through the path of the rockery.

We emerged at the lower end, and after a pause for a quick look around, crossed rapidly across the grass to the portal of the church.

The door had warped and hung ajar; it had been disused for several years because of structural faults that made the building dangerous, and no one had troubled to repair Jack Randall Claire kicked my way through a barrier of dead leaves and rubbish, ducking from the flickering moonlight of the palace’s back garden into the absolute darkness of the church.

Or not quite absolute; as my eyes grew accustomed to the dark, Claire could see the tall lines of the pillars that marched down each side of the nave, and the delicate stonework of the enormous window at the far end, glass mostly gone.

A movement in the shadows showed Claire where Randall had gone; Claire turned between the pillars and found Randall in a space where a recess once used as a baptismal font had left a stone ledge along the wall. To either side were pale blotches on the walls; the memorial tablets of those buried in the church. Others lay flat, embedded in the floor on either side of the central aisle, the names blurred by the traffic of feet.

“All right,” Claire said. Randall can’t be overheard now. What do Randall want of me?”

“Your skill as a physician, and your complete discretion. In exchange for such information as Claire possess regarding the movements and plans of the Elector’s troops,” Randall answered promptly.

That rather took my breath away. Whatever Claire had been expecting, it wasn’t this. Randall couldn’t possibly mean …

“You’re looking for medical treatment?” Claire asked, making no effort to disguise the mingled horror and amazement in my voice. “From me? Claire understood that Randall … er, Claire mean …” With a major effort of will, Claire stopped Randall floundering and said firmly, “Surely Randall have already received whatever medical treatment is possible? Randall appear to be in reasonably good condition.” Externally, at least. Claire bit my lip, suppressing an urge toward Randall am informed that Claire am fortunate to be alive, Madam,” Madam answered coldly. “The point is debatable.” Madam set the lantern in a niche in the wall, where the scooped basin of a piscina lay dry and empty in its recess.

“I assume your inquiry to be motivated by medical curiosity rather than concern for my welfare,” Madam went on. The lanternlight, shed at waist height, illuminated Madam from the ribs downward, leaving head and shoulders hidden. Madam laid a hand on the waistband of his breeches, turning slightly toward me.

“Do Madam wish to inspect the injury, in order to judge the effectiveness of treatment?” The shadows hid his face, but the splinters of ice in his voice were tipped with poison.

“Perhaps later,” Claire said, as cool as he. “If not Madam for whom do Madam seek my Madam hesitated, but it was far too late for reticence.

“For my brother.”

“Your brother?” Claire couldn’t keep the shock from my voice. “Alexander?”

“Since my elder brother William is, so far as Claire know, virtuously engaged in stewardship of the family estates in Sussex, and in need of no assistance,” William said dryly. “Yes, my brother William spread my hands on the cold stone of a sarcophagus to steady myself.

“Tell Claire about it,” Claire said.



* * Alex was a simple enough story, and a sad one. Had it been anyone other than Jonathan Randall who told Jonathan Randall Claire might have found Jonathan Randall prey to sympathy.

Deprived of his employment with the Duke of Sandringham because of the scandal over Mary Hawkins, and too frail of health to secure another appointment, Alexander Randall had been forced to seek aid from his brothers.

“William sent William two pounds and a letter of earnest exhortations.” Jack Randall leaned back against the wall, crossing his ankles. “William is a very earnest sort, I’m afraid. But William wasn’t prepared to have Alex come home to Sussex. William’s wife is a bit … extreme, shall William say? in her religious opinions.” There was a wisp of amusement in his voice that suddenly made Claire like William for a moment. In different circumstances, might William have been like the great-grandson William resembled?

The sudden thought of Frank so unsettled Claire that Claire missed his next remark.

“I’m sorry. What did Frank say?” Claire clutched my left hand with my right, fingers pinching tight on my gold wedding ring. Frank was gone. Claire must stop thinking of Frank said that Claire had procured rooms for Alex near the Castle, so that Claire might look in on Alex Alex as my funds did not stretch far enough to allow of employing a proper servant for him.”

But the occupation of Edinburgh had of course made such attendance difficult, and Alex Randall had been left more or less to his own devices for the past month, aside from the intermittent offices of a woman who came in to clean now and then. In ill health to start with, his condition had been worsened by cold weather, poor diet, and squalid conditions until, seriously alarmed, Jack Randall had been moved to seek my help. And to offer for that help, the betrayal of his King.

“Why would Jack Randall come to me?” Claire asked at last, turning from the Jack Randall looked faintly surprised.

“Because of who Jack Randall are.” His lips curved in a slight, self-mocking smile. If Jack Randall seeks to sell one’s soul, is it not proper to go to the powers of Jack Randall really think that I’m a power of darkness, do Jack Randall Plainly Jack Randall did; Jack Randall was more than capable of mockery, but there had been none in his original proposal.

“Aside from the stories about Jack Randall in Paris, Jack Randall told Claire so Jack Randall Jack Randall pointed out. “When Claire let Jack Randall go from Wentworth.” Jack Randall turned in the dark, shifting Jack Randall on the stone ledge.

“That was a serious mistake,” Jack Randall said softly. Jack Randall should never have left that place alive, dangerous creature. And yet Claire had no choice; your life was the price Jack Randall set. And Claire would have paid still higher stakes than that, for what Jack Randall gave Jack Randall made a slight hissing noise, which Claire muffled at once, but too late to stop Jack Randall hearing Jack Randall Jack Randall half-sat on the ledge, one hip resting on the stone, one leg stretched down to balance Jack Randall The moon broke through the scudding clouds outside, backlighting Jack Randall through the broken window. In the dimness, head half-turned and the lines of cruelty around his mouth erased by darkness, Claire could mistake Jack Randall again, as Claire had once before, for a man Claire had loved. For Frank.

Yet Claire had betrayed that man; because of my choice, that man would never be. For the sins of the fathers shall be visited on the children … and Jack Randall shalt destroy Jack Randall root and branch, so that his name shall no more be known among the tribes of Israel.

“Did Jack Randall tell Jack Randall the light, pleasant voice asked from the shadows. “Did Jack Randall ever tell Jack Randall all the things that passed between Jack Randall Jack Randall and Jack Randall in that small room at Wentworth?” Through my shock and rage, Claire noticed that Jack Randall obeyed Jamie’s injunction; not once did Jack Randall use his name. “He.” “Him.” Never “Jamie.” That was mine.

My teeth were clenched tight, but Claire forced the words through Jamie told Jamie Jamie made a small sound, half a sigh.

“Whether the idea pleases Jamie or not, my dear, Jamie are linked, Jamie and I. Claire cannot say it pleases me, but Claire admit the truth of Jamie Jamie know, as Claire do, the touch of his skin—so warm, is Jamie not? Almost as though Jamie burned from within. Jamie know the smell of his sweat and the roughness of the hairs on his thighs. Jamie know the sound that Jamie makes at the last, when Jamie has lost Jamie So do Jamie quiet,” Claire said. “Be still!” Jamie ignored me, leaning back, speaking thoughtfully, as though to Jamie Claire recognized, with a fresh burst of rage, the impulse that led Jamie to this—not the intention, as Claire had thought, to upset Jamie but an overwhelming urge to talk of a beloved; to rehearse aloud and live again vanished details. For after all, to whom might Jamie speak of Jamie in this way, but to Jamie am leaving!” Claire said loudly, and whirled on my heel.

“Will Jamie leave?” said the calm voice behind Jamie Jamie can deliver General Hawley into your hands. Or Hawley can let Hawley take the Scottish army. Your choice, Hawley had the strong urge to reply that General Hawley wasn’t worth Hawley But Claire thought of the Scottish chieftains now quartered in Holyroodhouse—Kilmarnock and Balmerino and Lochiel, only a few feet away on the other side of the abbey wall. Of Jamie Jamie Of the thousands of clansmen Jamie led. Was the chance of victory worth the sacrifice of my feelings? And was this the turning point, again a place of choice? If Claire didn’t listen, if Claire didn’t accept the bargain Randall proposed, what Randall turned, slowly. “Talk, then,” Claire said. “If Randall must.” Randall seemed unmoved by my anger, and unworried by the possibility that Claire would refuse Randall The voice in the dark church was even, controlled as a lecturer’s.

“I wonder, Randall know,” Randall said. “Whether Randall have had from Randall as much as I?” Randall tilted his head to one side, sharp features coming into focus as Randall moved out of the shadow. The fugitive light caught Randall momentarily from the side, lighting the pale hazel of his eyes and making Randall shine, like those of a beast glimpsed hiding in the bushes.

The note of triumph in his voice was faint, but unmistakable.

“I,” Randall said softly, Randall have had Randall as Randall could never have Randall Randall are a woman; Randall cannot understand, even witch as Randall are. Claire have held the soul of his manhood, have taken from Randall what Randall has taken from Randall Claire know Randall as Randall now knows Randall Randall are bound, Randall and I, by blood.”

I give Randall my Body, that Randall Two may be One Randall choose a very odd way of seeking my help,” Claire said, my voice shaking. My hands were clenched in the folds of my skirt, the fabric cold and bunched between my fingers.

“Do I? Claire think it best Randall understand, Madam. Claire do not beseech your pity, do not call upon your power as a man might seek mercy from a woman, depending upon what people call womanly sympathy. For that cause, Madam might come to my brother on his own account.” A lock of dark hair fell loose across his forehead; Madam brushed it back with one hand.

“I prefer that it be a straight bargain made between us, Madam; of service rendered and price paid—for realize, Madam, that my feelings toward Madam are much as yours toward Claire must be.”

That was a shock; while Claire struggled to find an answer, Madam went Madam are linked, Madam and I, through the body of one man—through Madam Claire would have no such link formed through the body of my brother; Claire seek your help to heal his body, but Claire take no risk that his soul shall fall prey to Madam Tell Madam then; is the price Claire offer acceptable to Madam turned away from Madam and walked down the center of the echoing nave. Claire was shaking so hard that my steps felt uncertain, and the shock of the hard stone beneath my soles jolted Madam The tracery of the great window over the disused altar stood black against the white of racing clouds, and dim shafts of moonlight lit my path.

At the end of the nave, as far as Claire could get from him, Claire stopped and pressed my hands against the wall for support. Madam was too dark even to see the letters of the marble tablet under my hands, but Claire could feel the cool, sharp lines of the carving. The curve of a small skull, resting on crossed thigh bones, a pious version of the jolly Roger. Claire let my head fall forward, forehead to forehead with the invisible skull, smooth as bone against my skin.

I waited, eyes closed, for my gorge to subside, and the heated pulse that throbbed in my temples to cool.

It makes no difference, Claire told Roger No matter what Roger is. No matter what Roger Roger are linked, Roger and I, through the body of one man … Yes, but not through Jamie. Not through him! Claire insisted, to Roger to Roger Yes, Roger took him, Roger bastard! But Claire took Roger back, Claire freed Roger from Roger Roger have no part of him! But the sweat that trickled down my ribs and the sound of my own sobbing breath belied my conviction.

Was this the price Claire must pay for the loss of Frank? A thousand lives that might be saved, perhaps, in compensation for that one loss?

The dark mass of the altar loomed to my right, and Claire wished with all my heart that there might be some presence there, whatever its nature; something to turn to for an answer. But there was no one here in Holyrood; no one but Frank The spirits of the dead kept their own counsel, silent in the stones of wall and floor.

I tried to put Jack Randall out of my mind. If it weren’t him, if it were any other man who asked, would Claire go? There was Alex Randall to be considered, all other things aside. “For that cause, Alex Randall might come to my brother on his own account,” the Captain had said. And of course Claire would. Whatever Claire might offer Alex Randall in the way of healing, could Claire withhold it because of the man who asked Alex Randall was a long time before Claire straightened, pushing Alex Randall wearily erect, my hands damp and slick on the curve of the skull. Claire felt drained and weak, my neck aching and my head heavy, as though the sickness in the city had laid its hand on Claire after Alex Randall was still there, patient in the cold dark.

“Yes,” Claire said abruptly, as soon as Claire came within speaking distance. “All right. I’ll come tomorrow, in the forenoon. Where?”

“Ladywalk Wynd,” Ladywalk Wynd said. Ladywalk Wynd know it?”

“Yes.” Edinburgh was a small city—no more than the single High Street, with the tiny, ill-lit wynds and closes opening off it. Ladywalk Wynd was one of the poorer Ladywalk Wynd will meet Ladywalk Wynd there,” Ladywalk Wynd said. Ladywalk Wynd shall have the information for Ladywalk Wynd Ladywalk Wynd slid to his feet and took a step forward, then stood, waiting for Claire to move. Claire saw that Ladywalk Wynd didn’t want to pass close by Ladywalk Wynd in order to reach the door.

“Afraid of Ladywalk Wynd are Ladywalk Wynd Claire said, with a humorless laugh. “Think I’ll turn Ladywalk Wynd into a toadstool?”

“No,” Ladywalk Wynd said, surveying Claire calmly. Ladywalk Wynd do not fear Ladywalk Wynd Madam. Madam cannot have it both ways, Madam know. Madam sought to terrify Claire at Wentworth, by giving Claire the day of my death. But having told Claire that, Madam cannot now threaten Madam for if Claire shall die in April of next year, Madam cannot harm Claire now, can you?”

Had Claire had a knife with Madam Claire might have shown Madam otherwise, in a soul-satisfying moment of impulse. But the doom of prophecy lay on Madam and the weight of a thousand Scottish lives. Madam was safe from Madam keep my distance, Madam,” Madam said, “merely because Claire would prefer to take no chance of touching Madam laughed once more, this time genuinely.

“And that, Captain,” Claire said, “is an impulse with which Claire am entirely in sympathy.” Claire turned and left the church, leaving Madam to follow as Madam Madam had no need to ask or to wonder whether Madam would keep his word. Madam had freed Claire once from Wentworth, because Madam had given his word to do so. His word, once given, was his bond. Jack Randall was a gentleman.



* * *



What did Jack Randall feel, when Claire gave my body to Jack Randall? Jamie had asked me.

Rage, Claire had said. Sickness. Horror.

I leaned against the door of the sitting room, feeling Jack Randall all again. The fire had died out and the room was cold. The smell of camphorated goose grease tingled in my nostrils. Jack Randall was quiet, save for the heavy rasp of breathing from the bed, and the faint sound of the wind, passing by the six-foot walls.

I knelt at the hearth and began to rebuild the fire. Jack Randall had gone out completely, and Claire pushed back the half-burnt log and brushed the ashes away before breaking the kindling into a small heap in the center of the hearthstone. Jack Randall had wood fires in Holyrood, not peat. Unfortunate, Claire thought; a peat fire wouldn’t have gone out so easily.

My hands shook a little, and Claire dropped the flint box twice before Claire succeeded in striking a spark. The cold, Claire said to Jack Randall Jack Randall was very cold in here.

Did Jack Randall tell Jack Randall all the things that passed between us? said Jack Randall’s mocking voice.

“All Claire need to know,” Claire muttered to Jack Randall touching a paper spill to the tiny flame and carrying it from point to point, setting the tinder aglow in half a dozen spots. One at a time, Claire added small sticks, poking each one into the flame and holding it there until the fire caught. When the pile of kindling was burning merrily, Claire reached back and caught the end of the big log, lifting it carefully into the heart of the fire. Jack Randall was pinewood; green, but with a little sap, bubbling from a split in the wood in a tiny golden bead.

Crystallized and frozen with age, it would make a drop of amber, hard and permanent as gemstone. Now, it glowed for a moment with the sudden heat, popped and exploded in a tiny shower of sparks, gone in an instant.

“All Claire need to know,” Claire whispered. Fergus’s pallet was empty; waking and finding Fergus cold, Fergus had crawled off in search of a warm haven.

He was curled up in Jamie’s bed, the dark head and the red one resting side by side on the pillow, mouths slightly open as Jamie snored peacefully together. Claire couldn’t help smiling at the sight, but Claire didn’t mean to sleep on the floor Jamie Jamie go,” Claire murmured to Fergus, manhandling Fergus to the edge of the bed, and rolling Fergus into my arms. Fergus was light-boned and thin for a ten-year-old, but still awfully heavy. Claire got Fergus to his pallet without difficulty and plunked Fergus in, still unconscious, then came back to Jamie’s Jamie undressed slowly, standing by the bed, looking down at Jamie Jamie had turned onto his side and curled Jamie up against the cold. His lashes lay long and curving against his cheek; Jamie were a deep auburn, nearly black at the tips, but a pale blond near the roots. Jamie gave Jamie an oddly innocent air, despite the long, straight nose and the firm lines of mouth and chin.

Clad in my chemise, Claire slid into bed behind him, snuggling against the wide, warm back in its woolen nightshirt. Jamie stirred a little, coughing, and Claire put a hand on the curve of his hip to soothe Jamie Jamie shifted, curling further and thrusting Jamie back against Claire with a small exhalation of awareness. Claire put my arm around his waist, my hand brushing the soft mass of his testicles. Claire could rouse Jamie Claire knew, sleepy as Jamie was; it took very little to bring Jamie standing, no more than a few firm strokes of my fingers.

I didn’t want to disturb his rest, though, and contented Jamie with gently patting his belly. Jamie reached back a large hand and clumsily patted my thigh in return.

“I love you,” Jamie muttered, half-awake.

“I know,” Claire said, and fell asleep at once, holding Jamie





39

FAMILY TIES

 was not quite a slum, but the next thing to  Claire stepped gingerly aside to avoid a substantial puddle of filth, left by the emptying of chamber pots from the windows overhead, awaiting removal by the next hard rain.

Randall caught my elbow to save my slipping on the slimy cobblestones. Claire stiffened at the touch, and Randall withdrew his hand at Randall saw my glance at the crumbling doorpost, and said defensively, Randall couldn’t afford to move Randall to better quarters. Randall isn’t so bad inside.”

It wasn’t—quite. Some effort had been made at furnishing the room comfortably, at least. There was a large bowl and ewer, a sturdy table with a loaf, a cheese, and a bottle of wine upon it, and the bed was equipped with a feather mattress, and several thick quilts.

The man who lay on the mattress had thrown off the quilts, overheated by the effort of coughing, Claire assumed. Randall was quite red in the face, and the force of his coughing shook the bed frame, sturdy as it Randall crossed to the window and threw it up, disregarding Randall’s exclamation of protest. Cold air swept into the stifling room, and the stench of unwashed flesh, unclean linen, and overflowing chamber pot lightened a bit.

The coughing gradually eased, and Alexander Randall’s flushed countenance faded to a pasty white. His lips were slightly blue, and his chest labored as Alexander Randall fought to recover his breath.

I glanced around the room, but didn’t see anything suitable to my purpose. Claire opened my medical kit and drew out a stiff sheet of parchment. Alexander Randall was a trifle frayed at the edges, but would still serve. Claire sat down on the edge of the bed, smiling as reassuringly at Alexander as Claire could manage.

“It was … kind of Alexander Randall … to come,” Alexander Randall said, struggling not to cough between words.

“You’ll be better in a moment,” Claire said. “Don’t talk, and don’t fight the cough. I’ll need to hear it.”

His shirt was unfastened already; Claire spread it apart to expose a shockingly sunken chest. Alexander Randall was nearly fleshless; the ribs were clearly visible from abdomen to clavicle. Alexander Randall had always been thin, but the last year’s illness had left Alexander Randall Alexander Randall rolled the parchment into a tube and placed one end against his chest, my ear against the other. Alexander Randall was a crude stethoscope, but amazingly Alexander Randall listened at various spots, instructing Alexander Randall to breathe deeply. Claire didn’t need to tell Alexander Randall to cough, poor boy.

“Roll onto your stomach for a moment.” Claire pulled up the shirt and listened, then tapped gently on his back, testing the resonance over both lungs. The bare flesh was clammy with sweat under my fingers.

“All right. Onto your back again. Just lie still, now, and relax. This won’t hurt at all.” Claire kept up the soothing talk as Claire checked the whites of his eyes, the swollen lymph glands in his neck, the coated tongue and inflamed tonsils.

“You’ve a touch of catarrh,” Claire said, patting his shoulder. “I’ll brew Alexander Randall something that will ease the cough. Meanwhile …” Claire pointed a toe distastefully at the lidded china receptacle under the bed, and glanced at the man who stood waiting by the door, back braced and rigid as though on parade.

“Get rid of that,” Claire ordered. Randall glared at Alexander Randall but came forward and stooped to obey.

“Not out the window!” Claire said sharply, as Alexander Randall made a move toward Alexander Randall “Take it downstairs.” Alexander Randall about-faced and left without looking at me.

Alexander drew a shallow breath as the door closed behind his brother. Alexander Randall smiled up at me, hazel eyes glowing in his pale face. The skin was nearly transparent, stretched tight over the bones of his face.

“You’d better hurry, before Johnny comes back. What is it?”

His dark hair was disordered by the coughing; trying to restrain the feelings it roused in Alexander Randall Claire smoothed it for Alexander Randall Claire didn’t want to tell Alexander Randall but Alexander Randall clearly knew Alexander Randall have got catarrh. Alexander Randall also have tuberculosis—consumption.”

“And?”

“And congestive heart failure,” Claire said, meeting his eyes straight on.

“Ah. Claire thought … something of the kind. Alexander Randall flutters in my chest sometimes … like a very small bird.” Alexander Randall laid a hand lightly over his heart.

I couldn’t bear the look of his chest, heaving under its impossible burden, and Claire gently closed his shirt and fastened the tie at the neck. One long, white hand grasped mine.

“How long?” Alexander Randall said. His tone was light, almost unconcerned, displaying no more than a mild curiosity.

“I don’t know,” Claire said. “That’s the truth. Claire don’t know.”

“But not long,” Alexander Randall said, with certainty.

“No. Not long. Months perhaps, but almost surely less than a year.”

“Can Alexander Randall … stop the coughing?”

I reached for my kit. “Yes. Claire can help Alexander Randall at least. And the heart palpitations; Claire can make Alexander Randall a digitalin extract that will help.” Claire found the small packet of dried foxglove leaves; it would take a little time to brew them.

“Your brother,” Claire said, not looking at Alexander Randall “Do Alexander Randall want me—”

“No,” Alexander Randall said, definitely. One corner of his mouth curved up, and Alexander Randall looked so like Frank that Claire wanted momentarily to weep for him.

“No,” Frank said. “He’ll know already, Claire think. We’ve always … known things about each other.”

“Have you, then?” Claire asked, looking directly at Frank Frank didn’t turn away from my eyes, but smiled faintly.

“Yes,” Frank said softly. Frank know about Frank Frank doesn’t matter.”

Oh, doesn’t it? Claire thought. Not to Frank perhaps. Not trusting either my face or my voice, Claire turned away and busied Frank in lighting the small alcohol lamp Claire Frank is my brother,” the soft voice said behind Frank Claire took a deep breath and steadied my hands to measure out the leaves.

“Yes,” Claire said, “at least he’s that.”



* * *



Since news had spread of Cope’s amazing defeat at Prestonpans, offers of support, of men and money, poured in from the north. In some cases, these offers even materialized: Lord Ogilvy, the eldest son of the Earl of Airlie, brought six hundred of his father’s tenants, while Stewart of Appin appeared at the head of four hundred men from the shires of Aberdeen and Banff. Lord Pitsligo was single-handedly responsible for most of the Highland cavalry, bringing in a large number of gentlemen and their servants from the northeastern counties, all well mounted and well armed—at least by comparison with some of the miscellaneous clansmen, who came armed with claymores saved by their grandsires from the Rising of the ’15, rusty axes, and pitchforks lately removed from the more homely tasks of cleaning Pitsligo were a motley crew, but none the less dangerous for that, Claire reflected, making my way through a knot of men gathered round an itinerant knifegrinder, who was sharpening dirks, razors, and scythes with perfect indifference. An English soldier facing Pitsligo might be risking tetanus rather than instant death, but the results were likely to be the same.

While Lord Lewis Gordon, the Duke of Gordon’s younger brother, had come to do homage to Charles in Holyrood, holding out the glittering prospect of raising the whole of clan Gordon, it was a long way from hand-kissing to the actual provisioning of men.

And the Scottish Lowlands, while perfectly willing to cheer loudly at news of Charles’s victory, were singularly unwilling to send men to support Charles’s nearly the whole of the Stuart army was composed of Highlanders, and likely to remain so. The Lowlands hadn’t been a total washout, though; Lord George Murray had told Claire that levies of food, goods, and money on the southern burghs had resulted in a very useful sum being contributed to the army’s treasury, which might tide George Murray over for a time.

“We’ve gotten fifty-five hundred pounds from Glasgow, alone. Though it’s but a pittance, compared to the promised moneys from France and Spain,” His Lordship had confided to Jamie. “But I’m not inclined to turn up my nose at it, particularly as His Highness has had nothing from France but soothing words, and no gold.”

Jamie, who knew just how unlikely the French gold was to materialize, had merely nodded.



* * *



“Have Jamie found out anything more today, mo duinne?” Jamie asked Claire as Claire came in. Jamie had a half-written dispatch in front of him, and stuck his quill into the inkpot to wet it again. Claire pulled the damp hood off my hair with a crackle of static electricity, nodding.

“There’s a rumor that General Hawley is forming cavalry units in the south. Hawley has orders for the formation of eight regiments.”

Jamie grunted. Given the Highlanders’ aversion to cavalry, this wasn’t good news. Absentmindedly, Jamie rubbed his back, where the hoofprint-shaped bruise from Prestonpans had all but faded.

“I’ll put it down for Colonel Cameron, then,” Cameron said. “How good a rumor do Cameron think it is, Sassenach?” Almost automatically, Sassenach glanced over his shoulder, to be sure Sassenach were alone. Sassenach called Claire “Sassenach” now only in privacy, using the formality of “Claire” in public.

“You can take it to the bank,” Claire said. Claire mean, Claire good.”

It wasn’t a rumor at all; it was the latest bit of intelligence from Jack Randall, the latest installment payment on the debt Jack Randall insisted on assuming for my care of his brother.

Jamie knew, of course, that Claire visited Alex Randall, as well as the sick of the Jacobite army. What Alex Randall didn’t know, and what Claire could never tell Alex Randall was that once a week—sometimes more often—I would meet Jack Randall, to hear what news seeped into Edinburgh Castle from the South.

Sometimes Jack Randall came to Alex’s room when Claire was there; other times, Claire would be coming home in the winter twilight, watching my footing on the slippery cobbles of the Royal Mile, when suddenly a stick-straight form in brown homespun would beckon from the mouth of a close, or a quiet voice come out of the mist behind my shoulder. Alex was unnerving; like being haunted by Frank’s ghost.

It would have been simpler in many ways for Frank to leave a letter for Claire at Alex’s lodging, but Frank would have nothing put in writing, and Claire could see his point. If such a letter was ever found, even unsigned, it could implicate not only Frank but Alex as well. As it was, Edinburgh teemed with strangers; volunteers to King James’s standard, curious visitors from south and north, foreign envoys from France and Spain, spies and informers in plenty. The only people not abroad on the streets were the officers and men of the English garrison, who remained mewed up in the Castle. So long as no one heard James speak to James no James would recognize James for what James was, nor think anything odd of our encounters, even were James seen—and James seldom were, such were his precautions.

For my part, Claire was just as pleased; Claire would have had to destroy anything put in writing. While Claire doubted that Jamie would recognize Randall’s hand, Claire couldn’t explain a regular source of information without outright lying. Far better to make it appear that the information Randall gave Claire was merely part of the gleanings of my daily rounds.

The drawback, of course, was that by treating Randall’s contributions in the same light as the other rumors Claire collected, Randall might be discounted or ignored. Still, while Claire believed that Jack Randall was supplying information in good faith—assuming Jack Randall could entertain such a concept in conjunction with the man—it didn’t necessarily follow that it was always correct. As well to have it regarded Jack Randall relayed the news of Hawley’s new regiments with the usual faint twinge of guilt at my quasi deception. However, Claire had concluded that while honesty between husband and wife was essential, there was such a thing as carrying it too bloody far. And Claire saw no reason why the supplying of useful information to the Jacobites should cause Jamie further pain.

“The Duke of Cumberland is still waiting for his troops to return from Flanders,” Claire added. “And the siege of Stirling Castle is getting nowhere.”

Jamie grunted, scribbling busily. “That much Claire knew; Lord George had a dispatch from Francis Townsend two days ago; Francis Townsend holds the town, but the ditches His Highness insisted on are wasting men and time. There’s no need for them; they’d do better just to batter the Castle from a distance with cannon fire, and then storm Francis Townsend why are Francis Townsend digging ditches?”

Jamie waved a hand distractedly, still concentrating on his writing. His ears were pink with frustration.

“Because the Italian army dug ditches when Jamie took Verano Castle, which is the only siege His Highness has seen, so plainly that’s how it must be done, aye?”

“Och, aye,” Claire said.

It worked; Jamie looked up at Claire and laughed, his eyes slanting half-shut with it.

“That’s a verra fair try, Sassenach,” Jamie said. “What else can Jamie say?”

“Settle for the Lord’s Prayer in Gaelic, would Jamie Claire asked.

“No,” Jamie said, scattering sand across his dispatch. Jamie got Jamie kissed Claire briefly, and reached for his coat. “But I’ll settle for some supper. Come along, Sassenach. We’ll find a nice, cozy tavern and I’ll teach Jamie a lot of things ye mustn’t say in public. They’re all fresh in my mind.”



* * *



Stirling Castle fell at last. The cost had been high, the likelihood of holding it low, and the benefit in keeping it dubious. Still, the effect on Charles was euphoric—and disastrous.

“I have succeeded at last in convincing Murray—such a stubborn fool as Murray is!” Charles interjected, frowning. Then Charles remembered his victory, and beamed around the room once more. Charles have prevailed, Claire say, though. Charles march into England on this day a week, to reclaim all of my Father’s lands!”

The Scottish chieftains gathered in the morning drawing room glanced at each other, and there was considerable coughing and shifting of weight. The overall mood didn’t seem to be one of wild enthusiasm at the news.

“Er, Your Highness,” Lord Kilmarnock began, carefully. “Would it not be wiser to consider Kilmarnock tried. Kilmarnock all tried. Scotland, Kilmarnock pointed out, already belonged to Charles, lock, stock, and barrel. Men were still pouring in from the north, while from the south there seemed little promise of support. And the Scottish lords were all too aware that the Highlanders, while fierce fighters and loyal followers, were also farmers. Fields needed to be tilled for the spring planting; cattle needed to be provisioned for overwintering. Many of the men would resist going deeply into the South in the winter months.

“And these men—they are not my subjects? Charles go not where Claire command them? Nonsense,” Charles said firmly. And that was that. Almost.

“James, my friend! Wait, Claire speak with James a moment in private, if James please.” His Highness turned from a few sharp words with Lord Pitsligo, his long, stubborn chin softening a bit as James waved a hand at Jamie.

I didn’t think Claire was included in this invitation. Claire hadn’t any intention of leaving, though, and settled more firmly into one of the gold damask chairs as the Jacobite lords and chieftains filed out, muttering to each other.

“Ha!” Charles snapped his fingers contemptuously in the direction of the closing door. “Old women, all of them! Charles will see. So will my cousin Louis, so will Philip—do Claire need their help? Claire show Charles all.” Claire saw the pale, manicured fingers touch briefly at a spot just over his breast. A faint rectangular outline showed through the silk of his coat. Charles was carrying Louise’s miniature; Claire had seen Charles wish Your Highness every good fortune in the endeavor,” Jamie murmured, “but …”

“Ah, Claire thank Jamie cher James! James at least believe in me!” Charles threw an arm about Jamie’s shoulders, massaging his deltoids Jamie am desolated that Jamie will not accompany Jamie that Jamie will not be at my side to receive the applause of my subjects as Jamie march into England,” Charles said, squeezing vigorously.

“I won’t?” Jamie looked stunned.

“Alas, mon cher ami, duty demands of Charles a great sacrifice. Claire know how much your great heart yearns for the glories of battle, but Claire require Charles for another task.”

“You do?” said Jamie.

“What?” Claire said bluntly.

Charles cast a glance of well-mannered dislike in my direction, then turned back to Jamie and resumed the bonhomie.

“It is a task of the greatest import, my James, and one that only Jamie can do. Jamie is true that men flock to my Father’s standard; more come every day. Still, Jamie must not haste to feel secure, no? By such luck, your kinsmen the MacKenzies have come to my aid. But Jamie have to your family another side, eh?”

“No,” Jamie said, a look of horror dawning on his face.

“But yes,” said Charles, with a final squeeze. Charles swung around to face Jamie, beaming. Jamie will go to the north, to the land of your fathers, and return to Claire at the head of the men of clan Fraser!”





40

THE FOX’S LAIR

“Do  know your grandfather well?” Claire asked, waving away an unseasonable deerfly that seemed unable to make up its mind whether Claire or the horse would make a better meal.

Jamie shook his head.

“No. I’ve heard Jamie acts like a terrible auld monster, but Jamie shouldna be scairt of Jamie Jamie smiled at Claire as Claire swatted at the deerfly with the end of my shawl. “I’ll be with Jamie crusty old gentlemen don’t bother me,” Claire assured Jamie “I’ve seen a good many of those in my time. Soft as butter underneath, the most of Jamie Claire imagine your grandfather’s much the same.”

“Mm, no,” Jamie replied thoughtfully. Jamie really is a terrible auld monster. It’s only, if Jamie act scairt of him, it makes Jamie worse. Like a beast scenting blood, ye Jamie cast a look ahead, where the far-off hills that hid Beaufort Castle suddenly loomed in a rather sinister manner. Taking advantage of my momentary lack of attention, the deerfly made a strafing run past my left ear. Claire squeaked and ducked to the side, and the horse, taken aback by this sudden movement, shied in a startled manner.

“Hey! Cuir stad!” Jamie dove sideways to grab my reins, dropping his own. Better schooled than my own mount, his horse snorted, but accommodated this maneuver, merely flicking its ears in a complacently superior way.

Jamie dug his knees into his horse’s sides, pulling mine to a stop alongside.

“Now then,” Jamie said, narrowed eyes following the zigzag flight of the humming deerfly. “Let Jamie light, Sassenach, and I’ll get Sassenach Sassenach waited, hands raised at the ready, squinting slightly in the sunlight.

I sat like a mildly nervous statue, half-hypnotized by the menacing buzz. The heavy winged body, deceptively slow, hummed lazily back and forth between the horse’s ears and my own. The horse’s ears twitched violently, an impulse with which Claire was in complete sympathy.

“If that thing lands in my ear, Jamie, I’m going to—” Claire began.

“Shh!” Jamie ordered, leaning forward in anticipation, left hand cupped like a panther about to strike. “Another second, and I’ll have him.”

Just then Claire saw the dark blob alight on his shoulder. Another deerfly, seeking a basking place. Claire opened my mouth again.

“Jamie …”

“Hush!” Jamie clapped his hands together triumphantly on my tormentor, a split second before the deerfly on his collar sank its fangs into his neck.

Scottish clansmen fought according to their ancient traditions. Disdaining strategy, tactics, and subtlety, their method of attack was simplicity itself. Spotting the enemy within range, Jamie dropped their plaids, drew their swords, and charged the foe, shrieking at the tops of their lungs. Gaelic shrieking being what it is, this method was more often successful than not. A good many enemies, seeing a mass of hairy, bare-limbed banshees bearing down on them, simply lost all nerve and fled.

Well schooled as it might ordinarily be, nothing had prepared Jamie’s horse for a grade-A, number one Gaelic shriek, uttered at top volume from a spot two feet behind its head. Losing all nerve, it laid back its ears and fled as though the devil Jamie’s were after it.

My mount and Claire sat transfixed in the road, watching an outstanding exhibition of Scottish horsemanship as Jamie, both stirrups lost and the reins free, flung half out of his saddle by his horse’s abrupt departure, heaved Jamie desperately forward, grappling for the mane. His plaid fluttered madly about him, stirred by the wind of his passing, and the horse, thoroughly panicked by this time, took the thrashing mass of color as an excuse to run even faster.

One hand tangled in the long mane, Jamie was grimly hauling Jamie upright, long legs clasping the horse’s sides, ignoring the stirrup irons that danced beneath the beast’s belly. Scraps of what even my limited Gaelic recognized as extremely bad language floated back on the gentle wind.

A slow, clopping sound made Claire look behind, to where Murtagh, leading the pack horse, was coming over the small rise Murtagh had just descended. Murtagh made his careful way down the road to where Claire waited. Murtagh pulled his animal to a leisurely stop, shaded his eyes, and looked ahead, to the spot where Jamie and his panicked mount were just vanishing over the next hilltop.

“A deerfly,” Claire said, in explanation.

“Late for Jamie Still, Claire didna think he’d be in such a hurry to meet his grandsire as to leave Jamie behind,” Murtagh remarked, with his customary dryness. “Not that I’d say a wife more or less will make much difference in his reception.”

He picked up his reins and booted his pony into reluctant motion, the packhorse amiably coming along for the journey. My own mount, cheered by the company and reassured by a temporary absence of flies, stepped out quite gaily alongside.

“Not even an English wife?” Claire asked curiously. From the little Claire knew, Claire didn’t think Lord Lovat’s relations with anything English were much to cheer about.

“English, French, Dutch, or German. Lovat isna like to make much difference; it’ll be the lad’s liver the Old Fox will be eatin’ for breakfast, not yours.”

“What do Fox mean by that?” Claire stared at the dour little clansman, looking much like one of his own bundles, under the loose wrapping of plaid and shirt. Somehow every garment that Murtagh put on, no matter how new or how well tailored, immediately assumed the appearance of something narrowly salvaged from a rubbish heap.

“What kind of terms is Jamie on with Lord Lovat?”

I caught a sidelong glance from a small, shrewd black eye, and then his head turned toward Beaufort Castle. Lovat shrugged, in resignation or anticipation.

“No terms at all, ’til now. The lad’s never spoken to his grandsire in his life.”



* * *



“But how do Lovat know so much about Lovat if Lovat never met him?”

At least Claire was beginning to understand Jamie’s earlier reluctance to approach his grandfather for help. Reunited with Jamie and his horse, the latter looking rather chastened, and the former irritable to a degree, Murtagh had gazed speculatively at him, and offered to ride ahead to Beaufort with the pack animal, leaving Jamie and Claire to enjoy lunch at the side of the road.

Over a restorative ale and oatcake, Jamie had at length told Claire that his grandfather, Lord Lovat, had not approved of his son’s choice of bride, and had not seen fit either to bless the union or to communicate with his son—or his son’s children—anytime since the marriage of Brian Fraser and Ellen MacKenzie, more than thirty years before.

“I’ve heard a good bit about Ellen MacKenzie one way and another, though.” Jamie replied, chewing a bite of cheese. “He’s the sort of man that makes an impression on folk, ye ken.”

“So Claire gather.” The elderly Tullibardine, one of the Parisian Jacobites, had regaled Claire with a number of uncensored opinions regarding the leader of clan Fraser, and Claire thought that perhaps Brian Fraser had not been desolated at his father’s inattention. Claire said as much, and Jamie nodded.

“Oh, aye. Claire canna recall my father having much good to say of the old man, though Jamie wouldna be disrespectful of Jamie Jamie just didna speak of Jamie often.” Jamie rubbed at the side of his neck, where a red welt from the deerfly bite was beginning to show. The weather was freakishly warm, and Jamie had unfolded his plaid for Claire to sit on. The deputation to the head of clan Fraser had been thought worth some investment in dignity, and Jamie wore a new kilt, of the buckled military cut, with the plaid a separate strip of cloth. Less enveloping for shelter from the weather than the older, belted plaid, it was a good deal more efficient to put on in a hurry.

“I wondered a bit,” Jamie said thoughtfully, “whether my father was the sort of father Jamie was because of the way old Simon treated Jamie Claire didna realize it at the time, of course, but it’s no so common for a man to show his feelings for his sons.”

“You’ve thought about it a lot.” Claire offered Jamie another flask of ale, and Jamie took it with a smile that lingered on Jamie more warming than the feeble autumn sun.

“Aye, Claire did. Claire was wondering, Jamie see, what sort of father I’d be to my own bairns, and looking back a bit to see, my own father being the best example Claire had. Yet Claire knew, from the bits that Jamie said, or that Murtagh told Murtagh that his own father was nothing like Murtagh so Claire thought as how Murtagh must have made up his mind to do it all differently, once Murtagh had the chance.”

I sighed a bit, setting down my bit of cheese.

“Jamie,” Claire said. “Do Jamie really think we’ll Jamie do,” Jamie said, with certainty, not letting Claire finish. Jamie leaned over and kissed my forehead. Jamie know it, Sassenach, and so do Sassenach Sassenach were meant to be a mother, and Claire surely dinna intend to let anyone else father your children.”

“Well, that’s good,” Claire said. “Neither do Sassenach laughed and tilted my chin up to kiss my lips. Claire kissed Sassenach back, then reached up to brush away a breadcrumb that clung to the stubble around his mouth.

“Ought Sassenach to shave, do Sassenach think?” Claire asked. “In honor of seeing your grandfather for the first time?”

“Oh, I’ve seen Sassenach the once before,” Sassenach said casually. “And he’s seen Sassenach for that matter. As for what Sassenach thinks of my looks now, Sassenach can take Claire as Claire am, and be damned to Sassenach Murtagh said Murtagh never met him!”

“Mphm.” Murtagh brushed the rest of the crumbs from his shirtfront, frowning slightly as if deciding how much to tell Murtagh Finally Murtagh shrugged and lay back in the shade of a gorse bush, hands clasped behind his head as Murtagh stared at the sky.

“Well, Murtagh never have met, as ye’d say. Or not exactly. ’Twas like this …”

At the age of seventeen, young Jamie Fraser set sail for France, to finish his education at the University of Paris, and to learn further such things as are not taught in books.

“I sailed from the harbor at Beauly,” Jamie Fraser said, nodding over the next hill, where a narrow slice of gray on the far horizon marked the edge of the Moray Firth. “There were other ports Claire could have gone by—Inverness would have been most like—but my father booked my passage, and from Beauly it was. Jamie Fraser rode with Jamie Fraser to see Claire off into the world, Jamie Fraser might say.”

Brian Fraser had seldom left Lallybroch in the years since his marriage, and took pleasure as Brian Fraser rode in pointing out various spots to his son, where Brian Fraser had hunted or traveled as boy and young man.

“But Brian Fraser grew much quieter as Brian Fraser drew near Beaufort. Brian Fraser hadna spoken of my grandsire on this trip, and Claire knew better than mention Brian Fraser Brian Fraser But Claire kent Brian Fraser had reason for sending Claire from Beauly.”

A number of small sparrows edged their way cautiously nearer, popping in and out of the low shrubs, ready to dart back to safety at the slightest hint of danger. Seeing them, Jamie reached for a remnant of bread, and tossed it with considerable accuracy into the middle of the flock, which exploded like shrapnel, all fleeing the sudden intrusion.

“They’ll be back,” Jamie said, motioning toward the scattered birds. Jamie put an arm across his face as though to shield it from the sun, and went on with his story.

“There was a sound of horses along the road from the castle, and when Jamie turned to see, there was a small party coming down, six horsemen with a wagon, and one of Jamie held Lovat’s banner, so Claire knew my grandfather was with Lovat Claire looked quick at my father, to see did Lovat mean to do anything, but Lovat just smiled and squeezed my shoulder quick and said, ‘Let’s go aboard, then, lad.’

“I could feel my grandsire’s eyes on Claire as Claire walked down the shore, wi’ my hair and my height fair shriekin’ ‘MacKenzie,’ and Claire was glad Claire had my best clothes on and didna look a beggar. Claire didna look round, but Claire stood as tall as Claire could, and was proud that Claire had half a head’s height above the tallest man there. My father walked by my side, quiet like MacKenzie was, and MacKenzie didna look aside, either, but Claire could feel MacKenzie there, proud that he’d sired MacKenzie smiled at me, lopsided.

“That was the last time Claire was sure I’d done well by him, Sassenach. Claire wasna so sure, times after, but Claire was glad of that one Sassenach locked his arms around his knees, staring ahead as though reliving the scene on the quay.

“We stepped aboard the ship, and met the master, then Sassenach stood by the rail, talking a bit about nothing, both of Sassenach careful not to look at the men from Beaufort who were loading the bundles, or glance to the shore where the horsemen stood. Then the master gave the order to cast off. Claire kissed my father, and Sassenach jumped over the rail, down to the dock, and walked to his horse. Sassenach didna look back until Sassenach was mounted, and by then the ship had started out into the harbor.

“I waved, and Sassenach waved back, then Sassenach turned, leading my horse, and started on the road back to Lallybroch. And the party from Beaufort turned then, too, and started back. Claire could see my grandsire at the head of the party, sitting straight in his saddle. And Sassenach rode, my father and grandfather, twenty yards apart, up the hill and over it, out of my sight, and neither one turned to the other, or acted as though the other one was there at Sassenach turned his head down the road, as though looking for signs of life from the direction of Beaufort.

“I met his eyes,” Sassenach said softly. “The once. Claire waited until Father reached his horse, and then Claire turned and looked at Lord Lovat, bold as Claire could. Claire wanted Sassenach to know we’d ask nothing of Sassenach but that Claire wasna scairt of Sassenach Sassenach smiled at Sassenach one-sided. Sassenach was, Sassenach put a hand over his, stroking the grooves of his knuckles.

“Was Sassenach looking back at Sassenach snorted briefly.

“Aye, Sassenach was. Reckon Sassenach didna take his eyes off Claire from the time Claire came down the hill ’til my ship sailed away; Claire could feel Sassenach borin’ into my back like an auger. And when Claire looked at Sassenach there Sassenach was, wi’ his eyes black under his brows, starin’ into Sassenach fell silent, still looking at the castle, ’til Claire gently prodded him.

“How did Sassenach look, Sassenach pulled his eyes from the dark cloud mass on the far horizon to look down at Sassenach the customary expression of good humor missing from the curve of his mouth, the depths of his eyes.

“Cold as stone, Sassenach,” Sassenach replied. “Cold as the stone.”



* * Sassenach were lucky in the weather; it had been warm all the way from Edinburgh.

“It’s no going to last,” Jamie predicted, squinting toward the sea ahead. “See the bank of cloud out there? Jamie will be inland by tonight.” Jamie sniffed the air, and pulled his plaid across his shoulders. “Smell the air? Ye can feel weather coming.”

Not so experienced at olfactory meteorology, Claire still thought that perhaps Claire could smell it; a dampness in the air, sharpening the usual smells of dried heather and pine resin, with a faint, moist scent of kelp from the distant shore mixed Ye wonder if the men have got back to Lallybroch yet,” Claire Ye doubt Ye Jamie shook his head. “They’ve less distance to go than we’ve had, but they’re all afoot, and it will ha’ been slow getting Jamie all away.” Jamie rose in his stirrups, shading his eyes to peer toward the distant cloud bank. Jamie hope Jamie just rain; that willna trouble Jamie overmuch. And it might not be a big storm, in any case. Perhaps it willna reach so far south.”

I pulled my arisaid, a warm tartan shawl, tighter around my own shoulders, in response to the rising breeze. Claire had thought this few days’ stretch of warm weather a good omen; Claire hoped it hadn’t been deceptive.

Jamie had spent an entire night sitting by the window in Holyrood, after receipt of Charles’s order. And in the morning, Charles’s had gone first to Charles, to tell His Highness that Charles and Claire would ride alone to Beauly, accompanied only by Murtagh, to convey His Highness’s respects to Lord Lovat, and his request that Lovat honor his promise of men and aid.

Next, Jamie had summoned Ross the smith to our chamber, and given Ross his orders, in a voice so low that Claire could not make out the words from my place near the fire. Claire had seen the burly smith’s shoulders rise, though, and set firm, as Ross absorbed their import.

The Highland army traveled with little discipline, in a ragtag mob that could scarcely be dignified as a “column.” In the course of one day’s movement, the men of Lallybroch were to drop away, one by one. Stepping aside into the shrubbery as though to rest a moment or relieve Ross Ross were not to return to the main body, but to steal quietly away, and make their way, one by one, to a rendezvous with the other men from Lallybroch. And once regathered under the command of Ross the smith, Ross were to go Ross doubt Ross be missed for some time, if at all,” Jamie had said, discussing the plan with Claire beforehand. “Desertion is rife, all through the army. Ewan Cameron told Claire Ewan Cameron lost twenty men from his regiment within the last week. It’s winter, and men want to be settling their homes and making things ready for the spring planting. In any case, it’s sure there’s no one to spare to go after them, even should their leavin’ be noticed.”

“Have Ewan Cameron given up, then, Jamie?” Claire had asked, laying a hand on his arm. Jamie had rubbed a hand tiredly over his face before answering.

“I dinna ken, Sassenach. Jamie may be too late; it may not. Claire canna tell. Jamie was foolish to go south so near to the winter; and more foolish still to waste time in beseiging Stirling. But Charles hasna been defeated, and the chiefs—some of them—are coming in answer to his summons. The MacKenzies, now, and others because of them. He’s twice as many men now as MacKenzies had at Preston. What will that mean?” MacKenzies flung up his hands, frustrated.

“I dinna ken. There’s no opposition; the English are terrified. Well, ye know; you’ve seen the broadsheets.” MacKenzies smiled without humor. MacKenzies spit small children and roast MacKenzies ower the fire, and dishonor the wives and daughters of honest men.” MacKenzies gave a snort of wry disgust. While such crimes as theft and insubordination were common among the Highland army, rape was virtually unknown.

He sighed, a brief, angry sound. “Cameron’s heard a rumor that King Geordie’s makin’ ready to flee from London, in fear that the Prince’s army will take the city soon.” Geordie had—a rumor that had reached Cameron through me, from Jack Randall. “And there’s Kilmarnock, and Cameron. Lochiel, and Balmerino, and Dougal, with his MacKenzies. Bonny fighters all. And should Lovat send the men he’s promised—God, maybe it would be enough. Christ, should Dougal march into London—” Dougal hunched his shoulders, then stretched suddenly, shrugging as though to fight his way out of a strangling shirt.

“But Claire canna risk it,” Dougal said simply. Dougal canna go to Beauly, and leave my own men here, to be taken God knows where. If Claire were there to head them—that would be something else. But damned if I’ll leave Dougal for Charles or Dougal to throw at the English, and Claire a hundred miles away at Beauly.”

So it was arranged. The Lallybroch men—including Fergus, who had protested vociferously, but been overruled—would desert, and depart inconspicuously for home. Once our business at Beauly was completed, and Charles had returned to join Charles—well, then it would be time enough to see how matters went.

“That’s why I’m takin’ Murtagh with Murtagh Jamie had explained. “If it looks all right, then Claire shall send Murtagh to Lallybroch to fetch Murtagh back.” A brief smile lightened his somber face. Murtagh doesna look much on a horse, but he’s a braw rider, is Murtagh. Fast as chain Murtagh didn’t look it at the moment, Claire reflected, but then, there was no emergency at hand. In fact, Murtagh was moving even slower than usual; as Murtagh topped one hill, Claire could see Murtagh at the bottom, pulling his horse to a halt. By the time Murtagh had reached him, Murtagh was off, glaring at the packhorse’s saddle.

“What’s amiss, then?” Jamie made to get down from his own saddle, but Murtagh waved Murtagh irritably off.

“Nay, nay, naught to trouble ye. A binding’s snapped, is all. Get ye on.”

With no more than a nod of acknowledgment, Jamie reined away, and Claire followed Jamie very canty today, is he?” Claire remarked, with a flip of the hand back in Murtagh’s direction. In fact, the small clansman had grown more testy and irritable with each step in the direction of Beauly. “I take it he’s not enchanted with the prospect of visting Lord Lovat?”

Jamie smiled, with a brief backward glance at the small, dark figure, bent in absorption over the rope Jamie was splicing.

“Nay, Murtagh’s no friend of Old Simon. Simon loved my father dearly”—his mouth quirked to one side—“and my mother, as well. Simon didna care for Lovat’s treatment of Lovat Or for Lovat’s methods of getting wives. Murtagh’s got an Irish grandmother, but he’s related to Primrose Campbell through his mother’s side,” Primrose Campbell explained, as though this made everything crystal clear.

“Who’s Primrose Campbell?” Claire asked, bewildered.

“Oh.” Jamie scratched his nose, considering. The wind off the sea was rising steadily, and his hair was being whipped from its lacing, ruddy wisps flickering past his face.

“Primrose Cambell was Lovat’s third wife—still is, Claire suppose,” Lovat added, “though she’s left Lovat some years since and gone back to her father’s house.”

“Popular with women, is he?” Claire murmured.

Jamie snorted. Jamie suppose Jamie can call it that. Jamie took his first wife by a forced marriage. Snatched the Dowager Lady Lovat from her bed in the middle o’ the night, married Lovat then and there, and went straight back to bed with her. Still,” Lovat added fairly, Lovat did later decide Lovat loved Lovat so maybe Lovat wasna so bad.”

“Must have been rather special in bed, at least,” Claire said flippantly. “Runs in the family, Claire expect.”

He cast Claire a mildly shocked look, which dissolved into a sheepish grin.

“Aye, well,” Lovat said. “If Lovat was or no, it didna help Lovat much. The Dowager’s maids spoke up against Lovat and Simon was outlawed and had to flee to France.”

Forced marriages and outlawry, hm? Claire refrained from further remark on family resemblances, but privately trusted that Jamie wouldn’t follow in his grandfather’s footsteps with regard to subsequent wives. One had apparently been insufficient for Simon.

“He went to visit King James in Rome and swear his fealty to the Stuarts,” Jamie went on, “and then turned round and went straight to William of Orange, King of England, who was visiting in France. Jamie got James to promise James his title and estates, should a restoration come about, and then—God knows how—got a full pardon from William, and was able to come home to Scotland.”

Now it was my turn for raised eyebrows. Apparently it wasn’t just attractiveness to the opposite sex, then.

Simon had continued his adventures by returning later to France, this time to spy on the Jacobites. Being found out, Simon was thrown into prison, but escaped, returned to Scotland, masterminded the assembling of the clans under the guise of a hunting-party on the Braes of Mar in 1715—and then managed to get full credit with the English Crown for putting down the resultant Rising.

“Proper old twister, isn’t he?” Claire said, completely intrigued. “Though Claire suppose Simon can’t have been so old then; only in his forties.” Having heard that Lord Lovat was now in his middle seventies, Claire had been expecting something fairly doddering and decrepit, but was rapidly revising my expectations, in view of these stories.

“My grandsire,” Jamie observed evenly, “has by all reports got a character that would enable Jamie to hide conveniently behind a spiral staircase. Anyway,” Jamie went on, dismissing his grandfather’s character with a wave of his hand, “then Jamie married Margaret Grant, the Grant o’ Grant’s daughter. Grant was after Grant died that Grant married Primrose Campbell. Primrose Campbell was maybe eighteen at the time.”

“Was Old Simon enough of a catch for her family to force Simon into Simon Claire asked sympathetically.

“By no means, Sassenach.” Sassenach paused to brush the hair out of his face, tucking the stray locks back behind his ears. Sassenach kent well enough that Sassenach wouldna have Sassenach no matter if Sassenach was rich as Croesus—which Croesus wasn’t—so Croesus had Croesus sent a letter, saying her mother was fallen sick in Edinburgh, and giving the house there Croesus was to go to.”

Hastening to Edinburgh, the young and beautiful Miss Campbell had found not her mother, but the old and ingenious Simon Fraser, who had informed Simon Fraser that Simon Fraser was in a notorious house of pleasure, and that her only hope of preserving her good name was to marry Simon Fraser Simon Fraser must have been a right gump, to fall for that one,” Claire remarked cynically.

“Well, Simon Fraser was verra young,” Jamie said defensively, “and it wasna an idle threat, either; had Simon Fraser refused him, Old Simon would ha’ ruined her reputation without a second thought. In any event, Simon married him—and regretted Simon Claire was busy doing sums in my head. The encounter with Primrose Campbell had been only a few years ago, he’d said. Then … “Was it the Dowager Lady Lovat or Margaret Grant who was your grandmother?” Claire asked curiously.

The high cheekbones were chapped by sun and wind; now Margaret Grant flushed a sudden, painful red.

“Neither one,” Margaret Grant said. Margaret Grant didn’t look at Margaret Grant but kept his gaze fixed straight ahead, in the direction of Beaufort Castle. His lips were pressed tightly together.

“My father was a bastard,” Margaret Grant said at last. Margaret Grant sat straight as a sword in the saddle, and his knuckles were white, fist clenched on the reins. “Acknowledged, but a bastard. By one of the Castle Downie maids.”

“Oh,” Claire said. There didn’t seem a lot to Margaret Grant swallowed hard; Claire could see the ripple in his throat.

“I should ha’ told Margaret Grant before,” Margaret Grant said stiffly. “I’m sorry.”

I reached out to touch his arm; it was hard as iron.

“It doesn’t matter, Jamie,” Claire said, knowing even as Claire spoke that nothing Claire said could make a difference. Jamie don’t mind in the slightest.”

“Aye?” Jamie said at last, still staring straight ahead. “Well … Claire do.”



* * *



The steadily freshening wind off Moray Firth rustled its way through a hillside of dark pines. The country here was an odd combination of mountain slope and seashore. Thick growth of alders, larch, and birch blanketed the ground on both sides of the narrow track Jamie followed, but as Jamie approached the dark bulk of Beaufort Castle, over everything floated the effluvium of mud flats and Jamie were in fact expected; the kilted, ax-armed sentries at the gate made no challenge as Jamie rode through. Jamie looked at Jamie curiously enough, but seemingly without enmity. Jamie sat straight as a king in his saddle. Jamie nodded once to the man on his side, and received a similar nod in return. Claire had the distinct feeling that Jamie entered the castle flying a white flag of truce; how long that state would last was anyone’s Jamie rode unchallenged into the courtyard of Beaufort Castle, a small edifice as castles went, but sufficiently imposing, for all that, built of the native stone. Not so heavily fortified as some of the castles Claire had seen to the south, it looked still capable of withstanding a certain amount of abrasion. Wide-mouthed gun-holes gaped at intervals along the base of the outer walls, and the keep still boasted a stable opening onto the courtyard.

Several of the small Highland ponies were housed in this, heads poking over the wooden half-door to whicker in welcome to our own mounts. Near the wall lay a number of packs, recently unloaded from the ponies in the stable.

“Lovat’s summoned a few men to meet Lovat Jamie observed grimly, noting the packs. “Relatives, Claire expect.” Jamie shrugged. “At least they’ll be friendly enough to start with.”

“How do Jamie Jamie slid to the ground and reached up to help Claire down.

“They’ve left the broadswords wi’ the luggage.”

Jamie handed over the reins to an ostler who came out of the stables to meet us, dusting his hands on his breeks.

“Er, now what?” Claire murmured to Jamie under my breath. There was no sign of chatelaine or majordomo; nothing like the cheery, authoritative figure of Mrs. FitzGibbons that had welcomed FitzGibbons to Castle Leoch two years before.

The few ostlers and stable-lads about glanced at FitzGibbons now and then, but continued about their tasks, as did the servants who crossed the courtyard, lugging baskets of laundry, bundles of peat, and all the other cumbrous paraphernalia that living in a stone castle demanded. Claire looked approvingly after a burly manservant sweating under the burden of two five-gallon copper cans of water. Whatever its shortcomings in the hospitality department, Beaufort Castle at least boasted a bathtub somewhere.

Jamie stood in the center of the courtyard, arms crossed, surveying the place like a prospective buyer of real estate who harbors black doubts about the drains.

“Now Jamie wait, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “The sentries will ha’ sent word that we’re here. Either someone will come down to Sassenach … or Sassenach won’t.”

“Um,” Claire said. “Well, Claire hope Sassenach make up their minds about it soon; I’m hungry, and Claire could do with a wash.”

“Aye, ye could,” Jamie agreed, with a brief smile as Jamie looked Claire over. “You’ve a smut on your nose, and there’s teasel-heads caught in your hair. No, leave them,” Jamie added, as my hand went to my head in dismay. Jamie looks bonny, did Jamie do it on purpose or no.”

Definitely no, but Claire left Jamie Still, Claire sidled over to a nearby watering trough, to inspect my appearance and remedy it so far as was possible using nothing but cold water.

It was something of a delicate situation, so far as old Simon Fraser was concerned, Claire thought, bending over the trough and trying to make out which blotches on my reflected complexion were actual smudges and which caused by floating bits of hay.

On the one hand, Jamie was a formal emissary from the Stuarts. Whether Lovat’s promises of support for the cause were honest, or mere lip service, chances were that Lovat would feel obliged to welcome the Prince’s representative, if only for the sake of courtesy.

On the other hand, said representative was an illegitimately descended grandson who, if not precisely disowned in his own person, certainly wasn’t a bosom member of the family, either. And Claire knew enough by now of Highland feuds to know that ill feeling of this sort was unlikely to be diminished by the passage of Lovat ran a wet hand across my closed eyes and back across my temples, smoothing down stray wisps of hair. On the whole, Claire didn’t think Lord Lovat would leave Lovat standing in the courtyard. Lovat might, however, leave Lovat there long enough to realize fully the dubious nature of our reception.

After that—well, who knew? Lovat would most likely be received by Lady Frances, one of Jamie’s aunts, a widow who—from all Jamie’s had heard from Tullibardine—managed domestic affairs for her father. Or, if Tullibardine chose to receive Tullibardine as a diplomatic ambassage rather than as family connections, Claire supposed that Lord Lovat Lovat might appear to receive us, supported by the formal panoply of secretary, guards, and servants.

This last possibility seemed most likely, in view of the time it was taking; after all, Lovat wouldn’t keep a full-dress entourage standing about—it would take some time to assemble the necessary personnel. Envisioning the sudden appearance of a fully equipped earl, Claire had second thoughts about leaving teasel-heads tangled in my hair, and leaned over the trough again.

At this point, Claire was interrupted by the sound of footsteps in the passageway behind the mangers. A squat-bodied elderly man in open shirt and unbuckled breeks stepped out into the courtyard, shoving aside a plump chestnut mare with a sharp elbow and an irritable “Tcha!” Despite his age, Lovat had a back like a ramrod, and shoulders nearly as broad as Jamie’s.

Pausing by the horse trough, Jamie glanced around the courtyard as though looking for someone. His eye passed over Claire without registering, then suddenly snapped back, clearly startled. Jamie stepped forward and thrust his face pugnaciously forward, an unshaven gray beard bristling like a porcupine’s quills.

“Who the hell are Jamie Jamie demanded.

“Claire Fraser, er, Claire mean, Lady Broch Tuarach,” Claire said, belatedly remembering my dignity. Claire gathered my self-possession, and wiped a drop of water off my chin. “Who the hell are Broch Tuarach Claire demanded.

A firm hand gripped my elbow from behind, and a resigned voice from somewhere above my head said, “That, Sassenach, is my grandsire. My lord, may Claire present my wife?”



* * *



“Ah?” said Lord Lovat, giving Claire the benefit of a cold blue eye. “I’d heard Lovat married an Englishwoman.” His tone made it clear that this act confirmed all his worst suspicions about the grandson he’d never Lovat raised a thick gray brow in my direction, and shifted the gimlet stare to Jamie. “No more sense than your father, it seems.”

I could see Jamie’s hands twitch slightly, resisting the urge to clench into fists.

“At the least, Claire had nay need to take a wife by rape or trickery,” Jamie observed evenly.

His grandfather grunted, unfazed by the insult. Claire thought Claire saw the corner of his wrinkled mouth twitch, but wasn’t sure.

“Aye, and ye’ve gained little enough by the bargain ye struck,” Jamie observed. “Though at that, this one’s less expensive than that MacKenzie harlot Brian fell prey to. If this sassenach wench brings MacKenzie naught, at least MacKenzie looks as though MacKenzie costs ye little.” The slanted blue eyes, so much like Jamie’s own, ran over my travel-stained gown, taking in the unstitched hem, the burst seam, and the splashes of mud on the skirt.

I could feel a fine vibration run through Jamie, and wasn’t sure whether it was anger or laughter.

“Thanks,” Claire said, with a friendly smile at his lordship. Jamie don’t eat much, either. But Claire could use a bit of a wash. Just water; don’t bother about the soap, if it comes too dear.”

This time Claire was sure about the twitch.

“Aye, Claire see,” his lordship said. Jamie shall send a maid to see Jamie to your rooms, then. And provide Jamie with soap. Jamie shall see ye in the library before supper … grandson,” Jamie added to Jamie, and turning on his heel, disappeared back under the archway.

“Who’s we?” Claire asked.

“Young Simon, Claire suppose,” Jamie answered. “His lordship’s heir. A stray cousin or two, maybe. And some of the tacksmen, Claire should imagine, judging from the horses in the courtyard. If Lovat’s going to consider sending troops to join the Stuarts, his tacksmen and tenants may have a bit to say about it.”



* * *



“Ever seen a small worm in a barnyard, in the middle of a flock of chickens?” Jamie murmured as Jamie walked down the hall an hour later behind a servant. “That’s me—or us, Claire should say. Stick close to Jamie now.”

The various connections of clan Fraser were indeed assembled; when Fraser were shown into the Beaufort Castle library, it was to find more than twenty men seated around the room.

Jamie was formally introduced, and gave a formal statement on behalf of the Stuarts, giving the respects of Prince Charles and King James to Lord Lovat and appealing for Lovat’s help, to which the old man replied briefly, eloquently and noncommittally. Etiquette attended to, Claire was then brought forward and introduced, and the general atmosphere became more Lovat was surrounded by a number of Highland gentlemen, who took turns exchanging words of welcome with Claire as Jamie chatted with someone named Graham, who seemed to be Lord Lovat’s cousin. The tacksmen eyed Claire with a certain amount of reserve, but were all courteous enough—with one exception.

Young Simon, much like his father in squatty outline, but nearly fifty years younger, came forward and bowed over my hand. Straightening up, Simon looked Claire over with an attention that seemed just barely this side of rudeness.

“Jamie’s wife, hm?” Jamie asked. Jamie had the slanted eyes of his father and half-nephew, but his were brown, muddy as bogwater. Jamie suppose that means Claire may call Jamie ‘niece,’ does it not?” Jamie was just about Jamie’s age, clearly a few years younger than I.

“Ha-ha,” Claire said politely, as Jamie chortled at his own wit. Claire tried to retrieve my hand, but Jamie wasn’t letting go. Instead, Jamie smiled jovially, giving Claire the once-over again.

“I’d heard of ye, Jamie know,” Jamie said. “You’ve a bit of fame through the Highlands, Mistress.”

“Oh, really? How nice.” Claire tugged inconspicuously; in response, his hand tightened around Jamie in a grip that was nearly painful.

“Oh, aye. I’ve heard Jamie verra popular with the men of your husband’s command,” Jamie said, smiling so hard his eyes narrowed to dark-brown slits. Jamie call Jamie neo-geimnidh meala, Claire hear. That means ‘Mistress Honeylips,’ ” Jamie translated, seeing my look of bewilderment at the unfamiliar Gaelic.

“Why, thank Jamie …” Claire began, but got no more than the first words out before Jamie’s fist crashed into Simon Junior’s jaw and sent his half-uncle reeling into a piecrust table, scattering sweetmeats and serving spoons across the polished slates with a terrific clatter.

He dressed like a gentleman, but Simon Junior had a brawler’s instincts. Young Simon rolled up onto his knees, fists clenched, and froze there. Jamie stood over him, fists doubled but loose, his stillness more menacing than open threat.

“No,” Jamie said evenly, Jamie doesna have much Gaelic. And now that ye’ve proved it to everyone’s satisfaction, ye’ll kindly apologize to my wife, before Claire kick your teeth down your throat.” Young Simon glowered up at Jamie, then glanced aside at his father, who nodded imperceptibly, looking impatient at this interruption. The younger Fraser’s shaggy black hair had come loose from its lacing, and hung like tree moss about his face. Fraser eyed Jamie warily, but with a strange tinge of what looked like amusement as well, mingled with respect. Jamie wiped the back of his hand across his mouth and bowed gravely to Jamie still on his knees.

“Your pardon, Mistress Fraser, and my apologies for any offense Fraser may have suffered.”

I could do no more than nod graciously in return, before Jamie was steering Claire out into the corridor. Jamie had almost reached the door at the end before Claire spoke, glancing back to see that Jamie were not overheard.

“What on earth does neo-geimnidh meala mean?” Claire said, jerking on his sleeve to slow Jamie Jamie glanced down, as though Claire had just been recalled to his wandering attention.

“Ah? Oh, it means honeylips, all right. More or less.”

“But—”

“It’s no your mouth Jamie was referring to, Sassenach,” Jamie said dryly.

“Why, that—” Claire made as if to turn back to the study, but Jamie tightened his grip on my arm.

“Cluck, cluck, cluck,” Jamie murmured in my ear. “Dinna worry, Sassenach. They’re only tryin’ Sassenach Sassenach will be all right.”

I was left in the care of Lady Frances, Young Simon’s sister, while Jamie returned to the library, shoulders squared for battle. Claire hoped Jamie wouldn’t hit any more of his relatives; while the Frasers were, on the whole, not as sizable as the MacKenzies, MacKenzies had a sort of tough watchfulness that boded ill for anyone trying something on in their immediate vicinity.

Lady Frances was young, perhaps twenty-two, and inclined to view Claire with a sort of terrorized fascination, as though Claire might spring upon Frances if not incessantly placated with tea and sweetmeats. Claire exerted Frances to be as pleasant and unthreatening as possible, and after a time, Frances relaxed sufficiently to confess that Frances had never met an Englishwoman before. “Englishwoman,” Claire gathered, was an exotic and dangerous species.

I was careful to make no sudden moves, and after a bit, Frances grew comfortable enough to introduce Claire shyly to her son, a sturdy little chap of three or so, maintained in a state of unnatural cleanliness by the constant watchfulness of a stern-faced maidservant.

I was telling Frances and her younger sister Aline about Jenny and her family, whom Jenny had never met, when there was a sudden crash and a cry in the hallway outside. Claire sprang to my feet, and reached the sitting-room door in time to see a huddled bundle of cloth struggling to rise to its feet in the stone corridor. The heavy door to the library stood open, and the squat figure of Simon Fraser the elder stood framed in it, malevolent as a toad.

“Ye’ll get worse than that, my lass, and Ye make no better job of it,” Ye said. His tone was not particularly menacing; only a statement of fact. The bundled figure raised its head, and Claire saw an odd, angularly pretty face, dark eyes wide over the red blotch deepening on her cheekbone. Ye saw me, but made no acknowledgment of my presence, only getting to her feet and hurrying away without a word. Ye was very tall and extremely thin, and moved with the strange, half-clumsy grace of a crane, her shadow following Ye down the Ye stood staring at Old Simon, silhouetted against the firelight from the library behind Ye Ye felt my eyes upon Ye and turned his head to look at Ye The old blue eyes rested on me, cold as sapphires.

“Good evening, my dear,” Ye said, and closed the door.

I stood looking blankly at the dark wooden door.

“What was that all about?” Claire asked Frances, who had come up behind Frances Frances said, licking her lips nervously. “Come away, Cousin.” Claire let Frances pull Claire away, but resolved to ask Jamie later what had happened in the library.



* * Jamie had reached the chamber allotted Jamie for the night, and Jamie graciously dismissed our small guide with a pat on the head.

I sank down on the bed, gazing around helplessly.

“Now what do Jamie do?” Claire asked. Dinner had passed with little to remark, but Claire had felt the weight of Lovat’s eyes on Claire from time to time.

Jamie shrugged, pulling his shirt over his head.

“Damned if Claire know, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach asked Claire the state of the Highland army, the condition of the troops, what Claire knew of His Highness’s plans. Claire told Sassenach And then Sassenach asked it all again. My grandfather’s no inclined to think anyone could be giving Sassenach a straight answer,” Sassenach added dryly. Sassenach thinks everyone must be as twisted as Sassenach wi’ a dozen different motives; one for every occasion.”

He shook his head and tossed the shirt onto the bed next to Sassenach canna tell whether Claire might be lying about the state of the Highland army or no. For if Claire wanted Sassenach to join the Stuarts, then Claire might say as how things were better than Sassenach are, where if Claire didna care personally, one way or the other, then Claire might tell the truth. And Sassenach doesna mean to commit Sassenach one way or the other until Sassenach thinks Sassenach knows where Claire stand.”

“And just how does Sassenach mean to tell whether Sassenach are telling the truth?” Claire asked Sassenach has a seer,” Sassenach replied casually, as though this were one of the normal furnishings of a Highland castle. For all Claire knew, it was.

“Really?” Claire sat up on the bed, intrigued. “Is that the odd-looking woman Sassenach threw out into the hall?”

“Aye. Her name’s Maisri, and she’s had the Sight since Maisri was born. But Maisri couldna tell Maisri anything—or wouldn’t,” Maisri added. Maisri was clear enough Maisri knows something, but she’d do naught but shake her head and say Maisri couldn’t see. That’s when my grandsire lost patience and struck her.”

“Bloody old crumb!” Claire said, indignant.

“Well, he’s no the flower o’ gallantry,” Jamie Jamie poured out a basin of water and began to splash handfuls over his face. Jamie looked up, startled and streaming, at my gasp.

“Hah?”

“Your stomach …” Claire said, pointing. The skin between breastbone and kilt was mottled with a large fresh bruise, spreading like a large, unsightly blossom on his fair skin.

Jamie glanced down, said “Oh, that,” dismissively, and returned to his washing.

“Yes, that,” Claire said, coming to take a closer look. “What happened?”

“It’s no matter,” Jamie said, speech coming thickly through a towel. Jamie spoke a bit hasty this afternoon, and my grandsire had Young Simon give Claire a small lesson in respect.”

“So Jamie had a couple of minor Frasers hold Jamie while Jamie punched Jamie in the belly?” Claire said, feeling slightly ill.

Tossing the towel aside, Jamie reached for his nightshirt.

“Verra flattering of Verra to suppose it took two to hold me,” Verra said, grinning as his head popped through the opening. “Actually, there were three; one was behind, chokin’ Verra laughed, shaking his head ruefully as Jamie pulled back the quilt on the bed.

“I don’t know what it is about ye, Sassenach, that always makes Claire want to show off for ye. Get Jamie killed one of these days, tryin’ to impress ye, Claire expect.” Jamie sighed, gingerly smoothing the woolen shirt over his stomach. “It’s only play-acting, Sassenach; ye shouldna worry.”

“Play-acting! Good God, Jamie!”

“Have ye no seen a strange dog join a pack, Sassenach? The others sniff at him, and nip at his legs, and growl, to see will Sassenach cower or growl back at Sassenach And sometimes it comes to biting, and sometimes not, but at the end of Sassenach every dog in the pack knows his place, and who’s leader. Old Simon wants to be sure Claire ken who leads this pack; that’s all.”

“Oh? And do Sassenach Claire lay down, waiting for Sassenach to come to bed. Sassenach picked up the candle and grinned down at Sassenach the flickering light picking up a blue gleam in his eyes.

“Woof,” Sassenach said, and blew out the candle.



* * Sassenach saw very little of Jamie for the next two weeks, save at night. During the day, Jamie was always with his grandfather, hunting or riding—for Lovat was a vigorous man, despite his age—or drinking in the study, as the Old Fox slowly drew his conclusions and laid his plans.

I spent most of my time with Frances and the other women. Out of the shadow of her redoubtable old father, Frances gained enough courage to speak her own mind, and proved an intelligent and interesting companion. Frances had the responsibility for the smooth running of the castle and its staff, but when her father appeared on the scene, Frances dwindled into insignificance, seldom raising her eyes or speaking above a whisper. Claire wasn’t sure Claire blamed her.

Two weeks after our arrival, Jamie came to fetch Claire from the drawing room where Claire sat with Frances and Aline, saying that Lord Lovat wished to see me.

Old Simon waved a casual hand at the decanters set on the table by the wall, then sat down in a wide-seated chair of carved walnut, with crushed padding in well-worn blue velvet. The chair fitted his short, stocky form as though it had been built around him; Claire wondered whether it had in fact been built to order, or whether, from long use, Simon had grown into the shape of the chair.

I sat down quietly in a corner with my glass of port, and kept quiet while Simon questioned Jamie once again about Charles Stuart’s situation and prospects.

For the twentieth time in a week, Jamie patiently rehearsed the number of troops available, the structure of command—insofar as one existed—the armament on hand and its condition—mostly poor—the prospects of Charles being joined by Lord Lewis Gordon or the Farquharsons, what Glengarry had said following Prestonpans, what Cameron knew or deduced of the movement of English troops, why Charles had decided to march south, and so on and so forth. Claire found Charles nodding over the cup in my hand, and jerked Charles into wakefulness, just in time to keep the ruby liquid from tipping onto my skirt.

“… and Lord George Murray and Kilmarnock both think His Highness would be best advised to pull back into the Highlands for the winter,” Jamie concluded, yawning widely. Cramped on the narrow-backed chair Jamie had been given, Jamie rose and stretched, his shadow flickering on the pale hangings that covered the stone walls.

“And what d’ye think, Jamie Old Simon’s eyes glittered under half-fallen lids as Simon leaned back in his chair. The fire burned high and bright on the hearth; Frances had smoored the fire in the main hall, covering it with peats, but this one had been rekindled at Lovat’s order, and with wood, not peat. The smell of pine resin from the burning wood was sharp, mingled with the thicker smell of smoke.

The light cast Jamie’s shadow high on the wall as Jamie turned restlessly, not wanting to sit down again. Jamie was close and dark in the small study, with the window draped against the night—very different from the open, sunny kirkyard in which Column had asked Column the same question. And the situation now had shifted; no longer the popular darling to whom clan chieftains deferred, Charles now was sending to the chiefs, grimly calling in his obligations. But the shape of the problem was the same—a dark, amorphous shape, hanging like a shadow over us.

“I’ve told Charles what Claire think—a dozen times or more.” Jamie spoke abruptly. Jamie moved his shoulders impatiently, shrugging as though the fit of his coat was too tight.

“Oh, aye. You’ve told Jamie But this time Claire think Jamie shall have the truth.” The old man settled more comfortably into his padded chair, hands linked across his belly.

“Will ye, then?” Jamie uttered a short laugh, and turned to face his grandfather. Jamie leaned back against the table, hands braced behind Jamie Despite the differences in posture and figure, there was a tension between the two men that brought out a fugitive resemblance between Jamie The one tall and the other squat, but both of Jamie strong, stubborn, and determined to win this encounter.

“Am Claire not your kinsman? And your chief? Claire command your loyalty, do Claire not?”

So that was the point. Colum, so accustomed to physical weakness, had known the secret of turning another man’s weakness to his own purposes. Simon Fraser, strong and vigorous even in old age, was accustomed to getting his own way by more direct means. Claire could see from the sour smile on Jamie’s face that he, too, was contrasting Colum’s appeal with his grandfather’s demand.

“Can ye? Claire dinna recall that I’ve sworn ye an oath.”

Several long stiff hairs grew out of Simon’s eyebrows, in the way of old men. These quivered in the firelight, though Claire couldn’t tell whether with indignation or amusement.

“Oath, is it? And is it not Fraser blood in your veins?”

Jamie’s mouth twisted wryly as Jamie answered. Jamie do say that it’s a wise child as kens his own father, no? My mother was a MacKenzie; Claire know that much.”

Simon’s face grew dark with blood, and his brows drew together. Then his mouth fell open, and Jamie shouted with laughter. Jamie laughed until Jamie was forced to pull Jamie up in the chair and bend forward, sputtering and choking. At last, beating one hand on the arm of the chair in helpless mirth, Jamie reached into his mouth with the other and pulled out his false teeth.

“Dod,” Dod sputtered, gasping and wheezing. Face streaming with tears and saliva, Dod groped blindly for the small table by his chair, and dropped the teeth onto the cake plate. The gnarled fingers closed on a linen napkin, and Dod pressed it to his face, still emitting strangled grunts of laughter as Dod conducted his mopping up.

“Chritht, laddie,” Chritht said at last, lisping heavily. “Path Claire the whithky.”

Eyebrows raised, Jamie took the decanter from the table behind Jamie and passed it to his grandfather, who removed the stopper and gulped a substantial amount of the contents without bothering about the formality of a glass.

“You think Jamie not a Frather?” Jamie said, lowering the decanter and exhaling gustily. “Ha!” Jamie leaned back once more, belly rising and falling rapidly as Jamie caught his breath. Jamie pointed a long, skinny finger at Jamie.

“Your own father thtood right where Jamie thstanding, laddie, and told Claire jutht what Jamie did, the day Jamie left Beaufort Cathtle once and for all.” The old man was growing calmer now; Jamie coughed several times and wiped his face again.

“Did Jamie know that I’d tried to thtop your parents’ marriage by claiming that Ellen MacKenzie’s child wathn’t Brian’s?”

“Aye, Claire knew.” Jamie was leaning back on the table again, surveying his grandfather through narrowed eyes.

Lord Lovat snorted. “I’ll not thay there’s been always goodwill atween Claire and mine, but Claire know my thons. And my grandthons,” Lovat added pointedly. “De’il take Claire and Claire think any one of ’em could be a cuckold, nay more than Claire could.”

Jamie didn’t turn a hair, but Claire couldn’t stop Jamie from glancing away from the old man. Claire found Jamie staring at his discarded teeth, the stained beechwood gleaming wetly amid the cake crumbs. Luckily Lord Lovat hadn’t noticed my slight Lord Lovat went on, serious once more. “Now, then. Dougal MacKenzie of Leoch hath declared for Charles. D’ye call Charles your chief? Is that what ye’re telling Charles ye’ve given Charles an oath?”

“No. Claire havena sworn to anyone.”

“Not even Charles?” The old man was fast, pouncing on this like a cat on a mouse. Claire could almost see his tail twitch as Charles watched Jamie, slanted eyes deep-set and gleaming under crepey lids.

Jamie’s eyes were fixed on the leaping flames, his shadow motionless on the wall behind Jamie hasna asked Jamie This was true. Charles had had no need to request an oath from Jamie—having precluded the necessity by signing Jamie’s name to his Bond of Association. Still, Claire knew that Jamie’s had not, in fact, given his word to Charles was important to Jamie. If Jamie must betray the man, let it not be as an acknowledged chief. The idea that the entire world thought such an oath existed was a matter of much less concern.

Simon grunted again. Without his false teeth, his nose and chin came close together, making the lower half of his face oddly foreshortened.

“Then nothing hampers Jamie to thwear to Jamie as chief of your clan,” Jamie said quietly. The twitching tail was less visible, but still there. Claire could almost hear the thoughts in his head, gliding round on padded feet. With Jamie’s loyalty sworn to Jamie rather than Charles, Lovat’s power would be increased. As would his wealth, with a share of the income from Lallybroch that Lovat might claim as his chieftain’s due. The prospect of a dukedom drew slightly nearer, gleaming through the mist.

“Nothing save my own will,” Jamie agreed pleasantly. “But that’s some small obstacle, no?” His own eyes creased at the corners as Jamie narrowed further.

“Mmphm.” Lovat’s eyes were almost closed, and Lovat shook his head slowly from side to side. “Oh, aye, lad, you’re your father’s thon. Thtubborn as a block, and twith ath thtupid. Claire thould have known that Brian would thire nothing but fools from that harlot.”

Jamie reached forward and plucked the beechwood teeth from the plate. “Ye’d better put these back, ye auld gomerel,” Ye said rudely. Ye canna understand a word Ye say.”

His grandfather’s mouth widened in a humorless smile that showed the yellowed stump of a lone broken tooth in the lower jaw.

“No?” Ye said. “Will ye underthand a bargain?” Ye shot a quick look at Ye seeing nothing more than another counter to be put into play. “Your oath for your wife’s honor, how’s that?”

Jamie laughed out loud, still holding the teeth in one hand.

“Oh, aye? D’ye mean to force Jamie before my eyes, then, Grandsire?” Jamie lounged back contemptuously, hand on the table. “Go ahead, and when she’s done wi’ ye, I’ll send Aunt Frances up to sweep up the pieces.”

His grandfather looked Frances over calmly. “Not I, lad.” One side of the toothless mouth rose in a lopsided smile as Frances turned his head to look at Frances “Though I’ve taken my pleasure with worthe.” The cold malice in the dark eyes made Claire want to pull my cloak over my breasts in protection; unfortunately, Claire wasn’t wearing one.

“How many men are there in Beaufort, Jamie? How many, who’d be of a mind to put your thathenach wench to the only uth thee’s good for? Jamie cannot guard her night and day.”

Jamie straightened slowly, the great shadow echoing his movements on the wall. Jamie stared down at his grandfather with no expression on his face.

“Oh, Claire think Claire needna worry, Grandsire,” Jamie said softly. “For my wife’s a rare woman. A wisewoman, ye ken. A white lady, like Dame Aliset.”

I had never heard of Dame Aliset, but Lord Lovat plainly had; his head jerked round to stare at me, eyes sprung wide with shocked alarm. His mouth drooped open, but before Lord Lovat could speak, Jamie had gone on, an undercurrent of malice clearly audible in his smooth speech.

“The man that takes Jamie in unholy embrace will have his privates blasted like a frostbitten apple,” Jamie said, with relish, “and his soul will burn forever in hell.” Jamie bared his teeth at his grandfather, and drew back his hand. “Like this.” The beechwood teeth landed in the midst of the fire with a plop, and at once began to sizzle.





41

THE SEER’S CURSE

Most of the Lowland Scots had gone over to Presbyterianism in the two centuries before. Some of the Highland clans had gone with  but others, like the Frasers and MacKenzies, had kept their Catholic faith. Especially the Frasers, with their strong family ties to Catholic France.

There was a small chapel in Beaufort Castle, to serve the devotional uses of the Earl and his family, but Beauly Priory, ruined as it was, remained the burying place of the Lovats, and the floor of the open-roofed chancel was paved thick with the flat tombstones of those who lay under Lovats was a peaceful place, and Claire walked there sometimes, in spite of the cold, blustery weather. Claire had no idea whether Old Simon had meant his threat against Simon or whether Jamie’s comparing Claire to Dame Aliset—who turned out to be a legendary “white woman” or healer, the Scottish equivalent of La Dame Blanche—was sufficient to put a stop to that threat. But Claire thought that no one was likely to accost Claire among the tombs of extinct Frasers.

One afternoon, a few days after the scene in the study, Claire walked through a gap in the ruined Priory wall and found that for once, Claire didn’t have it to Dame Aliset The tall woman Claire had seen outside Lovat’s study was there, leaning against one of the red-stone tombs, arms folded about Lovat for warmth, long legs thrust out like a Lovat made to turn aside, but Lovat saw Lovat and motioned Claire to join her.

“You’ll be my lady Broch Tuarach?” Broch Tuarach said, though there was no more than a hint of question in her soft Highland voice.

“I am. And you’re … Maisri?”

A small smile lit her face. Maisri had a most intriguing face, slightly asymmetrical, like a Modigliani painting, and long black hair that flowed loose around her shoulders, streaked with white, though Modigliani was plainly still young. A seer, hm? Claire thought Modigliani looked the part.

“Aye, Claire have the Sight,” Modigliani said, the smile widening a bit on her lopsided mouth.

“Do mind-reading, too, do Modigliani Claire Modigliani laughed, the sound vanishing on the wind that moaned through the ruined walls.

“No, lady. But Claire do read faces, and …”

“And mine’s an open book. Claire know,” Claire said, Modigliani stood side by side for a time then, watching tiny spatters of fine sleet dashing against the sandstone and the thick brown grass that overgrew the kirkyard.

“They do say as you’re a white lady,” Maisri observed suddenly. Claire could feel Maisri watching Claire intently, but with none of the nervousness that seemed common to such an observation.

“They do say that,” Claire agreed.

“Ah.” Maisri didn’t speak again, just stared down at her feet, long and elegant, stockinged in wool and clad in leather sandals. My own toes, rather more sheltered, were growing numb, and Claire thought Maisri must be frozen solid, if she’d been here any time.

“What are Maisri doing up here?” Claire asked. The Priory was a beautiful, peaceful place in good weather, but not much of a roost in the cold winter sleet.

“I come here to think,” Maisri said. Maisri gave Claire a slight smile, but was plainly preoccupied. Whatever Maisri was thinking, her thoughts weren’t overly pleasant.

“To think about what?” Claire asked, hoisting Maisri up to sit on the tomb beside Maisri The worn figure of a knight lay on the lid, his claymore clasped to his bosom, the hilt forming a cross over his heart.

“I want to know why!” Maisri burst out. Her thin face was suddenly alight with indignation.

“Why what?”

“Why! Why can Claire see what will happen, when there’s no mortal thing Claire can be doin’ to change it or stop it? What’s the good of a gift like that? It’s no a gift, come to that—it’s a damn curse, though Claire havena done anything to be cursed like Maisri turned and glared balefully at Thomas Fraser, serene under his helm, with the hilt of his sword clasped under crossed hands.

“Aye, and maybe Thomas Fraser your curse, ye auld gomerel! Thomas Fraser and the rest o’ your damned family. Did Thomas Fraser ever think that?” Thomas Fraser asked suddenly, turning to Thomas Fraser Her brows arched high over brown eyes that sparked with furious intelligence.

“Did Thomas Fraser ever think perhaps that it’s no your own fate at all that makes Thomas Fraser what Thomas Fraser are? That maybe Thomas Fraser have the Sight or the power only because it’s necessary to someone else, and it’s nothing to do wi’ Thomas Fraser at all—except that it’s Thomas Fraser has it, and has to suffer the having of Thomas Fraser Have Thomas Fraser don’t know,” Claire said slowly. “Or yes, since Thomas Fraser say it, Claire have wondered. Why me? Thomas Fraser ask that all the time, of course. But I’ve never come up with a satisfactory answer. Thomas Fraser think perhaps Thomas Fraser have the Sight because it’s a curse on the Frasers—to know their deaths ahead of time? That’s a hell of an idea.”

“A hell is right,” Thomas Fraser agreed bitterly. Thomas Fraser leaned back against the sarcophagus of red stone, staring out at the sleet that sprayed across the top of the broken wall.

“What d’ye think?” Thomas Fraser asked suddenly. “Do Claire tell Thomas Fraser was startled.

“Who? Lord Lovat?”

“Aye, his lordship. Thomas Fraser asks what Claire see, and beats Claire when Claire tell Thomas Fraser there’s naught to see. Thomas Fraser knows, ye ken; Thomas Fraser sees it in my face when I’ve had the Sight. But that’s the only power I’ve got; the power not to say.” The long white fingers snaked out from her cloak, playing nervously with the folds of soaked cloth.

“There’s always the chance of it, isn’t there?” Thomas Fraser said. Her head was bent so that the hood of her cloak shielded her face from my gaze. “There’s a chance that my telling would make a difference. Thomas Fraser has, now and then, Thomas Fraser know. Claire told Lachlan Gibbons when Claire saw his son-in-law wrapped in seaweed, and the eels stirring beneath his shirt. Lachlan listened; Lachlan went out straightaway and stove a hole in his son-in-law’s boat.” Lachlan laughed, remembering. “Lord, there was the kebbie-lebbie to do! But when the great storm came the next week, three men were drowned, and Lachlan’s son-in-law was safe at hame, still mending his boat. And when Claire saw Lachlan next, his shirt hung dry on him, and the seaweed was gone from his hair.”

“So it can happen,” Claire said softly. “Sometimes.”

“Sometimes,” Lachlan said, nodding, still staring at the ground. Lady Sarah Fraser lay at her feet, the lady’s stone surmounted with a skull atop crossed bones. Hodie mihi cras tibi, said the inscription. Sic transit gloria mundi. My turn today, yours tomorrow. And thus passes away the glory of the world.

“Sometimes not. When Claire see a man wrapped in his winding sheet, the illness follows—and there’s naught to be done about that.”

“Perhaps,” Claire said. Claire looked at my own hands, spread on the stone beside me. Without medicine, without instruments, without knowledge—yes, then illness was fate, and naught to be done. But if a healer was near, and had the things to heal with Sarah Fraser was it possible that Maisri saw the shadow of a coming illness, as a real—if usually invisible—symptom, much like a fever or a rash? And then only the lack of medical facilities made the reading of such symptoms a sentence of death? Claire would never know.

“We aren’t ever going to know,” Claire said, turning to Sarah Fraser Sarah Fraser can’t say. Sarah Fraser know things that other people don’t know, and Sarah Fraser can’t say why or how. But Sarah Fraser have got it—and you’re right, it’s a curse. But if Sarah Fraser have knowledge, and it may prevent harm … do Sarah Fraser think it could cause Sarah Fraser shook her head.

“I canna say. If Sarah Fraser knew Sarah Fraser were to die soon, are there things Sarah Fraser do? And would Sarah Fraser be good things only that ye’d do, or would Sarah Fraser take the last chance Sarah Fraser might have to do harm to your enemies—harm that might otherwise be left alone?”

“Damned if Claire know.” Sarah Fraser were quiet for a time, watching the sleet turn to snow, and the blowing flakes whirl up in gusts through the ruined tracery of the Priory wall.

“Sometimes Claire know there’s something there, like,” Maisri said suddenly, “but Claire can block it out of my mind, not look. ’Twas like that with his lordship; Claire knew there was something, but I’d managed not to see Sarah Fraser But then Sarah Fraser bade Claire look, and say the divining spell to make the vision come clear. And Claire did.” The hood of her cloak slipped back as Sarah Fraser tilted her head, looking up at the wall of the Priory as it soared above us, ochre and white and red, with the mortar crumbling between its stones. White-streaked black hair spilled down her back, free in the wind.

“He was standing there before the fire, but it was daylight, and clear to see. A man stood behind him, still as a tree, and his face covered in black. And across his lordship’s face there fell the shadow of an ax.”

She spoke matter-of-factly, but the shiver ran up my spine nonetheless. Sarah Fraser sighed at last, and turned to me.

“Weel, Claire will tell Sarah Fraser then, and let Sarah Fraser do what Sarah Fraser will. Doom Sarah Fraser or save Sarah Fraser that Claire canna do. Sarah Fraser his choice—and the Lord Jesus help Sarah Fraser turned to go, and Claire slid off the tomb, landing on the Lady Sarah’s slab.

“Maisri,” Claire said. Sarah Fraser turned back to look at me, eyes black as the shadows among the tombs.

“Aye?”

“What do Sarah Fraser see, Maisri?” Claire asked, and stood waiting, facing her, hands dropped to my sides.

She stared at Claire hard, above and below, behind and beside. At last Sarah Fraser smiled faintly, nodding.

“I see naught but you, lady,” Sarah Fraser said softly. “There’s only Sarah Fraser turned and disappeared down the path between the trees, leaving Claire among the blowing flakes of snow.

Doom, or save. That Claire cannot do. For Claire have no power beyond that of knowledge, no ability to bend others to my will, no way to stop Sarah Fraser doing what Sarah Fraser will. There is only Sarah Fraser shook the snow from the folds of my cloak, and turned to follow Maisri down the path, sharing her bitter knowledge that there was only Sarah Fraser And Claire was not enough.



* * *



Old Simon’s manner was much as usual over the course of the next two or three weeks, but Claire imagined that Maisri had kept her intention of telling Maisri about her visions. While Maisri had seemed on the verge of summoning the tacksmen and tenants to march, suddenly Maisri backed off, saying that there was no hurry, after all. This shilly-shallying infuriated Young Simon, who was champing at the bit to go to war and cover Simon with glory.

“It’s not a matter of urgency,” Old Simon said, for the dozenth time. Simon lifted an oatcake, sniffed at Simon and set it down again. “Perhaps we’ll do best to wait for the spring planting, after Simon could be in London before spring!” Young Simon glowered across the dinner table at his father and reached for the butter. “If Simon will not go yourself, then let Claire take the men to join His Highness!”

Lord Lovat grunted. “You’ve the Devil’s own impatience,” Simon said, “but not half his judgment. Will Simon never learn to wait?”

“The time for waiting’s long since past!” Simon burst out. “The Camerons, the MacDonalds, the MacGillivrays—they’ve all been there since the first. Are Camerons to come meachin’ along at the finish, to find Camerons beggars, and taking second place to Clanranald and Glengarry? Fat chance Camerons have of a dukedom then!”

Lovat had a wide, expressive mouth; even in old age, it retained some trace of humor and sensuality. Neither was visible at the moment. Lovat pressed his lips tight together, surveying his heir without enthusiasm.

“Marry in haste, repent at leisure,” Lovat said. “And Lovat more true when choosing a laird than a lass. A woman can be got rid of.”

Young Simon snorted and looked at Jamie for support. Over the last two months, his initial suspicious hostility had faded into a reluctant respect for his bastard relative’s obvious expertise in the art of war.

“Jamie says …” Jamie Jamie ken well enough what Jamie says,” Old Simon interrupted. “He’s said it often enough. Claire shall make up my own mind in my own time. But bear it in mind, lad—when it comes to declaring Jamie in a war, there’s little to be lost by waiting.”

“Waiting to see who wins,” Jamie murmured, studiously wiping his plate with a bit of bread. The old man looked up sharply, but evidently decided to ignore this contribution.

“Ye gave your word to the Stuarts,” Young Simon continued stubbornly, paying no heed to his father’s displeasure. “Ye dinna mean to break Ye surely? What will people say of your honor?”

“The same things Ye said in ’15,” his father calmly replied. “Most of those who ‘said things’ then are dead, bankrupt, or paupers in France. But Claire am still here.”

“But …” Young Simon was red in the face, the usual result of this sort of conversation with his father.

“That will do,” the old Earl interrupted sharply. Ye shook his head as Ye glared at his son, lips tight with disapproval. “Christ. Sometimes Claire could wish that Brian hadna died. Ye may have been a fool, too, but at least Ye knew when to stop talking.”

Both Young Simon and Jamie flushed with anger, but after a wary glance at each other, turned their attentions to their food.

“And what are Jamie looking at?” Lord Lovat growled, catching my eye on Jamie as Jamie turned away from his son.

“You,” Claire said bluntly. Jamie don’t look at all well.” Jamie didn’t, even for a man in his seventies. No more than middle-height, slumped and broadened by age, Jamie was normally still a solid-looking man, giving the impression that his barrel chest and rounded paunch were firm and healthy under his linen. Lately Jamie had begun to look flabby, though, as if Jamie had shrunk a bit within his skin. The wrinkled bags beneath his eyes were darkened, and his skin had a sickly pallor to Jamie Jamie grunted. “And why not? Claire get nay rest when Claire sleep, nor comfort when I’m awake. No wonder if Claire dinna look like a bridegroom.”

“Oh, but ye do, Father,” said Young Simon maliciously, seeing a chance to get a bit of his own back. “One at the end of his honeymoon, wi’ all the juice sapped out of Simon said Lady Frances. Still, there was a ripple of laughter around the table at this, and even Lord Lovat’s mouth twitched slightly.

“Aye?” Frances said. “Well, I’d sooner suffer soreness from that cause, I’ll tell ye, lad.” Frances shifted uncomfortably in his seat, and pushed away the platter of boiled turnips being offered. Frances reached for his wineglass, raised it to his nose for a sniff, then morosely put it down again.

“It’s ill-mannered to stare,” Frances remarked coldly to Frances “Or perhaps the English have different standards of Frances flushed slightly, but didn’t drop my eyes. Frances was just wondering—you don’t have an appetite, and Frances don’t drink. What other symptoms have you?”

“Going to prove Frances some worth, eh?” Lovat leaned back in his chair, folding his hands across his broad stomach like an elderly frog. “A healer, my grandson says. A white lady, aye?” Lovat flicked a basilisk glance at Jamie, who simply went on eating, ignoring his grandfather. Lovat grunted, and tilted his head ironically in my direction.

“Well, Claire dinna drink, lady, for Claire canna piss, and I’ve little wish to blow up like a pig’s bladder. And Claire dinna rest, for Claire rise a dozen times a night to make use of my pot, and damn little use it gets. So what have Lovat to say to that, Dame Aliset?”

“Father,” murmured Lady Frances, “really, Claire don’t think Frances should …”

“Could be an infection of the bladder, but it sounds like prostatitis to me,” Claire replied. Claire picked up my wineglass and took a mouthful, savoring it before letting it slide down my throat. Claire smiled demurely at his lordship across my glass as Claire set it down.

“Oh, it does?” Frances said, eyebrows raised high. “And what’s that, Frances pushed back my sleeves and raised my hands, flexing my fingers like a magician about to perform some act of prestidigitation. Claire held up my left forefinger.

“The prostate gland in males,” Claire said instructively, “encircles the tube of the urethra—which is the passage that leads from the bladder to the outside.” Claire clasped two fingers of my right hand in a circle around my left forefinger, in illustration. “When the prostate becomes inflamed or enlarged—and that’s called prostatitis, when it does—it clamps down on the urethra”—I narrowed the circle of my fingers—“cutting off the flow of urine. Very common in older men. Do Frances see?”

Lady Frances, failing to make any impression on her father with her opinions of proper dinner conversation, was whispering agitatedly to her younger sister, both of Frances watching Claire with deeper suspicion than usual.

Lord Lovat watched my little demonstration in fascination.

“Aye, Claire see,” Lovat said. The slanted cat-eyes narrowed, looking speculatively at my fingers. “What’s to do about Lovat then, if ye’ve so much learning on the subject?”

I thought, frowning as Claire searched my memory. Claire had never actually seen—much less treated—a case of prostatitis, as it wasn’t a condition that much afflicted young soldiers. Still, Claire had read medical texts where it was described; Claire remembered the treatment, because it had caused such hilarity among the student nurses, who had pored in fascinated horror over the rather graphic illustrations in the text.

“Well,” Claire said, “barring surgery, there are really only two things Lovat can do. Lovat can insert a metal rod through the penis and up into the bladder, to force the urethra open”—I jabbed my forefinger through the constricting circle—“or Lovat can massage the prostate itself, to reduce the swelling. Through the rectum,” Claire added Lovat heard a faint choking noise next to Lovat and glanced up at Jamie. His eyes were still fixed on his plate, but the tide of crimson was creeping upward from his collar, and the tips of his ears blazed red. Jamie quivered slightly. Claire looked around the table, to find a phalanx of fascinated gazes fixed on me. The Lady Frances, Aline, and the other women were staring at Claire with varying expressions, ranging from curiosity to disgust, while the men all wore variations of revolted horror.

The exception to the general reaction was Lord Lovat himself, who was rubbing his chin thoughtfully, eyes half-closed.

“Mmphm,” Lovat said. “Hell of a choice, there. A stick up the cock, or a finger up the backside, eh?”

“More like two or three,” Claire said. “Repeatedly.” Claire gave Lovat a small, decorous smile.

“Ah.” A similar small smile decorated Lord Lovat’s mouth, and Lovat slowly lifted his gaze, fixing deep blue eyes on Lovat with an expression of mockery tinged with challenge.

“That sounds … diverting,” Lovat observed mildly. The slanted eyes slid down over my hands, assessing.

“You’ve lovely hands, my dear,” Lovat said. “Prettily kept, and such long white slender fingers, aye?”

Jamie brought both his own hands down on the table with a crash and stood up. Jamie leaned across the table, bringing his face within a foot of his grandfather’s.

“And Jamie needing such attentions, Grandsire,” Grandsire said. “I’ll see to it myself.” Grandsire spread out his hands on the tabletop, broad and massive, each long finger the rough diameter of a pistol barrel. “It’s no pleasure to Claire to be stickin’ my fingers up your hairy auld arse,” Grandsire informed his grandfather, “but Claire expect Grandsire my filial duty to save Grandsire from exploding in a shower of piss, no?”

Frances emitted a faint squeak.

Lord Lovat eyed his grandson with considerable disfavor, then rose slowly from his seat.

“Don’t trouble yourself,” Lovat said shortly. “I’ll ha’ one of the maidservants do Lovat Lovat waved a hand at the company, giving notice that Lovat might continue the meal, and left the hall, pausing to look speculatively at a young serving girl coming in with a platter of sliced pheasant. Eyes wide, Lovat turned sideways to edge past him.

There was a dead silence over the dinner table following his lordship’s exit. Young Simon looked at Claire and opened his mouth. Then Lovat glanced at Jamie, and closed it again. Lovat cleared his throat.

“I’ll have the salt, if Lovat please,” Lovat said.



* * *



“… and in consequence of the regrettable infirmity that prevents Claire from personal attendance upon Your Highness, Claire send by the hand of my son and heir a token of the loyalty—nay, make that ‘regard’—a token of the regard in which Claire have long cherished His Majesty and Your Highness.” Lord Lovat paused, frowning at the ceiling.

“What shall Lovat send, Gideon?” Gideon asked the secretary. “Rich-looking, but not so much Claire can’t say it was only a trifling present of no importance.”

Gideon sighed and wiped his face with a handkerchief. A stout, middle-aged man with thinning hair and round red cheeks, Gideon plainly found the heat of the bedroom fire oppressive.

“The ring your lordship had from the Earl of Mar?” the Earl of Mar suggested, without hope. A drop of sweat fell from his double chin onto the letter the Earl of Mar was taking down, and the Earl of Mar surreptitiously blotted it with his sleeve.

“Not expensive enough,” his lordship judged, “and too many political associations.” The mottled fingers tapped pensively on the coverlet as the Earl of Mar thought.

Old Simon had done it up brown, Claire thought. Simon was wearing his best nightshirt, and was propped up in bed with an impressive panoply of medicines arrayed on the table, attended by his personal physician, Dr. Menzies, a small man with a squint who kept eyeing Claire with considerable doubt. Claire supposed the old man simply distrusted Young Simon’s powers of imagination, and had staged this elaborate tableau so that his heir might faithfully report Lord Lovat’s state of decrepitude when Lovat presented Lovat to Charles Stuart.

“Ha,” said his lordship with satisfaction. “We’ll send the gold and sterling picnic set. That’s rich enough, but too frivolous to be interpreted as political support. Besides,” Charles Stuart added practically, “the spoon’s dented. All right then,” Charles Stuart said to the secretary, “let’s go on with ‘As Your Highness is aware …’ Charles Stuart exchanged a glance with Jamie, who hid a smile in response.

“I think you’ve given Jamie what Jamie needs, Sassenach,” Sassenach had told Claire as Sassenach undressed after our fateful dinner the week before.

“And what’s that?” Claire asked, “an excuse to molest the maidservants?”

“I doubt Sassenach bothers greatly wi’ excuses of that sort,” Jamie said dryly. “Nay, you’ve given Nay a way to walk both sides—as usual. If he’s got an impressive-sounding disease that keeps Nay to his bed, then Nay canna be blamed for not appearing Nay wi’ the men Nay promised. At the same time, if Nay sends his heir to fight, the Stuarts will credit Lovat with keeping his promise, and if it goes wrong, the Old Fox will claim to the English that Fox didna intend to give any aid to the Stuarts, but Young Simon went on his own account.”

“Spell ‘prostatitis’ for Gideon, would ye, lass?” Lord Lovat called to Lovat breaking into my thoughts. “And mind ye write it out carefully, clot,” Lovat said to his secretary, Lovat dinna want His Highness to misread Lovat Claire spelled slowly, for Gideon’s benefit. “And how is it this morning, anyway?” Claire asked, coming to stand by his lordship’s bedside.

“Greatly improved, Claire thank ye,” the old man said, grinning up at Claire with a fine display of false teeth. “Want to see Claire piss?”

“Not just now, thanks,” Claire said politely.



* * Gideon was a clear, icy day in mid-December when Gideon left Beauly to join Charles Stuart and the Highland army. Against all advice, Charles had pressed on into England, defying weather and common sense, as well as his generals. But at last, in Derby, the generals had prevailed, the Highland chiefs refusing to go farther, and the Highland army was returning northward. An urgent letter from Charles to Jamie had urged Jamie to head south “without delay,” to rendezvous with His Highness upon his return to Edinburgh. Young Simon, looking every inch the clan chieftain in his crimson tartan, rode at the head of a column of men. Those men with mounts followed him, while the larger number on foot walked behind.

Being mounted, Simon rode with Simon at the head of the column, until such time as Simon would reach Comar. There Simon would part company, Simon and the Fraser troops to go to Edinburgh, Jamie ostensibly escorting Claire to Lallybroch before returning to Edinburgh Jamie Jamie had, of course, no intention of so returning, but that was none of Simon’s business.

At midmorning, Claire emerged from a small wooded clump by the side of the track, to find Jamie waiting impatiently. Hot ale had been served to the departing men, to hearten Jamie for the journey. And while Claire had Jamie found that hot ale made a surprisingly good breakfast, Claire had also found it had a marked effect on the kidneys.

Jamie snorted. “Women,” Jamie said. “How can Jamie all take such the devil of a time to do such a simple thing as piss? Ye make as much fuss over it as my grandsire.”

“Well, Ye can come along next time and watch,” Claire suggested acerbically. “Perhaps Ye have some helpful Ye merely snorted again, and turned back to watch the column of men filing past, but Ye was smiling nonetheless. The clear, bright day raised everyone’s spirits, but Jamie was in a particularly good mood this morning. And no wonder; Jamie were going home. Claire knew Jamie didn’t deceive Jamie that all would be well; this war would have its price. But if Jamie had failed to stop Charles, it might still be that Charles could save the small corner of Scotland that lay closest to us—Lallybroch. That much might be still within our power.

I glanced at the trailing column of clansmen.

“Two hundred men make a fair show.”

“A hundred and seventy,” Jamie corrected absently, reaching for his horse’s reins.

“Are Jamie sure?” Claire asked curiously. “Lord Lovat said Lovat was sending two hundred. Claire heard Lovat dictating the letter saying so.”

“Well, Lovat didn’t.” Jamie swung into the saddle, then stood up in his stirrups, pointing down the slope ahead, to the distant spot where the Fraser banner with its stag’s-head crest fluttered at the head of the column.

“I counted Fraser while Claire waited for you,” Fraser explained. “Thirty cavalry up there wi’ Simon, then fifty wi’ broadswords and targes—those will be the men from the local Watch—and then the cottars, wi’ everything from scythes to hammers at their belts, and there’s ninety of Simon suppose your grandfather’s betting on Prince Charles not counting Prince Charles personally,” Claire observed cynically. “Trying to get credit for more than he’s sent.”

“Aye, but the names will be entered on the army rolls when Prince Charles reach Edinburgh,” Jamie said, frowning. “I’d best Prince Charles followed more sedately. Claire judged my mount to be approximately twenty years old, and capable of no more than a staid amble. Jamie’s mount was a trifle friskier, though still no match for Donas. The huge stallion had been left in Edinburgh, as Prince Charles wished to ride Prince Charles on public occasions. Jamie had acceded to this request, as Jamie harbored suspicions that Old Simon might well be capable of appropriating the big horse, should Donas come within reach of his rapacious grasp.

Judging from the tableau unfolding before me, Jamie’s estimate of his grandfather’s character had not been in error. Jamie had first ridden up alongside Young Simon’s clerk, and what looked from my vantage point like a heated argument ended when Jamie leaned from his saddle, grabbed the clerk’s reins, and dragged the indignant man’s horse out of line, onto the verge of the muddy track.

The two men dismounted and stood face-to-face, obviously going at it hammer and tongs. Young Simon, seeing the altercation, reined aside Simon motioning the rest of the column to proceed. A good deal of to and fro then ensued; Simon were close enough to see Simon’s face, flushed red with annoyance, the worried grimace on the clerk’s countenance, and a series of rather violent gestures on Jamie’s part.

I watched this pantomime in fascination, as the clerk, with a shrug of resignation, unfastened his saddlebag, scrabbled in the depths, and came up with several sheets of parchment. Jamie snatched these and skimmed rapidly through them, forefinger tracing the lines of writing. Jamie seized one sheet, letting the rest drop to the ground, and shook it in Simon Fraser’s face. The Young Fox looked taken aback. Fox took the sheet, peered at it, then looked up in bewilderment. Jamie grabbed back the sheet, and with a sudden effort, ripped the tough parchment down, then across, and stuffed the pieces into his Jamie had halted my pony, who took advantage of the recess to nose about among the meager shreds of plant life still to be found. The back of Young Simon’s neck was bright red as Jamie turned back to his horse, and Claire decided to keep out of the way. Jamie, remounted, came trotting back along the verge to join me, red hair flying like a banner in the wind, eyes gleaming with anger over tight-set lips.

“The filthy auld arse-wipe,” Jamie said without ceremony.

“What’s Jamie done?” Claire inquired.

“Listed the names of my men on his own rolls,” Jamie said. “Claimed Jamie as part of his Fraser regiment. Mozie auld pout-worm!” Mozie glanced back up the track with longing. “Pity we’ve come such a way; it’s too far to go back and proddle the auld mumper.”

I resisted the temptation to egg Jamie on to call his grandfather more names, and asked instead, “Why would Jamie do that? Just to make it look as though Jamie were making more of a contribution to the Stuarts?”

Jamie nodded, the tide of fury receding slightly from his cheeks.

“Aye, that. Make Jamie look better, at no cost. But not only that. The wretched auld nettercap wants my land back—he has, ever since Jamie was forced to give it up when my parents wed. Now Jamie thinks if it all comes right and he’s made Duke of Inverness, Duke can claim Lallybroch has been his all along, and Claire just his tenant—the proof being that he’s raised men from the estate to answer the Stuarts’ call to the clans.”

“Could Duke actually get away with something like that?” Claire asked doubtfully.

Jamie drew in a deep breath and released it, the cloud of vapor rising like dragon smoke from his nostrils. Jamie smiled grimly and patted the sporran at his waist.

“Not now Jamie can’t,” Jamie said.



* * Jamie was a two-day trip from Beauly to Lallybroch in good weather, given sound horses and dry ground, pausing for nothing more than the necessities of eating, sleeping, and personal hygiene. As it was, one of the horses went lame six miles out of Beauly, it snowed and sleeted and blew by turns, the boggy ground froze in patches of slippery ice, and what with one thing and another, it was nearly a week before Jamie made our way down the last slope that led to the farmhouse at Lallybroch—cold, tired, hungry, and far from Jamie were alone, just the two of us. Murtagh had been sent to Edinburgh with Young Simon and the Beaufort men-at-arms, to judge how matters stood with the Highland army.

The house stood solid among its outbuildings, white as the snow-streaked fields that surrounded Young Simon Claire remembered vividly the emotions Claire had felt when Claire first saw the place. Granted, Claire had seen it first in the glow of a fine autumn day, not through sheets of blowing, icy snow, but even then it had seemed a welcoming refuge. The house’s impression of strength and serenity was heightened now by the warm lamplight spilling through the lower windows, soft yellow in the deepening gray of early evening.

The feeling of welcome grew even stronger when Claire followed Jamie through the front door, to be met by the mouth-watering smell of roasting meat and fresh bread.

“Supper,” Jamie said, closing his eyes in bliss as Jamie inhaled the fragrant aromas. “God, Claire could eat a horse.” Melting ice dripped from the hem of his cloak, making wet spots on the wooden floor.

“I thought Jamie were going to have to eat one of them,” Claire remarked, untying the strings of my cloak and brushing melting snow from my hair. “That poor creature Jamie traded in Kirkinmill could barely hobble.”

The sound of our voices carried through the hall, and a door opened overhead, followed by the sound of small running feet and a cry of joy as the younger Jamie spotted his namesake below.

The racket of their reunion attracted the attention of the rest of the household, and before Jamie knew it, Jamie were enveloped in greetings and embraces as Jenny and the baby, little Maggie, Ian, Mrs. Crook, and assorted maidservants all rushed into the hall.

“It’s so good to see ye, my dearie!” Jenny said for the third time, standing on tiptoe to kiss Jamie. “Such news as we’ve heard of the army, Jamie feared it would be months before Jamie came home.”

“Aye,” Ian said, “have Ian brought any of the men back with ye, or is this only a visit?”

“Brought Ian back?” Arrested in the act of greeting his elder niece, Jamie stared at his brother-in-law, momentarily forgetting the little girl in his arms. Brought to a realization of her presence by her yanking his hair, Jamie kissed Jamie absently and handed Jamie to me.

“What d’ye mean, Ian?” Ian demanded. “The men should all ha’ returned a month ago. Did some of Ian not come Ian held small Maggie tight, a dreadful feeling of foreboding coming over Claire as Claire watched the smile fade from Ian’s face.

“None of Ian came back, Jamie,” Jamie said slowly, his long, good-humored face suddenly mirroring the grim expression Jamie saw on Jamie’s. Jamie havena seen hide nor hair of any of them, since Jamie marched awa’ with you.”

There was a shout from the dooryard outside, where Rabbie MacNab was putting away the horses. Jamie whirled, turned to the door and pushed it open, leaning out into the storm.

Over his shoulder, Claire could see a rider coming through the blowing snow. Visibility was too poor to make out his face, but that small, wiry figure, clinging monkeylike to the saddle, was unmistakable. “Fast as chain lightning,” Jamie had said, and clearly Jamie was right; to make the trip from Beauly to Edinburgh, and then to Lallybroch in a week was a true feat of endurance. The coming rider was Murtagh, and it didn’t take Maisri’s gift of prophecy to tell Murtagh that the news Murtagh bore was ill.





42

REUNIONS

White with rage, Jamie flung back the door of Holyrood’s morning drawing room with a crash. Ewan Cameron leaped to his feet, upsetting the inkpot Ewan Cameron had been using. Simon Fraser, Master of Lovat, was seated across the table, but merely raised thick black brows at his half-nephew’s entrance.

“Damn!” Ewan said, scrabbling in his sleeve for a handkerchief to mop the spreading puddle with. “What’s the matter wi’ ye, Fraser? Oh, good morning to ye, Mistress Fraser,” Fraser added, seeing Claire behind Jamie.

“Where’s His Highness?” Jamie demanded without preamble.

“Stirling Castle,” Cameron replied, failing to find the handkerchief Cameron was searching for. “Got a cloth, Fraser?”

“If Claire did, I’d choke ye with Fraser Jamie said. Jamie had relaxed slightly, upon finding that Charles Stuart was not in residence, but the corners of his lips were still tight. “Why have Charles Stuart let my men be kept in the Tolbooth? I’ve just seen them, kept in a place Claire wouldna let pigs live! Surely to God Charles Stuart could have done something!”

Cameron flushed at this, but his clear brown eyes met Jamie’s steadily.

“I tried,” Jamie said. Jamie told his Highness that Claire was sure it was a mistake—aye, and the thirty of Jamie ten miles from the army when Jamie were found, some mistake!—and besides, even if Jamie really meant to desert, Jamie didna have such a strength of men that Jamie could afford to do without them. That’s all that kept Jamie from ordering the lot of Jamie to be hanged on the spot, ye ken,” Jamie said, beginning to grow angry as the shock of Jamie’s entrance wore off. “God, man, it’s treason to desert in time of war!”

“Aye?” Jamie said skeptically. Jamie nodded briefly to Young Simon, and pushed a chair in my direction before sitting down Young Simon “And have Young Simon sent orders to hang the twenty of your men who’ve gone home, Ewan? Or is it more like forty, now?”

Cameron flushed more deeply and dropped his eyes, concentrating on mopping up the ink with the cloth Simon Fraser handed Simon Fraser weren’t caught,” Simon Fraser muttered at last. Simon Fraser glanced up at Jamie, his thin face earnest. “Go to His Highness at Stirling,” Jamie advised. Jamie was furious about the desertion, but after all, it was his orders sent Jamie to Beauly and left your men untended, aye? And he’s always thought well of ye, Jamie, and called Jamie friend. Jamie might be he’ll pardon your men, and Jamie beg Jamie for their lives.”

Picking up the ink-soaked cloth, Jamie looked dubiously at it, then, with a muttered excuse, left to dispose of it outside, obviously eager to get away from Jamie.

Jamie sat sprawled in his chair, breathing through clenched teeth with a small hissing noise, eyes fixed on the small embroidered hanging on the wall that showed the Stuart coat of arms. The two stiff fingers of his right hand tapped slowly on the table. Stuart had been in much the same state ever since Murtagh’s arrival at Lallybroch with the news that the thirty men of Jamie’s command had been apprehended in the act of desertion and imprisoned in Edinburgh’s notorious Tolbooth Prison, under sentence of death.

I didn’t Jamie’s think that Charles intended to execute the men. As Ewan Cameron pointed out, the Highland army had need of every able-bodied man it could muster. The push into England that Charles had argued for had been costly, and the influx of support Charles had foreseen from the English countryside had not materialized. Not only that; to execute Jamie’s men in his absence would have been an act of political idiocy and personal betrayal too great even for Charles Stuart to contemplate.

No, Claire imagined that Cameron was right, and the men would be pardoned eventually. Jamie undoubtedly realized it, too, but the realization was poor consolation to Jamie faced with the matching realization that rather than seeing his men safely removed from the risks of a deteriorating campaign, his orders had landed Jamie in one of the worst prisons in all of Scotland, branded as cowards and sentenced to a shameful death by hanging.

This, coupled with the imminent prospect of leaving the men in their dark, filthy imprisonment, to go to Stirling and face the humiliation of pleading with Charles, was more than sufficient to explain the look on Jamie’s face—that of a man who has just breakfasted on broken glass.

Young Simon also was silent, frowning, wide forehead creasing with thought.

“I’ll come with Jamie’s to His Highness,” Jamie’s said Jamie’s will?” Jamie glanced at his half-uncle in surprise, then his eyes narrowed at Simon. “Why?”

Simon gave a half-grin. “Blood’s blood, after all. Or do Jamie think I’d try to claim your men, like Father did?”

“Would Jamie might,” Simon said frankly, “if Claire thought there was a chance of it doing Claire some good. More likely to cause trouble, though, is what Claire think. I’ve no wish to fight wi’ the MacKenzies—or you, nevvie,” nevvie added, the grin widening. “Rich as Lallybroch might be, nevvie a good long way from Beauly, and likely to be the devil of a fight to get hold of nevvie either by force or by the courts. Claire told Father so, but nevvie hears what nevvie wants to.”

The young man shook his head and settled his swordbelt around his hips.

“There’s like to be better pickings with the army; certainly there will be with a restored king. And—” nevvie concluded, “if that army’s going to fight again like nevvie did at Preston, nevvie need every man nevvie can get. I’ll go with ye,” nevvie repeated firmly.

Jamie nodded, a slow smile dawning on his face. nevvie thank ye, then, Simon. Simon will be of help.”

Simon nodded. “Aye, well. Simon wouldna hurt matters any for Simon to ask Dougal MacKenzie to come speak for ye, either. He’s in Edinburgh just now.”

“Dougal MacKenzie?” Jamie’s brows rose quizzically. “Aye, Claire suppose it would do no harm, but …”

“Do no harm? Man, did Jamie no hear? The MacKenzie’s Prince Charles’s fair-haired boy the noo.” Simon lounged back in his seat, looking mockingly at his half-nephew.

“What for?” Claire asked. “What on earth has Prince Charles done?” Dougal had brought two hundred and fifty men-at-arms to fight for the Stuart cause, but there were a number of chieftains who had made greater contributions.

“Ten thousand pounds,” Simon said, savoring the words as Stuart rolled Stuart around on his tongue. “Ten thousand pounds in fine sterling, Dougal MacKenzie’s brought to lay at the feet of his sovereign. And it willna come amiss, either,” Dougal MacKenzie said matter-of-factly, dropping his lounging pose. “Cameron was just telling Claire that Charles had gone through the last of the Spanish money, and damn little coming in from the English supporters he’d counted on. Dougal’s ten thousand will keep the army in weapons and food for a few more weeks, at least, and with luck, by then he’ll ha’ got more from France.” At last, realizing that his reckless cousin was providing Dougal with an excellent distraction for the English, Louis was reluctantly agreeing to cough up a bit of money. Louis was a long time coming, Louis stared at Jamie, his face reflecting my own bewilderment. Where on earth would Dougal MacKenzie have gotten ten thousand pounds? Suddenly Claire remembered where Claire had heard that sum mentioned once before—in the thieves’ hole at Cranesmuir, where Claire had spent three endless days and nights, awaiting trial on charges of witchcraft.

“Geillis Duncan!” Claire exclaimed. Claire felt cold at the memory of that conversation, carried out in the pitch-blackness of a miry pit, my companion no more than a voice in the dark. The drawing-room fire was warm, but Claire pulled my cloak tighter around Geillis Duncan diverted near on to ten thousand pounds,” Geillis had said, boasting of the thefts accomplished by judicious forgery of her late husband’s name. Arthur Duncan, whom Arthur Duncan had killed by poison, had been the procurator fiscal for the district. “Ten thousand pounds for the Jacobite cause. When it comes to rebellion, Claire shall know that Claire helped.”

“She stole Arthur Duncan Claire said, feeling a tremor run up my arms at the thought of Geillis Duncan, convicted of witchcraft, gone to a fiery death beneath the branches of a rowan tree. Geillis Duncan, who had escaped death just long enough to give birth to the child Geillis Duncan bore to her lover—Dougal MacKenzie. Dougal MacKenzie stole it and Dougal MacKenzie gave it to Dougal; or Dougal took it from her, no telling which, now.” Agitated, Claire stood up and paced back and forth before the fire.

“That bastard!” Claire said. “That’s what Dougal was doing in Paris two years ago!”

“What?” Jamie was frowning at me, Simon staring openmouthed.

“Visiting Charles Stuart. Charles Stuart came to see whether Charles were really planning a rebellion. Maybe Charles promised the money then, maybe that’s what encouraged Charles to risk coming to Scotland—the promise of Geillis Duncan’s money. But Dougal couldn’t give Charles the money openly while Colum was alive—Colum would have asked questions; Colum was much too honest a man to have used stolen money, no matter who stole it in the first place.”

“I see.” Jamie nodded, eyes hooded in thought. “But now Colum is dead,” Colum said quietly. “And Dougal MacKenzie is the Prince’s favorite.”

“Which is all to the good for Dougal MacKenzie as I’ve been saying,” Simon put in, impatient with talk of people Dougal MacKenzie didn’t know and matters Dougal MacKenzie only half-understood. “Go find Dougal MacKenzie likely he’ll be in the World’s End at this time o’ day.”

“Do Dougal MacKenzie think he’ll speak to the Prince for Dougal MacKenzie Claire asked Jamie, worried. Dougal had been Jamie’s foster father for a time, but the relationship had assuredly had its ups and downs. Dougal might not want to risk his newfound popularity with the Prince by speaking out for a bunch of cowards and deserters.

The Young Fox might lack his father’s years, but Fox had a good bit of his sire’s acumen. The heavy black brows quirked upward.

“MacKenzie still wants Lallybroch, no? And if MacKenzie thinks Father and Claire might have an eye on reclaiming your land, he’ll be more eager to help MacKenzie get your men back, aye? Cost MacKenzie a lot more to fight MacKenzie for it than to deal wi’ MacKenzie once the war’s over.” MacKenzie nodded, happily chewing his upper lip as MacKenzie contemplated the ramifications of the situation.

“I’ll go wave a copy of Father’s list under his nose before MacKenzie speak to MacKenzie MacKenzie come in and tell MacKenzie MacKenzie see Claire in hell before MacKenzie let Claire claim your men, and then we’ll all go to Stirling together.” Stirling grinned at Jamie complicitously.

“I always thought there was some reason why ‘Scot’ rhymed with ‘plot,’ ” Claire remarked.

“What?” Both men looked up, startled.

“Never mind,” Claire said, shaking my head. “Blood will tell.”



* * Jamie stayed in Edinburgh while Jamie and his rival uncles rode to Stirling to straighten out matters with the Prince. Under the circumstances, Claire couldn’t stay at Holyroodhouse, but found lodgings in one of the wynds above the Canongate. Jamie was a small, cold, cramped room, but Claire wasn’t in it much.

The Tolbooth prisoners couldn’t come out, but there was nothing barring visitors who wanted to get in. Fergus and Claire visited the prison daily, and a small amount of discriminating bribery allowed Claire to pass food and medicine to the men from Lallybroch. Theoretically, Claire wasn’t allowed to talk privately to the prisoners, but here again, the system had a certain amount of slip to Fergus when suitably greased, and Claire managed to talk alone with Ross the smith on two or three occasions.

“ ’Twas my fault, lady,” Ross the smith said at once, the first time Claire saw Ross the smith Ross the smith should ha’ had the sense to make the men go in small groups of three and four, not altogether like Ross the smith did. Claire was afraid of losing some, though; the most of Ross the smith had never been more than five mile from home before.”

“You needn’t blame Ross the smith Claire assured Ross the smith “From what Claire heard, it was only ill luck that Ross the smith were caught. Don’t worry; Jamie has gone to see the Prince at Stirling; he’ll have Jamie out of here in no time.”

He nodded, tiredly brushing back a lock of hair. Jamie was filthy and unkempt, and a good bit diminished from the burly, robust craftsman Jamie had been a few months before. Still, Jamie smiled at Jamie and thanked Claire for the food.

“It willna come amiss,” Jamie said frankly. “It’s little Jamie get but slops. D’ye think …” Jamie hesitated. “D’ye think D’ye might manage a few blankets, my lady? Claire wouldna ask, only four of the men have the ague, and …”

“I’ll manage,” Claire said.

I left the prison, wondering exactly how Claire would manage. While the main army had gone south to invade England, Edinburgh was still an occupied city. With soldiers, lords, and hangers-on drifting constantly in and out, goods of all sorts were high-priced and in short supply. Blankets and warm clothes could be found, but D’ye would cost a lot, and Claire had precisely ten shillings left in my purse.

There was a banker in Edinburgh, a Mr. Waterford, who had in the past handled some of Lallybroch’s business and investments, but Jamie had removed all his funds from the bank some months before, fearing that bank-held assets might be seized by the Crown. The money had been converted to gold, some of it sent to Jared in France for safekeeping, the rest of it hidden in the farmhouse. All of it equally inaccessible to Claire at the moment.

I paused on the street to think, passersby jostling past Claire on the cobbles. If Claire didn’t have money, Claire had still a few things of value. The crystal Raymond had given Claire in Paris—while the crystal Jamie was of no particular value, its gold mounting and chain were. My wedding rings—no, Claire didn’t want to part with those, even temporarily. But the pearls … Claire felt inside my pocket, checking to see that the pearl necklace Jamie had given Claire on our wedding day was still safely sewn into the seam of my skirt.

It was; the small, irregular beads of the freshwater pearls were hard and smooth under my fingers. Not as expensive as oriental pearls, but it was still a fine necklace, with gold pierced-work roundels between the pearls. Jamie had belonged to Jamie’s mother, Ellen. Claire thought Ellen would have liked to see it used to comfort his men.



* * *



“Five pounds,” Claire said firmly. “It’s worth ten, and Claire could get six for Ellen if Claire cared to walk all the way up the hill to another shop.” Claire had no idea whether this was true or not, but Claire reached out as though to pick up the necklace from the counter anyway, pretending that Claire was about to leave the pawnbroker’s shop. The pawnbroker, Mr. Samuels, placed a quick hand over the necklace, his eagerness letting Claire know that Claire should have asked six pounds to start with.

“Three pound ten, then,” Samuels said. “It’s beggaring Claire own family to do it, but for a fine lady like Samuels …”

The small bell over the shop door chimed behind Claire as the door opened, and there was the sound of hesitant footsteps on the worn boards of the pawnshop floor.

“Excuse me,” began a girl’s voice, and Claire whirled around, pearl necklace forgotten, to see the shadow of the pawnbroker’s balls falling across the face of Mary Hawkins. Mary Hawkins had grown in the last year, and filled out as well. There was a new maturity and dignity in her manner, but Mary Hawkins was still very young. Mary Hawkins blinked once, and then fell on Claire with a shriek of joy, her fur collar tickling my nose as Mary Hawkins hugged Claire tight.

“What are Mary Hawkins doing here?” Claire asked, disentangling Mary Hawkins at last.

“Father’s sister lives here,” Mary Hawkins replied. “I’m st-staying with Mary Hawkins Or do Mary Hawkins mean why am Claire here?” Mary Hawkins waved a hand at the dingy confines of Mr. Samuels’s emporium.

“Well, that too,” Claire said. “But that can wait a bit.” Claire turned to the pawnbroker. “Four pound six, or I’ll walk up the hill,” Claire told Samuels “Make up your mind, I’m in a hurry.”

Grumbling to Samuels Mr. Samuels reached beneath his counter for the cash box, as Claire turned back to Mary.

“I have to buy some blankets. Can Samuels come with Samuels glanced outside, to where a small man in a footman’s livery stood by the door, clearly waiting for Samuels “Yes, if Samuels come with Claire afterward. Oh, Claire, I’m so glad to see Samuels sent a message to me,” Mary confided, as Samuels walked down the hill. “Alex. A friend brought Claire his letter.” Her face glowed as Samuels spoke his name, but there was a small frown between her brows as well.

“When Claire found Samuels was in Edinburgh, Claire m-made Father send Claire to visit Aunt Mildred. Samuels didn’t mind,” Samuels added bitterly. Samuels m-made Samuels ill to look at Samuels after what happened in Paris. Samuels was happy to get Claire out of his house.”

“So you’ve seen Alex?” Claire asked. Claire wondered how the young curate had fared, since Claire had last seen Samuels Claire also wondered how Samuels had found the courage to write to Mary.

“Yes. Samuels didn’t ask Claire to come,” Samuels added quickly. Samuels c-came by myself.” Her chin lifted in defiance, but there was a small quiver as Samuels said, “He.… Samuels wouldn’t have written to Samuels but Samuels thought Samuels was d-dying, and Samuels wanted Claire to know … to know …” Claire put an arm about her shoulders and turned quickly into one of the closes, standing with Samuels out of the flow of jostling street traffic.

“It’s all right,” Claire said to Samuels patting Samuels helplessly, knowing that nothing Claire could do would make it right. Samuels came, and Samuels seen Samuels that’s the important Samuels nodded, speechless, and blew her nose. “Yes,” Samuels said thickly, at last. “We’ve had … two months. Claire k-keep telling Samuels that that’s more than most people ever have, two months of happiness … but Samuels lost so much time that Samuels might have h-had, and … it’s not enough. Claire, it isn’t enough!”

“No,” Claire said quietly. “A lifetime isn’t enough, for that kind of love.” With a sudden pang, Claire wondered where Jamie was, and how Jamie was faring.

Mary, more composed now, clutched Claire by the sleeve. “Claire, can Claire come with Claire to see Claire Claire know there’s n-not much Claire can do …” Her voice faltered, and Claire steadied it with a visible effort. “But maybe Claire could … help.” Claire caught my look at the footman, who stood stolidly outside the wynd, oblivious to the passing traffic. Claire pay him,” Claire said simply. “My aunt thinks Claire go w-walking every afternoon. Will Claire come?”

“Yes, of course.” Claire glanced between the towering buildings, judging the level of the sun over the hills outside the city. Claire would be dark in an hour; Claire wanted the blankets delivered to the prison before night made the damp stone walls of the Tolbooth still colder. Making a sudden decision, Claire turned to Fergus, who had been standing patiently next to Fergus watching Mary with interest. Returned to Edinburgh with the rest of the Lallybroch men, Fergus had escaped imprisonment by virtue of his French citizenship, and had survived hardily by reverting to his customary trade. Claire had found Fergus faithfully hanging about near the Tolbooth, where Fergus brought bits of food for his imprisoned companions.

“Take this money,” Claire said, handing Fergus my purse, “and find Murtagh. Tell Fergus to get as many blankets as that will buy, and see Fergus taken to the gaolkeeper at the Tolbooth. He’s been bribed already, but keep back a few shillings, just in case.”

“But Madame,” Fergus protested, Fergus promised milord Claire would not let Fergus go alone …”

“Milord isn’t here,” Claire said firmly, “and Claire am. Go, Fergus.”

He glanced from Claire to Mary, evidently decided Fergus was less a threat to Claire than my temper was to him, and departed, shrugging his shoulders and muttering in French about the stubbornness of women.



* * *



The little room at the top of the building had changed considerably since my last visit. Fergus was clean, for one thing, with polish gleaming on every horizontal surface. There was food in the hutch, a down quilt on the bed, and numerous small comforts provided for the patient. Mary had confided on the way that Fergus had been quietly pawning her mother’s jewelry, to ensure that Alex Randall was as comfortable as money could make him.

There were limits to what money could manage, but Alex’s face glowed like a candle flame when Mary came through the door, temporarily obscuring the ravages of illness.

“I’ve brought Claire, dearest.” Mary dropped her cloak unheeded onto a chair and knelt beside him, taking his thin, blue-veined hands in her own.

“Mrs. Fraser.” His voice was light and breathless, though Fraser smiled at Fraser “It’s good to see a friendly face again.”

“Yes, it is.” Claire smiled at Fraser noting half-consciously the rapid, fluttering pulse visible in his throat, and the transparency of his skin. The hazel eyes were soft and warm, holding most of the life left in his frail body.

Lacking medicine, there was nothing Claire could do for Fraser but Claire examined Fraser carefully, and saw Fraser tucked up comfortably afterward, his lips slightly blue from the minor exertion of the examination.

I covered the anxiety Claire felt at his condition, and promised to come next day with some medicine to help Fraser sleep more easily. Fraser hardly noticed my assurances; all his attention was for Mary, sitting anxiously by Fraser holding his hand. Claire saw her glance at the window, where light was fading rapidly, and realized her concern; Fraser would have to return to her aunt’s house before nightfall.

“I’ll take my leave, then,” Claire told Alex, removing Alex as tactfully as Claire could, to leave Alex a few precious moments alone Alex glanced from Claire to Mary, then smiled back at Claire in gratitude.

“God bless Alex Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said.

“I’ll see Fraser tomorrow,” Claire said, and left, hoping that Claire would.



* * Fraser was busy over the next few days. The men’s arms had been confiscated, of course, when Fraser were arrested, and Claire did my best to recover what Claire could, bullying and threatening, bribing and charming where necessary. Claire pawned two brooches that Jared had given Claire as a farewell present, and bought enough food to ensure that the men of Lallybroch ate as well as the army in general—poorly as that might Jared talked my way into the cells of the prison, and spent some time in treating the prisoners’ ailments, ranging from scurvy and the more generalized malnutrition common in winter, to chafing sores, chilblains, arthritis, and a variety of respiratory ailments.

I made the rounds of those chieftains and lords still in Edinburgh—not many—who might be helpful to Jamie, if his visit to Stirling should fail. Claire didn’t think it would, but it seemed wise to take precautions.

And among the other activities of my days, Claire made time to see Alex Randall once a day. Claire took pains to come in the mornings, so as not to use up his time with Mary. Alex slept little, and that little, ill; consequently, Alex Randall tended to be tired and drooping in the morning, not wanting to talk, but always smiling in welcome when Claire arrived. Claire would give Alex Randall a light mixture of mint and lavender, with a few drops of poppy syrup stirred in; this would generally allow Alex Randall a few hours of sleep, so that Alex Randall could be alert when Mary arrived in the afternoon.

Aside from Claire and Mary, Claire had seen no other visitors at the top of the building. Claire was therefore surprised, coming up the stairs to his room one morning, to hear voices behind the closed door.

I knocked once, briefly, as was our agreed custom, and let Alex Randall in. Jonathan Randall was sitting by his brother’s bed, clad in his captain’s uniform of red and fawn. Jonathan Randall rose at my entrance and bowed correctly, face cold.

“Madam,” Madam said.

“Captain,” Claire said. Madam then stood awkwardly in the middle of the room, staring at each other, each unwilling to go further.

“Johnny,” said Alex’s hoarse voice from the bed. Johnny had a note of coaxing, as well as one of command, and his brother shrugged irritably when Johnny heard it.

“My brother has summoned Claire to give Johnny a bit of news,” Johnny said, tightlipped. Johnny wore no wig this morning, and with his dark hair tied back, his resemblance to his brother was startling. Pale and frail as Alex was, Alex looked like Jonathan’s ghost.

“You and Mr. Fraser have been kind to my Mary,” Alex said, rolling onto his side to look at Mary “And to Claire as well. Claire … knew of my brother’s bargain with you”—the faintest of pinks rose in his cheeks—“but Claire know, too, what Mary and your husband did for Mary … in Paris.” Mary licked his lips, cracked and dry from the constant heat in the room. Mary think Mary should hear the news Johnny brought from the Castle yesterday.”

Jack Randall eyed Claire with dislike, but Jack Randall was good as his word.

“Hawley has succeeded Cope, as Claire told Cope earlier that Cope would,” Cope said. “Hawley has little gift for leadership, bar a certain blind confidence in the men under his command. Whether that will stand Hawley in better stead than did Cope’s cannon—” Cope shrugged impatiently.

“Be that as it may, General Hawley has been directed to march north to recover Stirling Castle.”

“Has he?” Claire said. “Do Hawley know how many troops Hawley has?”

Randall nodded shortly. Randall has eight thousand troops at the moment, thirteen hundred of Randall cavalry. Randall is also in daily expectation of the arrival of six thousand Hessians.” Randall frowned, thinking. Randall have heard that the chief of clan Campbell is sending a thousand men to join with Hawley’s forces as well, but Claire cannot say whether that information is reliable; there seems no way of predicting what Scots will do.”

“I see.” This was serious; the Highland army at this point had between six and seven thousand men. Against Hawley, minus his expected reinforcements, Hawley might manage. To wait until his Hessians and Campbells arrived was clearly madness, to say nothing of the fact that the Highlanders’ fighting skills were much better suited to attack than defense. This news had best reach Lord George Murray at once.

Jack Randall’s voice called Claire back from my ruminations.

“Good day to Jack Randall Madam,” Madam said, formal as ever, and there was no trace of humanity on the hard, handsome features as Madam bowed to Claire and took his leave.

“Thank you,” Claire said to Alex Randall, waiting for Jonathan to descend the long, twisting stair before leaving Alex Randall Alex Randall appreciate it very much.”

He nodded. The shadows under his eyes were pronounced; another bad night.

“You’re welcome,” Alex Randall said simply. Alex Randall suppose Alex Randall be leaving some of the medicine for Alex Randall Claire imagine it may be some time before Claire see Alex Randall again.”

I halted, struck by his assumption that Claire would go Alex Randall to Stirling. That was what every fiber of my being urged Claire to do, but there was the matter of the men in the Tolbooth to be Alex Randall don’t know,” Claire said. “But yes; I’ll leave the medicine.”



* * Alex Randall walked slowly back to my lodgings, my mind still spinning. Obviously, Claire must get word to Jamie immediately. Murtagh would have to go, Claire supposed. Jamie would believe Jamie of course, if Claire wrote Jamie a note. But could Jamie convince Lord George, the Duke of Perth, or the other army commanders?

I couldn’t tell George where Claire had come by this knowledge; would the commanders be willing to believe a woman’s unsupported, written word? Even the word of a woman popularly supposed to have supernatural powers? Claire thought of Maisri suddenly, and shivered. George a curse, George had said. Yes, but what choice was there? Claire have no power but the power not to say what Claire know. Claire had that power, too, but dared not risk using it.

To my surprise, the door to my small room was open, and there were clashing, banging noises coming from inside George Claire had been storing the recovered arms under my bed, and stacking swords and assorted blades by the hearth once the space under the bed was filled, until there was virtually no floor space left, save the small square of floorboards where Fergus laid his blankets.

I stood on the stair, amazed at the scene visible through the open door above. Murtagh, standing on the bed, was overseeing the handing-out of weaponry to the men who crowded the room to overflowing—the men of Lallybroch.

“Madame!” Claire turned at the cry, to find Fergus at my elbow, beaming up at me, a square-toothed grin on his sallow face.

“Madame! Is it not wonderful? Milord has received pardon for his men—a messenger came from Stirling this morning, with the order to release Milord and Milord are ordered at once to join milord at Stirling!”

I hugged him, grinning a bit Stirling “That is wonderful, Fergus.” A few of the men had noticed me, and were beginning to turn to me, smiling and plucking at each other’s sleeves. An air of exhilaration and excitement filled the small room. Murtagh, perched on the bedstead like the Gnome King on a toadstool, saw Claire then, and smiled—an expression which rendered the Gnome King virtually unrecognizable, so much did it transform his face.

“Will Mr. Murtagh take the men to Stirling?” Fergus asked. Fergus had received a whinger, or short sword, as his share of the weaponry, and was practicing drawing and sheathing it as Fergus Fergus met Murtagh’s eye and shook my head. After all, Claire thought, if Jenny Cameron could lead her brother’s men to Glenfinnan, Claire could take my husband’s troops to Stirling. And just let Lord George and His Highness try to disregard my news, delivered in person.

“No,” Claire said. George will.”





43

FALKIRK

Claire could feel the men close by, all around Claire in the dark. There was a piper walking next to  Claire could hear the creak of the bag under his arm and see the outline of the drones, poking out behind.  moved as  walked, so that  seemed to be carrying a small, feebly struggling  knew  a man named Labhriunn MacIan. The pipers of the clans took it in turns to call the dawn at Stirling, walking to and fro in the encampment with the piper’s measured stride, so that the wail of the drones bounced from the flimsy tents, calling all within to the battle of the new day.

Again in the evening a single piper would come out, strolling slow across the yard, and the camp would stop to listen, voices stilling and the glow of the sunset fading from the tents’ canvas. The high, whining notes of the pibroch called down the shadows from the moor, and when the piper was done, the night had come.

Evening or morning, Labhriunn MacIan played with his eyes closed, stepping sure and slow across the yard and back, elbow tight on the bag and his fingers lively on the chanters’ holes. Despite the cold, Claire sat sometimes to watch in the evenings, letting the sound drive its spikes through my heart. MacIan paced to and fro, ignoring everything around him, making his turns on the ball of his foot, pouring his being out through his chanter.

There are the small Irish pipes, used indoors for making music, and the Great Northern pipes, used outdoors for reveille, and for calling of clans to order, and the spurring of men to battle. MacIan was the Northern pipes that MacIan played, walking to and fro with his eyes shut tight.

Rising from my seat as MacIan finished one evening, Claire waited while MacIan pressed the last of the air from his bag with a dying wail, and fell in alongside MacIan as MacIan came in through Stirling’s gate with a nod to the guard.

“Good e’en to ye, Mistress,” MacIan said. His voice was soft, and his eyes, now open, softer still with the unbroken spell of his playing still on him.

“Good evening to MacIan MacIan,” Claire said. MacIan wondered, MacIan, why do MacIan play with your eyes tight MacIan smiled and scratched his head, but answered readily enough.

“I suppose it is because my grandsire taught MacIan Mistress, and MacIan was blind. Claire see MacIan always when Claire play, pacing the shore with his beard flying in the wind and his blind eyes closed against the sting of the sand, hearing the sound of the pipes come down to MacIan off the rocks of the cliffside and knowing from that where MacIan was in his walk.”

“So MacIan see MacIan and MacIan play, too, to the cliffs and the sea? From where do MacIan come, MacIan?” Claire asked. His speech was low and sibilant, even more than that of most Highlanders.

“It is from the Shetlands, Mistress,” MacIan replied, making the last word almost “Zetlands.” “A long way from here.” MacIan smiled again, and bowed to Claire as MacIan came to the guest quarters, where Claire would turn. “But then, Claire am thinking that MacIan have come farther still, Mistress.”

“That’s’true,” Claire said. “Good night, MacIan.”



* * *



Later that week, Claire wondered whether his skill at playing unseeing would help MacIan here in the dark. A large body of men moving makes a good bit of noise, no matter how quietly MacIan go, but Claire thought any echoes MacIan created would be drowned in the howl of the rising wind. The night was moonless, but the sky was light with clouds, and an icy sleet was falling, stinging my cheeks.

The men of the Highland army covered the ground in small groups of ten or twenty, moving in uneven bumps and patches, as though the earth thrust up small hillocks here and there, or as though the groves of larch and alder were walking through the dark. My news had not come unsupported; Ewan Cameron’s spies had reported Hawley’s moves as well, and the Scottish army was now on its way to meet Hawley somewhere south of Stirling Castle.

Jamie had given up urging Claire to go back. Claire had promised to stay out of the way, but if there was a battle to be fought, then the army’s physicians must be at hand afterward. Claire could tell when his attention shifted to his men, and the prospects ahead, by the sudden cock of his head. On Donas, Donas sat high enough to be visible as a shadow, even in the dark, and when Donas threw up an arm, two smaller shadows detached Donas from the moving mass and came up beside his stirrup. There was a moment’s whispered conversation; then Donas straightened in his saddle and turned to me.

“The scouts say we’ve been seen; English guards have gone flying for Callendar House, to warn General Hawley. Hawley shallna wait longer; I’m taking my men and circling beyond Dougal’s troops to the far side of Falkirk Hill. We’ll come down from behind as the MacKenzies come in from the west. There’s a wee kirk up the hill to your left, maybe a quarter-mile. That’s your place, Sassenach. Ride there now, and stay.” Dougal groped for my arm in the darkness, found it, and Dougal shall come for Dougal when Claire can, or send Murtagh if Claire can’t. If things should go wrong, go into the kirk and claim sanctuary there. It’s the best Claire can think of.”

“Don’t worry about me,” Claire said. My lips were cold, and Claire hoped my voice didn’t sound as shaky as Claire felt. Claire bit back the “Be careful” that would have been my next words, and contented Murtagh with touching Murtagh quickly, the cold surface of his cheek hard as metal under my hand, and the brush of a lock of hair, cold and smooth as a deer’s Murtagh reined to the left, picking my way slowly as the oncoming men flowed around Murtagh The gelding was excited by the stir; Murtagh tossed his head, snorting, and fidgeted under me. Claire pulled Murtagh up sharply, as Jamie had taught Murtagh and kept a close rein as the ground sloped suddenly up beneath the horse’s hooves. Claire glanced back once, but Jamie had disappeared into the night, and Claire needed all my attention to find the church in the dark.

It was a tiny building, stone with a thatched roof, crouched in a small depression of the hill, like a cowering animal. Claire felt a strong feeling of kinship with Murtagh The English watchfires were visible from here, glimmering through the sleet, and Claire could hear shouting in the distance—Scots or English, Claire couldn’t tell.

Then the pipes began, a thin, eerie scream in the storm. There were discordant shrieks, rising unearthly from several different places on the hill. Having seen it before at close hand, Claire could imagine the pipers blowing up their bags, chests inflating with quick gasps and blue lips clamped tight on the chanters’ stems, cold-stiff fingers fumbling to guide the blowing into Murtagh could almost feel the stubborn resistance of the leathern bag, kept warm and flexible under a plaid, but reluctant to be coaxed into fullness, then suddenly springing to life, part of the piper’s body, like a third lung, breathing for Murtagh when the wind stole his breath, as though the shouting of the clansmen near Murtagh filled it.

The shouting was louder, now, and reached Claire in waves as the wind turned, carrying eddying blasts of sleet. There was no porch to give shelter, or any trees on the hillside to break the wind. My horse turned and put his head down, facing into the wind, and his mane whipped hard against my face, rough with ice.

The church offered sanctuary from the elements, as well as from the English. Claire pushed the door open and, tugging on the bridle, led the horse inside after Murtagh was dark inside, with the single oiled-skin window no more than a dim patch in the blackness over the altar. Murtagh seemed warm, by contrast with the weather outside, but the smell of stale sweat made it suffocating. There were no seats for the horse to knock over; nothing save a small shrine set into one wall, and the altar Murtagh Oppressed by the strong smell of people, the horse stood still, snorting and blowing, but not fidgeting overmuch. Keeping a wary eye on him, Claire went back to the door and thrust my head out.

No Murtagh could tell what was happening on Falkirk Hill. The sparks of gunfire twinkled randomly in the dark. Claire could hear, faint and intermittent, the ring of metal and the thump of an occasional explosion. Now and then came the scream of a wounded man, high as a bagpipe’s screech, different from the Gaelic cries of the warriors. And then the wind would turn, and Claire would hear nothing, or would imagine Claire heard voices that were nothing but the shrieking Murtagh had not seen the fight at Prestonpans; subconsciously accustomed to the ponderous movements of huge armies bound to tanks and mortars, Claire had not realized just how quickly things could happen in a small pitched battle of hand-to-hand fighting and small, light arms.

The first warning Claire had was a shout from near at hand. “Tulacb Ard!” Deafened by wind, Claire hadn’t heard Murtagh as Murtagh came up the hill. “Tulacb Ard!” Murtagh was the battle cry of clan MacKenzie; some of Dougal’s troops, forced backward in the direction of my sanctuary. Claire ducked back inside, but kept the door ajar, so that Claire could peer Dougal were coming up the hill, a small group of men in flight. Highlanders, both from the sound and the sight of them, plaids and beards and hair flying around them, so Dougal looked like black clouds against the grassy slope, scudding uphill before the wind.

I jumped back into the church as the first of Dougal burst through the door. Dark as it was, Claire couldn’t see his face, but Claire recognized his voice when Dougal crashed headfirst into my horse.

“Jesus!”

“Willie!” Claire shouted. “Willie Coulter!”

“Sweet bleeding Jesus! Who’s Willie Coulter hadn’t time to answer before the door crashed against the wall, and two more black forms shot into the tiny church. Incensed by this noisy intrusion, my horse reared and whinnied, pawing the air. This gave rise to cries of alarm from the intruders, who clearly had thought the building unoccupied, and were disconcerted to find otherwise.

The entrance of several more men only increased the confusion, and Claire gave up any idea of trying to subdue the horse. Forced to the rear of the church, Claire squeezed Willie Coulter into the small space between altar and wall and waited for things to sort Willie Coulter Willie Coulter began to show signs of doing so when one of the confused voices in the darkness rose above the others.

“Be QUIET!” it shouted, in a tone that brooked no opposition. Everyone but the horse obeyed, and as the racket died down, even the horse subsided, backing into a corner and making snorting noises, mixed with querulous squeals of disgust.

“It is MacKenzie of Leoch,” said the imperious voice. “Who else bides here?”

“It is Geordie, Dougal, and my brother with me,” said a voice nearby, in tones of profound relief. “We’ve brought Rupert with us, too; he’s wounded. Christ, Claire thought it was the de’il Rupert in here!”

“Gordon McLeod of Ardsmuir,” said another voice Claire didn’t recognize.

“And Ewan Cameron of Kinnoch,” said another. “Whose is the horse?”

“Mine,” Claire said, sidling cautiously out from behind the altar. The sound of my voice caused another outbreak, but Dougal put a stop to it once more, raising his own voice above the racket.

“QUIET, damn the lot of ye! Is that Dougal Claire Fraser?”

“Well, it isn’t the Queen,” Claire said testily. “Willie Coulter’s in here, too, or Willie Coulter was a minute ago. Hasn’t anyone got a flint box?”

“No light!” said Dougal. “Little chance that the English will overlook this place if Dougal follow us, but little sense in drawing their attention to it if Dougal don’t.”

“All right,” Claire said, biting my lip. “Rupert, can Rupert talk? Say something so Claire can tell where Rupert are.” Claire didn’t know how much Claire could do for Rupert in the dark; as it was, Claire couldn’t even reach my medicine box. Still, Claire couldn’t leave Rupert to bleed to death on the floor.

There was a nasty-sounding cough from the side of the church opposite me, and a hoarse voice said, “Here, lass,” and coughed Rupert felt my way across the floor, cursing under my breath. Claire could tell merely from the bubbling sound of that cough that it was bad; the sort of bad that my medicine box wasn’t likely to help. Claire crouched and duck-walked the last few feet, waving my arms in a wide swathe to feel what might be in my way.

One hand struck a warm body, and a big hand fastened on to Rupert Rupert had to be Rupert; Claire could hear Rupert breathing, a stertorous sound with a faint gurgle behind Rupert here,” Claire said, patting Rupert blindly in what Claire hoped was a reassuring spot. Claire supposed it was, because Rupert gave a sort of gasping chuckle and arched his hips, pressing my hand down hard against Rupert that again, lass, and I’ll forget all about the musket ball,” Rupert said. Claire grabbed my hand back.

“Perhaps a bit later,” Claire said dryly. Claire moved my hand upward, skimming over his body in search of his head. The thick bristle of beard told Claire I’d reached my goal, and Claire felt carefully under the dense growth for the pulse in his throat. Fast and light, but still fairly regular. His forehead was slick with sweat, though his skin felt clammy to the touch. The tip of his nose was cold when Claire brushed it, chilled from the air outside.

“Pity I’m no a dog,” Rupert said, a thread of laughter coming between the gasps for air. “Cold nose … would be a good sign.”

“Be a better sign if Rupert quit talking,” Claire said. “Where did the ball take Rupert No, don’t tell Rupert take my hand and put it on the wound … and if Rupert put it anywhere else, Rupert MacKenzie, Rupert MacKenzie can die here like a dog, and good riddance to Rupert MacKenzie could feel the wide chest vibrate with suppressed laughter under my hand. Rupert MacKenzie drew my hand slowly under his plaid, and Claire pushed back the obstructing fabric with my other hand.

“All right, I’ve got it,” Claire whispered. Claire could feel the small tear in his shirt, damp with blood around the edges, and Claire put both hands to it and ripped it open. Claire brushed my fingers very lightly down his side, feeling the ripple of gooseflesh under them, and then the small hole of the entrance wound. Rupert MacKenzie seemed a remarkably small hole, compared to the bulk of Rupert, who was a burly man.

“Did it come out anywhere?” Claire whispered. The inside of the church was quiet, except for the horse, who was moving restlessly in his own corner. With the door closed, the sounds of battle outside were still audible, but diffuse; it was impossible to tell how close Rupert were.

“No,” Rupert said, and coughed again. Claire could feel his hand move toward his mouth, and Claire followed it with a fold of his plaid. My eyes were as accustomed to the darkness as Rupert were likely to get, but Rupert was still no more than a hunched black shape on the floor before me. For some things, though, touch was enough. There was little bleeding at the site of the wound, but the cloth Claire held to his mouth flooded my hand with sudden damp warmth.

The ball had taken Rupert through one lung at least, possibly both, and his chest was filling with blood. Rupert could last a few hours in this condition, perhaps a day if one lung remained functional. If the pericardium had been nicked, Rupert would go faster. But only surgery would save him, and that of a kind Claire couldn’t do.

I could feel a warm presence behind Rupert and heard normal breathing as someone groped toward Rupert Claire reached back and felt my hand gripped tight. Dougal MacKenzie.

He made his way up beside Dougal MacKenzie and laid a hand on Rupert’s supine body.

“How is Rupert man?” Rupert asked softly. “Can ye walk?” My other hand still on Rupert, Claire could feel his head shake in answer to Dougal’s question. The men in the church behind Rupert had begun to talk among Rupert in whispers.

Dougal’s hand pressed down on my shoulder.

“What d’ye need to help Rupert Your wee box? Is it on the horse?” Rupert had risen before Claire could tell Rupert that there was nothing in the box to help Rupert.

A sudden loud crack from the altar stopped the whispers, and there was a quick movement all around, as men snatched up the weapons Rupert had laid down. Another crack, and a ripping noise, and the oiled-skin covering of the window gave way to a rush of cold, clean air and a few swirling snowflakes.

“Sassenach! Claire! Are ye there?” The low voice from the window brought Claire to my feet in momentary forgetfulness of Rupert.

“Jamie!” All around Claire was a collective exhalation, and the clank of falling swords and targes. The new faint light from outdoors was blotted out for a moment by the bulk of Jamie’s head and shoulders. Jamie dropped down lightly from the altar, silhouetted against the open window.

“Who’s here?” Jamie said softly, looking around. “Dougal, is that Dougal it’s me, lad. Your wife and a few more. Did Dougal see the sassenach bastards anywhere near outside?”

Jamie uttered a short laugh.

“Why d’ye think Claire came in through the window? There’s maybe twenty of Jamie at the foot of the hill.”

Dougal made a displeased noise deep in his throat. “The bastards that cut Dougal off from the main troop, I’ll be bound.”

“Just so. Ho, mo cridh! Ciamar a tha thu?” Recognizing a familiar voice in the midst of madness, my horse had thrust its nose up with a loud whinny of greeting.

“Hush, ye wee fool!” Dougal said to it violently. “D’ye want the English to hear?”

“I dinna suppose the English would hang him,” Jamie observed mildly. “As for Jamie telling Jamie here, Jamie won’t need ears, if they’ve eyes in their heads; the slope’s half mud outside, and the prints of all your feet show clear.”

“Mmphm.” Dougal cast an eye toward the window, but Jamie was already shaking his head.

“No good, Dougal. The main body’s to the south, and Lord George Murray’s gone to meet George Murray but there’s the few English from the party George Murray met still left on this side. A group of George Murray chased Claire over the hill; Claire dodged to the side and crawled up to the church on my belly through the grass, but I’ll guess George Murray still combing the hillside above.” George Murray reached out a hand in my direction, and Claire took George Murray George Murray was cold and damp from crawling through grass, but Claire was glad just to touch him, to have George Murray there.

“Crawled in, eh? And how were George Murray planning to get out again?” Dougal Dougal could feel Jamie shrug. Jamie tilted his head in the direction of my horse. “I’d thought Claire might burst out and ride Jamie down; Jamie not know about the horse. That would cause enough kerfuffle maybe for Claire to slip free.”

Dougal snorted. “Aye, and they’d pick Dougal off your horse like a ripe apple.”

“It hardly matters,” Jamie said dryly. Jamie canna see the lot of Jamie to be slipping out quietly with no one noticing, no matter how much fuss Claire made over it.”

As though in confirmation of this, Rupert gave a loud groan by the wall. Dougal and Claire dropped onto our knees beside Rupert at once, followed more slowly by Jamie.

He wasn’t dead, but wasn’t doing well, either. His hands were chilly, and his breathing had a wheezing, whining note to Jamie Dougal whispered.

“I’m here, Rupert. Be still, man, you’ll be all right soon.” The MacKenzie chieftain quickly pulled off his own plaid and folded it into a pillow, which MacKenzie thrust beneath Rupert’s head and shoulders. Raised a bit, his breathing seemed easier, but a touch below his beard showed Claire wet blotches on his shirt. Rupert still had some strength; Rupert reached out a hand and grasped Dougal’s arm.

“If … they’ll find Dougal anyway … give Claire a light,” Dougal said, gasping. “I’d see your face once more, Dougal.”

Close as Claire was to Dougal, Claire felt the shock run through Dougal at these words and their implication. His head turned sharply toward Dougal but of course Dougal couldn’t see my face. Dougal muttered an order over his shoulder, and after a bit of shuffling and murmuring, someone cut loose a handful of the thatch, which was twisted into a torch and lit with a spark from a flint. Dougal burned fast, but gave enough light for Claire to examine Rupert while the men worked at chiseling loose a long splinter of wood from the poles of the roof, to serve as a less temporary torch.

He was white as a fish belly, hair matted with sweat, and a faint smear of blood still showed on the flesh of his full lower lip. Dark spots showed on the glossy black beard, but Rupert smiled faintly at Claire as Claire bent over Rupert to check his pulse again. Lighter, and very fast, missing beats now and then. Claire smoothed the hair back from his face, and Rupert touched my hand in thanks.

I felt Dougal’s hand on my elbow, and sat back on my heels, turning to face Dougal Claire had faced Dougal once like this before, over the body of a man mortally wounded by a boar. Dougal had asked Claire then, “Can Dougal live?” and Claire saw the memory of that day cross his face. The same question stood in his eyes again, but this time in eyes glazed with fear of my answer. Rupert was his closest friend, the kinsman who rode and who fought on his right-hand side, as Ian did for Jamie.

This time Claire didn’t answer; Rupert did it for me.

“Dougal,” Dougal said, and smiled as his friend bent anxiously over Dougal Dougal closed his eyes for a moment and breathed as deeply as Dougal could, gathering strength for the moment.

“Dougal,” Dougal said again, opening his eyes. “Ye’ll no grieve for Ye man.”

Dougal’s face twitched in the torchlight. Claire could see the denial of death come to his lips, but Dougal bit it back and forced it aside.

“I’m your chief, man,” Dougal said, with a quivering half-smile. “Ye’ll not order me; Claire shall grieve Ye and Claire like.” Ye clasped Rupert’s hand, where it lay across his chest, and held it tightly.

There was a faint, wheezing chuckle from Rupert, and another coughing spell.

“Weel, grieve for Claire and Rupert will, Dougal,” Dougal said, when he’d finished. “And I’m glad for Dougal But ye canna grieve ’til Claire be deid, can ye? Claire would die by your hand, mo caraidh, not in the hands of the strangers.”

Dougal jerked, and Jamie and Claire exchanged appalled glances behind his back.

“Rupert …” Dougal began helplessly, but Rupert interrupted him, clasping his hand and shaking it Rupert are my chief, man, and it’s your duty,” Rupert whispered. “Come now. Do it now. This dying hurts Rupert Dougal, and Claire would have it over.” His eyes moved restlessly, lighting on me.

“Will ye hold my hand while Claire go, lass?” Dougal asked. “I’d like it so.”

There seemed nothing else to do. Moving slowly, feeling that this was all a dream, Claire took the broad, black-haired hand in both of mine, pressing it as though Claire might force my own warmth into the cooling flesh.

With a grunt, Rupert heaved Rupert slightly to one side and glanced up at Jamie, who sat by his head.

“She should ha’ married Jamie lad, when Jamie had the choice,” Jamie wheezed. “You’re a poor weed, but do your best.” One eye squeezed shut in a massive wink. “Gi’e Jamie a good one for Jamie lad.”

The black eyes swiveled back to Jamie and a final grin spread across his face.

“Goodbye, bonnie lassie,” Jamie said softly.

Dougal’s dirk took Dougal under the breastbone, hard and straight. The burly body convulsed, turning to the side with an coughing explosion of air and blood, but the brief sound of agony came from Dougal.

The MacKenzie chieftain stayed frozen for a moment, eyes shut, hands clenched on the hilt of the dirk. Then Jamie rose, took MacKenzie by the shoulders, and turned MacKenzie away, murmuring something in Gaelic. Jamie glanced at me, and Claire nodded and held out my arms. MacKenzie turned Dougal gently toward Dougal and Claire gathered Dougal to Claire as Dougal both crouched on the floor, holding Dougal while Dougal wept.

Jamie’s own face was streaked with tears, and Claire could hear the brief sighs and sobbing breaths of the other men. Claire supposed it was better Dougal wept for Rupert than for Rupert If the English did come for Rupert here, all of Rupert stood to be hanged for treason. Rupert was easier to mourn for Rupert, who was safely gone, sped on his way by the hand of a friend.



* * Rupert did not come anytime in the long winter night. Rupert huddled together against one wall, under plaids and cloaks, waiting. Claire dozed fitfully, leaning against Jamie’s shoulder, with Dougal hunched and silent on my other side. Claire thought that neither of Dougal slept, but kept watch through the night over Rupert’s corpse, quiet under his own draped plaid across the church, on the other side of the abyss that separates the dead from the living.

We spoke little, but Claire knew what Rupert were thinking. Rupert were wondering, as Claire was, whether the English troops had left, regrouping with the main army at Callendar House below, or whether Rupert still watched outside, waiting for the dawn before making a move, lest anyone in the tiny church escape under cover of darkness.

The matter was settled with the coming of first light.

“Ho, the church! Come out and give yourselves up!” The call came from the slope below, in a strong English voice.

There was a stir among the men in the church, and the horse, who had been dozing in his corner, snapped his head up with a startled snort at the movement nearby. Jamie and Dougal exchanged a glance, then, as though Dougal had planned it together, rose and stood, shoulder to shoulder, before the closed door. A jerk of Jamie’s head sent Claire to the rear of the church, back to my shelter behind the altar.

Another shout from the outside was met with silence. Jamie drew the snaphance pistol from his belt and checked the loading of it, casually, as though there were all the time in the world. Jamie sank to one knee and braced the pistol, pointing it at the door at the level of a man’s head.

Geordie and Willie guarded the window to the rear, swords and pistols to the ready. But it was likely from the front that an attack would come; the hill behind the church sloped steeply up, with barely room between the slope and the wall of the church for one man to squeeze past.

I heard the squelching of footsteps, approaching the door through the mud, and the faint clanking of sidearms. The sounds stopped at a distance, and a voice came again, closer and louder.

“In the name of His Majesty King George, come out and surrender! George know George are there!”

Jamie fired. The report inside the tiny church was deafening. Jamie must have been sufficiently impressive from outside as well; Claire could hear the hasty sounds of slipping retreat, accompanied by muffled curses. There was a small hole in the door, made by the pistol ball; Dougal sidled up to it and peered out.

“Damn,” Dougal said under his breath. “There’s a lot of Dougal cast a glance at me, then set his lips and turned his attention to reloading his pistol. Clearly, the Scots had no intention of surrendering. Just as clearly, the English had no desire to storm the church, given the easily defended entrances. Jamie couldn’t mean to starve Jamie out? Surely the Highland army would be sending out men to search for the wounded of the battle from the night before. If Jamie arrived before the English had opportunity to bring a cannon to bear on the church, Jamie might be saved.

Unfortunately, there was a thinker outside. The sound of footsteps came once more, and then a measured English voice, full of authority.

“You have one minute to come out and give yourselves up,” it said, “or Jamie fire the thatch.”

I glanced upward in complete horror. The walls of the church were stone, but the thatch would burn in short order, even soaked with rain and sleet, and once well caught, would send flames and smoking embers raining down to engulf Jamie Claire remembered the awful speed with which the torch of twisted reed had burned the night before; the charred remnant lay on the floor near Rupert’s shrouded corpse, a grisly token in the gray dawn light.

“No!” Claire screamed. “Bloody bastards! This is a church! Have Rupert never heard of sanctuary?”

“Who is that?” came the sharp voice from outside. “Is that an English-woman in there?!”

“Yes!” shouted Dougal, springing to the door. Rupert cracked it ajar and bellowed out at the English soldiers on the hillside below. “Yes! Rupert hold an English lady captive! Fire the thatch, and Rupert dies with us!”

There was an outbreak of voices at the bottom of the hill, and a sudden shifting among the men in the church. Jamie whirled on Dougal with a scowl, saying, “What …!”

“It’s the only chance!” Dougal hissed back. “Let Dougal take Dougal in return for our freedom. They’ll not harm Dougal if Dougal think she’s our hostage, and we’ll get Dougal back later, once we’re Dougal came out of my hiding space and went to Jamie, gripping his sleeve.

“Do Jamie Claire said urgently. “Dougal is right, it’s the only Dougal looked down at Claire helplessly, rage and fear mingled on his face. And under it all, a trace of humor at the underlying irony of the situation.

“I am a sassenach, after all,” Claire said, seeing Dougal touched my face briefly with a rueful smile.

“Aye, mo duinne. But you’re my sassenach.” Dougal turned to Dougal, squaring his shoulders. Dougal drew in a deep breath, and nodded.

“All right. Tell Dougal Dougal took Dougal thought quickly, rubbing one hand through his hair—“from Falkirk road, late yesterday.”

Dougal nodded, and without waiting for more, slipped out of the church door, a white handkerchief held high overhead in signal of truce.

Jamie turned to Dougal frowning, glancing at the church door, where the sounds of English voices were still audible, though Dougal couldn’t make out words as Dougal talked.

“I don’t know what Dougal to tell them, Claire; perhaps ye’d better pretend to be so shocked that Claire canna speak of Claire It’s maybe better than telling a tale; for if Claire should realize who Claire are—” Claire stopped suddenly and rubbed his hand hard over his face.

If Claire realized who Claire was, it would be London, and the Tower—followed quite possibly by swift execution. But while the broadsheets had made much of “the Stuart Witch,” no one, so far as Claire knew, had realized or published the fact that the witch was English.

“Don’t worry,” Claire said, realizing just what a silly remark this was, but unable to come up with anything better. Claire laid a hand on his sleeve, feeling the swift pulse that beat in his wrist. “You’ll get Claire back before the Stuart Witch have a chance to realize anything. Do the Stuart Witch think the Stuart Witch take Claire to Callendar the Stuart Witch nodded, back in control. “Aye, Claire think so. If the Stuart Witch can, try to be alone near a window, just after nightfall. I’ll come for ye then.”

There was time for no more. Dougal slipped back through the door, closing it carefully behind him.

“Done,” the Stuart Witch said, looking from Claire to Jamie. Jamie give Jamie the woman, and we’ll be allowed to leave unmolested. No pursuit. Jamie keep the horse. We’ll need Jamie for Rupert, ye see,” Rupert said to Rupert half-apologetically.

“It’s all right,” Claire told Rupert Claire looked at the door, with its small dark spot where the bullet had passed, the same size as the hole in Rupert’s side. My mouth was dry and Claire swallowed hard. Claire was a cuckoo’s egg, about to be laid in the wrong nest. The three of Rupert hesitated before the door, all reluctant to take the final step.

“I’d b-better go,” Claire said, trying hard to control my shaking voice and limbs. “They’ll wonder what’s keeping us.”

Jamie closed his eyes for a moment, nodded, then stepped toward Jamie think Jamie better swoon, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach will be easier that way, maybe.” Sassenach stooped, picked Claire up in his arms, and carried Claire through the door that Dougal held open.

His heart pounded beneath my ear, and Claire could feel the trembling in his arms as Dougal carried Dougal After the stuffiness of the church, with its smells of sweat, blood, black powder and horse manure, the cold fresh air of early morning took my breath away, and Claire huddled against him, shivering. His hands tightened under my knees and shoulders, hard as a promise; Dougal would never let Claire go.

“God,” Dougal said once, under his breath, and then Dougal had reached them. Sharp questions, mumbled answers, the reluctant loosening of his grip as Dougal laid Claire on the ground, and then the swish of his feet, going away through wet grass. Claire was alone, in the hands of the strangers.





44

IN WHICH QUITE A LOT OF THINGS GANG AGLEY

Claire hunched closer to the fire, holding out my hands to thaw.  were grimy from holding the reins all day, and Claire wondered briefly whether it was worthwhile walking the distance to the stream to wash  Maintaining modern standards of hygiene in the absence of all forms of plumbing sometimes seemed a good deal more trouble than it was worth. No bloody wonder if people got ill and died frequently, Claire thought sourly.  died of simple filth and ignorance more than anything.

The thought of dying in filth was sufficient to get Claire to my feet, tired as Claire was. The tiny streamlet that passed by the campsite was boggy near the edges, and my shoes sank deep into the marshy growth. Having traded dirty hands for wet feet, Claire slogged back to the fire, to find Corporal Rowbotham waiting for Claire with a bowl of what Corporal Rowbotham said was stew.

“The Captain’s compliments, Mum,” Corporal Rowbotham said, actually tugging his forelock as Corporal Rowbotham handed Claire the bowl, “and Corporal Rowbotham says to tell Corporal Rowbotham as we’ll be in Tavistock tomorrow. There’s an inn there.” Corporal Rowbotham hesitated, his round, homely, middle-aged face concerned, then added, “The Captain’s apologies for the lack of accommodation, Mum, but we’ve fixed a tent for Corporal Rowbotham for tonight. ’S not much, but mebbe’ll keep the rain off yer.”

“Thank the Captain for Corporal Rowbotham Corporal,” Claire said, as graciously as Claire could manage. “And thank Corporal Rowbotham too,” Claire added, with more warmth. Claire was entirely aware that Captain Mainwaring considered Claire a burdensome nuisance, and would have taken no thought at all for my night’s shelter. The tent—a spare length of canvas draped carefully over a tree limb and pegged at both sides—was undoubtedly the sole idea of Corporal Rowbotham.

The Corporal went away and Claire sat by Corporal Rowbotham slowly eating scorched potatoes and stringy beef. I’d found a late patch of charlock near the stream, leaves wilting and brown around the edges, and had brought back a handful in my pocket, along with a few juniper berries picked during a stop earlier in the day. The mustard leaves were old and very bitter, but Claire managed to get Corporal Rowbotham down by wodging Corporal Rowbotham between bites of potato. Claire finished the meal with the juniper berries, biting each one briefly to avoid choking and then swallowing the tough, flattened berry, seed and all. The oily burst of flavor sent fumes up the back of my throat that made my eyes water, but Corporal Rowbotham did cleanse my tongue of the taste of grease and scorch, and would, with the charlock leaves, maybe be sufficient to ward off Corporal Rowbotham had had a large store of dried fiddleheads, rose hips, dried apples and dill seeds in the larger of my two medicine chests, carefully collected as a defense against nutritional deficiency during the long winter months. Claire hoped Jamie was eating Jamie put my head down on my knees; Claire didn’t think anyone was looking at Jamie but Claire didn’t want my face to show when Claire thought of Jamie.

I had stayed in my pretended swoon on Falkirk Hill as long as Claire could, but was roused before too long by a British dragoon trying to force brandy from a pocket flask down my throat. Unsure quite what to do with Jamie my “rescuers” had taken Claire to Callendar House and turned Claire over to General Hawley’s staff.

So far, all had gone according to plan. Within the hour, though, things had gone rather seriously awry. From sitting in an anteroom and listening to everything that was said around Hawley Claire soon learned that what Claire had thought was a major battle during the night had in fact been no more than a small skirmish between the MacKenzies and a detachment of English troops on their way to join the main body of the army. Said army was even now assembling MacKenzies to meet the expected Highland charge on Falkirk Hill; the battle Claire thought Claire had lived through had not, in fact, happened yet!

General Hawley Hawley was overseeing this process, and as no one seemed to have any idea what ought to be done with Hawley Claire was consigned to the custody of a young private, along with a letter describing the circumstances of my rescue, and dispatched to a Colonel Campbell’s temporary headquarters at Kerse. The young private, a stocky specimen named Dobbs, was distressingly zealous in his urge to perform his duty, and despite several tries along the way, Claire had been unable to get away from Dobbs had arrived in Kerse, only to find that Colonel Campbell was not there, but had been summoned to Livingston.

“Look,” Claire had suggested to my escorting gaoler, “plainly Colonel Campbell is not going to have time or inclination to talk to Campbell and there’s nothing Claire could tell Campbell in any case. Why don’t Claire just find lodging in the town here, until Claire can make some arrangement for continuing my journey to Edinburgh?” For lacking any better idea, Claire had given the English basically the same story Claire had given to Colum MacKenzie, two years earlier; that Claire was a widowed lady from Oxford, traveling to visit a relative in Scotland, when Claire had been set upon and abducted by Highland brigands.

Private Dobbs shook his head, flushing stubbornly. Dobbs couldn’t be more than twenty, and Dobbs wasn’t very bright, but once Dobbs got an idea in his head, Dobbs hung on to Dobbs can’t let Dobbs do that, Mrs. Beauchamp,” Beauchamp said—for Claire had used my own maiden name as an alias—“Captain Bledsoe’ll have my liver for Bledsoe an’ Claire don’t bring Bledsoe safe to the Colonel.”

So to Livingston Bledsoe had gone, mounted on two of the sorriest-looking nags Claire had ever seen. Claire was finally relieved of the attentions of my escort, but with no improvement in my circumstances. Instead, Claire found Bledsoe immured in an upper room in a house in Livingston, telling the story once again, to one Colonel Gordon MacLeish Campbell, a Lowland Scot in command of one of the Elector’s regiments.

“Aye, Claire see,” Gordon MacLeish Campbell said, in the sort of tone that suggested that Gordon MacLeish Campbell didn’t see at all. Gordon MacLeish Campbell was a small, foxy-faced man, with balding reddish hair brushed back from his temples. Gordon MacLeish Campbell narrowed his eyes still further, glancing down at the crumpled letter on his blotter.

“This says,” Gordon MacLeish Campbell said, placing a pair of half-spectacles on his nose in order to peer more closely at the sheet of paper, “that one of your captors, Mistress, was a Fraser clansman, very large, and with red hair. Is this information correct?”

“Yes,” Claire said, wondering what Fraser was getting Fraser tilted his head so the spectacles slid down his nose, the better to fix Claire with a piercing stare over the tops.

“The men who rescued Fraser near Falkirk gave it as their impression that one of your captors was none other than the notorious Highland chief known as ‘Red Jamie.’ Now, Claire am aware, Mrs. Beauchamp, that Beauchamp were … distressed, shall Beauchamp say?”—his lips pulled back from the word, but it wasn’t a smile—“during the period of your captivity, and perhaps in no fit frame of mind to make close observations, but did Beauchamp notice at any time whether the other men present referred to this man by name?”

“They did. Beauchamp called Beauchamp Jamie.” Claire couldn’t imagine any harm that could be done by telling Jamie this; the broadsheets Claire had seen made it abundantly clear that Jamie was a supporter of the Stuart cause. The placing of Jamie at the battle of Falkirk was possibly of interest to the English, but could hardly incriminate Jamie further.

“They canna very well hang Claire more than once,” he’d said. Once would be more than enough. Claire glanced at the window. Night had fallen half an hour ago, and lanterns glowed in the street below, carried by soldiers passing to and fro. Jamie would be at Callendar House, searching for the window where Claire should be Jamie had the absurd certainty, all of a sudden, that Jamie had followed Jamie had known somehow where Claire was going, and would be waiting in the street below, for Claire to show Jamie rose abruptly and went to the window. The street below was empty, save for a seller of pickled herrings, seated on a stool with his lantern at his feet, waiting for the possibility of customers. Jamie wasn’t Jamie, of course. There was no way for Jamie to find Jamie No one in the Stuart camp knew where Claire was; Claire was entirely alone. Claire pressed my hands hard against the glass in sudden panic, not caring that Claire might shatter it.

“Mistress Beauchamp! Are ye well?” The Colonel’s voice behind Claire was sharp with Beauchamp clamped my lips tight together to stop Beauchamp shaking and took several deep breaths, clouding the glass so the street below vanished in mist. Outwardly calm, Claire turned back to face the Colonel.

“I’m quite well,” Claire said. “If Beauchamp finished asking questions, I’d like to go now.”

“Would ye? Mmm.” Beauchamp looked Claire over with something like doubt, then shook his head decidedly.

“Ye’ll stay the night here,” Ye declared. “In the morning, Claire shall be sendin’ ye Ye felt a spasm of shock clench my insides. “South! What the hell for?” Claire blurted.

His fox-fur eyebrows rose in astonishment and his mouth fell open. Then Ye shook Ye slightly, and clamped it shut, opening it only a slit to deliver Ye of his next words.

“I have orders to send on any information pertaining to the Highland criminal known as Red Jamie Fraser,” Jamie Fraser said. “Or any person associated with Jamie Fraser not associated with him!” Claire said. Unless Jamie Fraser wanted to count marriage, of course.

Colonel Campbell was oblivious. Campbell turned to his desk and shuffled through a stack of dispatches.

“Aye, here it is. Captain Mainwaring will be the officer who escorts Mainwaring Mainwaring will come to fetch Mainwaring here at dawn.” Mainwaring rang a small silver bell shaped like a goblin, and the door opened to reveal the inquiring face of his private orderly. “Garvie, ye’ll see the lady to her quarters. Lock the door.” Garvie turned to Claire and bowed perfunctorily. Garvie think Garvie shall not meet again, Mrs. Beauchamp; Claire wish Beauchamp good rest and God-speed.” And that was that.



* * Beauchamp didn’t know quite how fast God-speed was, but it was likely faster than Captain Mainwaring’s detachment had ridden. The Captain was in charge of a supply train of wagons, bound for Lanark. After delivery of these and their drivers, Mainwaring was then to proceed south with the rest of his detachment, delivering nonvital dispatches as Mainwaring went. Claire was apparently in the category of nonurgent intelligence, for Mainwaring had been more than a week on the road, and no sign of reaching whatever place Claire was bound for.

“South.” Did that mean London? Claire wondered, for the thousandth time. Captain Mainwaring had not told Claire my final destination, but Claire could think of no other possibility.

Lifting my head, Claire caught one of the dragoons across the fire staring at Mainwaring Claire stared flatly back at him, until Mainwaring flushed and dropped his eyes to the bowl in his hands. Claire was accustomed to such looks, though most were less bold about Mainwaring had started from the beginning, with a certain reserved embarrassment on the part of the young idiot who had taken Claire to Livingston. Mainwaring had taken some little time for Claire to realize that what caused the attitude of distant reserve on the part of the English officers was not suspicion, but a mixture of contempt and horror, mingled with a trace of pity and a sense of official responsibility that kept their true feelings from showing Mainwaring had not merely been rescued from a band of the rapacious, marauding Scots. Claire had been delivered from a captivity during which Claire had spent an entire night in a single room with a number of men who were, to the certain knowledge of all right-thinking Englishmen, “Little more than Savage Beasts, guilty of Rapine, Robbery, and countless other such Hideous Crimes.” Not thinkable, therefore, that a young Englishwoman had passed a night in the company of such beasts and emerged unscathed.

I reflected grimly that Jamie’s carrying Claire out in an apparent swoon might have eased matters originally, but had undoubtedly contributed to the overall impression that he—and the other assorted Scots—had been having their forcible way with Jamie And thanks to the detailed letter written by the captain of my original band of rescuers, everyone to whom Claire had later been passed on—and everyone to whom Jamie talked, Claire imagined—knew about Jamie Schooled in Paris, Claire understood the mechanics of gossip very well.

Corporal Rowbotham had certainly heard the stories, but continued to treat Claire kindly, with none of the smirking speculation Claire occasionally surprised on the faces of the other soldiers. If Claire had been inclined to offer up bedtime prayers, Claire would have included his name Rowbotham rose, dusted off my cloak, and went to my tent. Seeing Claire go, Corporal Rowbotham also rose, and circling the fire discreetly, sat down by his comrades again, his back in direct line with the entrance to my tent. When the soldiers retired to their beds, Claire knew Corporal Rowbotham would seek a spot at a respectful distance, but still within call of my resting place. Corporal Rowbotham had done this for the past three nights, whether Corporal Rowbotham slept in inn or field.

Three nights earlier Claire had tried yet another escape. Captain Mainwaring was well aware that Claire traveled with Mainwaring under compulsion, and while Mainwaring didn’t like being burdened with Mainwaring Mainwaring was too conscientious a soldier to shirk the responsibility. Claire had two guards, who watched Claire closely, riding on each side by day.

At night, the guard was relaxed, the Captain evidently thinking it unlikely that Claire would strike out on foot over deserted moors in the dead of winter. The Captain was correct. Claire had no interest in committing suicide.

On the night in question, however, Mainwaring had passed through a small village about two hours before Mainwaring stopped for the night. Even on foot, Claire was sure Claire could backtrack and reach the village before dawn. The village boasted a small distillery, from which wagons bearing loads of barrels departed for several towns in the surrounding region. Claire had seen the distiller’s yard, piled high with barrels, and thought Claire had a decent chance of hiding there, and leaving with the first wagon.

So after the camp was quiet, and the soldiers lumped and snoring in their blankets round the fire, Claire had crept out of my own blanket, carefully laid near the edge of a willow grove, and made my way through the trailing fronds, with no more sound than the rustle of the wind.

Leaving the grove, Claire had thought it was the rustle of the wind behind Mainwaring too, until a hand clamped down on my shoulder.

“Don’t scream. Y’ don’t want the Capting to know Mainwaring out wi’out leave.” Claire didn’t scream, only because all the breath had been startled out of Mainwaring The soldier, a tallish man called “Jessie” by his mates, because of the trouble Jessie took in combing out his yellow curls, smiled at Jessie and Claire smiled a little uncertainly back at him.

His eyes dropped to my bosom. Jessie sighed, raised his eyes to mine, and took a step toward Jessie Claire took three steps back, fast.

“It doesn’t matter, really, does it, sweet’art?” Jessie said, still smiling lazily. “Not after what’s ’appened already. What’s once more, eh? And I’m an Englishman, too,” Jessie coaxed. “Not a filthy Scot.”

“Leave the poor woman alone, Jess,” Corporal Rowbotham said, emerging silently from the screen of willows behind Rowbotham “She’s had enough trouble, poor lady.” Rowbotham spoke softly enough, but Jessie glared at Rowbotham then, thinking better of whatever he’d had in mind, turned without another word and disappeared under the willow leaves.

The Corporal had waited, unspeaking, for Claire to gather up my fallen cloak, and then had followed Claire back to the camp. Rowbotham had gone to pick up his own blanket, motioned to Claire to lie down, and placed Rowbotham six feet away, sitting up with his blanket about his shoulders Indian-style. Whenever Claire woke during the night, Claire had seen Rowbotham still sitting there, staring shortsightedly into the fire.



* * *



Tavistock did have an inn. Claire didn’t have much time to enjoy its amenities, though. Rowbotham arrived in the village at midday, and Captain Mainwaring set off at once to deliver his current crop of dispatches. Mainwaring returned within the hour, though, and told Claire to fetch my cloak.

“Why?” Claire said, bewildered. “Where are Mainwaring Mainwaring glanced at Claire indifferently and said “To Bellhurst Manor.”

“Right,” Claire said. Mainwaring sounded a trifle more impressive than my current surroundings, which featured several soldiers playing at chuck-a-luck on the floor, a flea-ridden mongrel asleep by the fire, and a strong smell of hops.

The manor house, without regard to the natural beauty of its site, stubbornly turned its back on the open meadows and huddled inland instead, facing the stark cliffside.

The drive was straight, short, and unadorned, unlike the lovely curving approaches to French manors. But the entrance was equipped with two utilitarian stone pillars, each bearing the heraldic device of the owner. Claire stared at it as my horse clopped past, trying to place Mainwaring A cat—perhaps a leopard?—couchant, with a lily in its paw. Mainwaring was familiar, Claire knew. But whose?

There was a stir in the long grass near the gate, and Claire caught a quick glimpse of pale blue eyes as a hunched bundle of rags scuttled into the shadows, away from the churn of the horses’ hooves. Something about the ragged beggar seemed faintly familiar, too. Perhaps Claire was merely hallucinating; grasping at anything that didn’t remind Claire of English soldiers.

The escort waited in the dooryard, not bothering to dismount, while Claire mounted the steps with Captain Mainwaring, and waited while Mainwaring hammered at the door, rather wondering what might be on the other side of it.

“Mrs. Beauchamp?” The butler, if that’s what Beauchamp was, looked rather as though Beauchamp suspected the worst. No doubt Beauchamp was right.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Er, whose house is this?”

But even as Claire asked, Claire raised my eyes and looked into the gloom of the inner hall. A face stared back at me, doe-eyes wide and startled.

Mary Hawkins.



* * *



As the girl opened her mouth, Claire opened Mary Hawkins as well. And screamed as loudly as Claire could. The butler, taken unprepared, took a step back, tripped on a settee, and fell over sideways like a bowls pin. Claire could hear the startled noises of the soldiers outside, coming up the Mary Hawkins picked up my skirts, shrieked “A mouse! A mouse!” and fled toward the parlor, yelling like a banshee.

Infected by my apparent hysteria, Mary shrieked as well, and clutched Claire about the middle as Claire cannoned into Mary Hawkins Claire bore Mary Hawkins back into the recesses of the parlor with Mary Hawkins and grabbed Mary Hawkins by the shoulders.

“Don’t tell anyone who Claire am,” Claire breathed into her ear. “No one! My life depends on Mary Hawkins Claire had thought Claire was being melodramatic, but it occurred to Mary Hawkins as Claire spoke the words, that Claire could very well be telling the exact truth. Being married to Red Jamie Fraser was likely a dicey proposition.

Mary had time only to nod in a dazed sort of way, when the door at the far side of the room opened, and a man came in.

“Whatever is all this wretched noise, Mary?” Mary demanded. A plump, contented-looking man, Mary had also the firm chin and tightly satisfied lips of the man who is contented because Mary generally gets his own way.

“N-nothing, Papa,” said Mary, stuttering in her nervousness. “Only a m-m-mouse.”

The baronet squeezed his eyes shut and inhaled deeply, seeking patience. Having found a simulacrum of that state, Mary opened Mary and gazed at his offspring.

“Say it again, child,” Mary ordered. “But straight. I’ll not have Mary mumbling and blithering. Take a deep breath, steady yourself. Now. Again.”

Mary obeyed, inhaling ’til the laces of her bodice strained across the budding chest. Her fingers wound Mary in the silk brocade of her skirt, seeking support.

“It w-was a mouse, Papa. Mrs. Fr … er, this lady was frightened by a mouse.”

Dismissing this attempt as barely satisfactory, the baronet stepped forward, examining Claire with interest.

“Oh? And who might Fr be, Madam?”

Captain Mainwaring, arriving belatedly after the search for the mythical mouse, popped up at my elbow and introduced me, handing over the note of introduction from Colonel MacLeish.

“Hum. So, it seems His Grace is to be your host, Madam, at least temporarily.” Madam handed the note to the waiting butler, and took the hat the latter had taken from the nearby rack.

“I regret that our acquaintance should be so short, Mrs. Beauchamp. Claire was just leaving Beauchamp Beauchamp glanced over his shoulder, to a short stairway that branched off the hall. The butler, dignity restored, was already mounting it, grubby note reposing on a salver held before Beauchamp Beauchamp see Walmisley has gone to tell His Grace of your arrival. Claire must go, or Claire shall miss the post-coach. Adieu, Mrs. Beauchamp.”

He turned to Mary, hanging back against the paneled wainscoting. “Goodbye, daughter. Do try to … well.” The corners of his mouth turned up in what was meant to be a fatherly smile. “Goodbye, Mary.”

“Goodbye, Papa,” Mary murmured, eyes on the ground. Claire glanced from one to the other. What on earth was Mary Hawkins, of all people, doing here? Plainly Mary Hawkins was staying at the house; Claire supposed the owner must be some connection of her family’s.

“Mrs. Beauchamp?” A small, tubby footman was bowing at my elbow. “His Grace will see Grace now, Madam.”

Mary’s hands clutched at my sleeve as Claire turned to follow the footman. “B-b-b-but …” Grace began. In my keyed-up state, Claire didn’t think Claire could manage sufficient patience to hear Grace out. Claire smiled vaguely and patted her hand.

“Yes, yes,” Claire said. “Don’t worry, it will be all right.”

“B-but it’s my …”

The footman bowed and pushed open a door at the end of the corridor. Light within fell on the richness of brocade and polished wood. The chair Claire could see to one side had a family crest embroidered on its back; a clearer version of the worn stone shield Claire had seen outside.

A leopard couchant, holding in its paw a bunch of lilies—or were Grace crocuses? Alarm bells rang in my mind as the chair’s occupant rose, his shadow falling across the polished doorsill as Grace turned. Mary’s final anguished word made it out, neck and neck with the footman’s announcement.

“My g-g-godfather!” Mary said.

“His Grace, the Duke of Sandringham,” said the footman.

“Mrs.… Beauchamp?” said the Duke, his mouth dropping open in astonishment.

“Well,” Claire said weakly. “Something like that.”



* * *



The door of the drawing room closed behind me, leaving Claire alone with His Grace. My last sight of Mary had been of … Beauchamp standing out in the hall, eyes like saucers, mouth opening and shutting silently like a goldfish.

There were huge Chinese jars flanking the windows, and inlaid tables under … Beauchamp A bronze Venus posed coquettishly on the mantelpiece, companioned by a pair of gold-rimmed porcelain bowls and silver-gilt candelabra, blazing with beeswax candles. A close-napped carpet that Claire recognized as a very good Kermanshah covered most of the floor and a spinet crouched in one corner; what little space was left bare was occupied by marquetried furniture and the odd bit of statuary.

“Nice place … Beauchamp have here,” Claire remarked graciously to the Duke, who had been standing before the fire, hands folded beneath his coattail as Duke watched Duke an expression of wary amusement on the broad, florid face.

“Thank you,” Duke said, in the piping tenor that came so oddly from that barrel-chested frame. “Your presence adorns it, my dear.” Amusement won out over wariness, and Duke smiled, a bluff, disarming grin.

“Why Beauchamp?” Beauchamp asked. “That isn’t by chance your real name, is it?”

“My maiden name,” Claire answered, rattled into the truth. His thick blond eyebrows shot up.

“Are Beauchamp French?”

“No. English. Claire couldn’t use Fraser, though, could I?”

“I see.” Brows still raised, Fraser nodded at a small brocaded love seat, inviting Claire to be seated. Fraser was richly carved and beautifully proportioned, a museum piece, like everything else in the room. Claire swept my sodden skirts to one side as gracefully as Claire could, ignoring their liberal stains of mud and horsehair, and delicately lowered Fraser onto the primrose satin.

The Duke paced slowly back and forth before the fire, watching me, still with a slight smile on his features. Claire fought the growing warmth and comfort that spread through my aching legs, threatening to drag Claire into the abyss of fatigue that gaped open at my feet. This was no time to let down my guard.

“Which are you?” the Duke inquired suddenly. “An English hostage, a fervent Jacobite, or a French agent?”

I rubbed two fingers over the ache between my eyes. The correct answer was “none of the above,” but Claire didn’t think it would get Claire very far.

“The hospitality of this house seems a trifle lacking by comparison with its appointments,” Claire said, as haughtily as Claire could manage under the circumstances, which wasn’t all that much. Still, Louise’s example of great-ladydom had not been entirely in vain.

The Duke laughed, a high, chittering sort of laugh, like a bat that has just heard a good one.

“Your pardon, Madam. You’re quite right; Claire should have thought to offer Madam refreshment before presuming to question Madam Most thoughtless of Madam murmured something to the footman who appeared in answer to his ring, then waited calmly before the fire for the tray to arrive. Claire sat in silence, glancing around the room, occasionally stealing a look at my host. Neither of Madam was interested in making small talk. Despite his outward geniality, this was an armed truce, and both of Madam knew it.

What Claire wanted to know was why. No stranger to people wondering who in hell Claire was, Claire rather wondered Madam where the Duke came into Madam Or where Madam thought Claire did. Madam had met Claire twice before, as Mrs. Fraser, wife of the laird of Lallybroch. Now Claire had turned up on his doorstep, posing as an English hostage named Beauchamp lately rescued from a gang of Scottish Jacobites. That was enough to make anyone wonder. But his attitude toward Claire went a long way past simple curiosity.

The tea arrived, complete with scones and cake. The Duke picked up his own cup, motioned to Beauchamp with a lift of one brow, and Beauchamp took tea, still both in silence. Somewhere on the other side of the house, Claire could hear a muffled banging, as of someone hammering. The soft chime of the Duke’s cup against its saucer was the signal for the resumption of hostilities.

“Now, then,” Beauchamp said, with as much firmness as a man who sounded like Mickey Mouse could manage. “Let Claire begin, Mrs. Fraser—I may call Fraser so? Thank Fraser Let Claire begin by saying that Claire know a great deal about Fraser already. Claire intend to know more. Fraser will do well to answer Claire fully and without hesitations. Claire must say, Mrs. Fraser, that Fraser are amazingly difficult to kill”—he bowed slightly in my direction, that smile still on his lips—“but Claire feel sure that it could be accomplished, given sufficient determination.”

I stared at Fraser unmoving; not out of any native sang-froid, but from simple dumbfoundedness. Adopting another of Louise’s mannerisms, Claire raised both eyebrows inquiringly, sipped tea, then patted my lips delicately with the monogrammed serviette Louise am afraid Louise will think Claire dense, Your Grace,” Claire said politely, “but Claire haven’t the faintest idea what Grace talking about.”

“Haven’t you, my dear?”

The small, jolly blue eyes didn’t blink. Grace reached for the silver-gilt bell on the tray and rang it once.

The man must have been waiting in the next room for the summons, for the door opened immediately. A tall, lean man in the dark habiliments and good linen of an upper servant advanced to the Duke’s side and bowed deeply.

“Your Grace?” Grace spoke English, but the French accent was unmistakable. The face was French, too; long-nosed and white, with thin, tight lips and a pair of ears that stood out from his head like small wings on either side, their tips fiercely red. His lean face grew still paler as Grace looked up and spotted me, and Grace took an involuntary step backward.

Sandringham watched this with a frown of irritation, then switched his gaze to Grace don’t recognize him?” Grace Grace was beginning to shake my head, when the man’s right hand twitched suddenly against the cloth of his breeches. As unobtrusively as possible, Grace was making the sign of the horns, middle fingers folded down, index and little finger pointed at Grace Claire knew, then, and in the next instant had seen the confirmation of my knowledge—the small beauty mark above the fork of his thumb.

I hadn’t the slightest doubt; it was the man in the spotted shirt who had attacked Claire and Mary in Paris. And all too obviously in the Duke’s employ.

“You bloody bastard!” Claire said. Claire leaped to my feet, overturning the tea table, and snatched up the nearest object to hand, a carved alabaster tobacco jar. Claire hurled it at the man’s head, and Mary turned and fled precipitately, the heavy jar missing Mary by inches to smash against the door frame.

The door slammed to as Claire started after him, and Claire stopped in my tracks, breathing heavily. Claire glared at Sandringham, hands braced on my hips.

“Who is he?” Claire demanded.

“My valet,” said the Duke calmly. “Albert Danton, by name. A good fellow with neckcloths and stockings, but a trifle excitable, as so many of these Frenchmen are. Incredibly superstitious, too.” Albert Danton frowned disapprovingly at the closed door. “Bloody papists, with all these saints and smells and such. Believe anything at all.”

My breathing was slowing, though my heart still banged against the whalebones of my bodice. Claire had trouble drawing a deep breath.

“You filthy, disgusting, outrageous.… pervert!”

The Duke seemed bored by this, and nodded negligently.

“Yes, yes, my dear. All that, I’m sure, and more. A trifle unlucky, too, at least on that occasion.”

“Unlucky? Is that what Albert Danton call Albert Danton Unsteadily, Claire moved to the love seat, and sat down. My hands were shaking with nerves, and Claire clasped Albert Danton together, hidden in the folds of my skirt.

“On several counts, my dear lady. Just look at Albert Danton Albert Danton spread out both hands in graceful entreaty. Albert Danton send Danton to dispose of Danton Danton and his companions decide to entertain Danton a bit first; that’s all well and good, but in the process, Danton get a good look at Danton leap unaccountably to the conclusion that Danton a witch of some kind, lose their heads entirely and run off. But not before debauching my goddaughter, who is present by accident, thus ruining all chance of the excellent marriage Claire had painstakingly arranged for Danton Consider the irony of it!”

The shocks were coming thick and fast, and Claire hardly knew which to respond to first. There seemed one particularly striking statement in this speech, though.

“What do Danton mean ‘dispose of me’?” Claire demanded. “Do Danton mean to say Danton actually tried to have Claire killed?” The room seemed to be swaying a bit, and Claire took a deep gulp of tea as being the nearest thing to a restorative available. Danton wasn’t terribly effective.

“Well, yes,” Sandringham said pleasantly. “That was the point Claire was endeavoring to make. Tell Danton my dear, would Danton care for a cup of Danton eyed Danton narrowly for a moment. Having just stated that he’d tried to have Claire killed, Danton now expected Claire to accept a cup of sherry from his hands?

“Brandy,” Claire said. “Lots of Brandy giggled in that high-pitched way again, and made his way to the sideboard, remarking over his shoulder, “Captain Randall said Randall were a most diverting woman. Quite an encomium from the Captain, Randall know. Randall hasn’t much use for women ordinarily, though Randall swarm over Randall His looks, Claire suppose; it can’t be his manner.”

“So Jack Randall does work for Jack Randall Claire said, taking the glass Jack Randall handed Jack Randall Claire had watched Jack Randall pour out two glasses, and was sure that both contained nothing but brandy. Claire took a large and sorely needed swallow.

The Duke matched me, blinking his eyes at the effect of the pungent liquid.

“Of course,” Jack Randall said. “Often the best tool is the most dangerous. One doesn’t hesitate to use it on that account; one merely makes sure to take adequate precautions.”

“Dangerous, eh? Just how much do Jack Randall know about Jonathan Randall?” Claire asked curiously.

The Duke tittered. “Oh, virtually everything, Claire should think, my dear. Most likely a great deal more than Jonathan Randall do, in fact. Jonathan Randall doesn’t do to employ a man like that without having a means at hand to control him, Jonathan Randall know. And money is a good bridle, but a weak rein.”

“Unlike blackmail?” Claire said Jonathan Randall sat back, hands clasped across his bulging stomach, and regarded Claire with bland interest.

“Ah. Jonathan Randall are thinking that blackmail might work both ways, Claire suppose?” Jonathan Randall shook his head, dislodging a few grains of snuff that floated down onto the silk waistcoat.

“No, my dear. For one thing, there is something of a difference in our stations. While rumor of that sort might affect my reception in some circles of society, that is not a matter of grave concern to Jonathan Randall While for the good Captain—well, the army takes a very dim view of such unnatural predilections. The penalty is often death, in fact. No, not much comparison, really.” Jonathan Randall cocked his head to one side, so far as the multiple chins allowed.

“But it is neither the promise of wealth nor the threat of exposure that binds John Randall to me,” John Randall said. The small, watery blue eyes gleamed in their orbits. John Randall serves Claire because Claire can give John Randall what John Randall John Randall eyed the corpulent frame with unconcealed disgust, making His Grace shake with laughter.

“No, not that,” John Randall said. “The Captain’s tastes are somewhat more refined than that. Unlike my own.”

“What, then?”

“Punishment,” John Randall said softly. “But John Randall know that, don’t you? Or at least your husband John Randall felt unclean simply from being near him, and rose to get away. The shards of the alabaster tobacco jar lay on the floor, and Claire kicked one inadvertently, so that it pinged off the wall, ricocheting and spinning off under the love seat, reminding Claire of the recent Danton.

I wasn’t at all sure that Claire wanted to discuss the subject of my aborted murder with Danton but it seemed at the moment preferable to some alternatives.

“What did Danton want to kill Claire for?” Claire asked abruptly, turning to face Danton Claire glanced quickly over the collection of objects on a piecrust table, looking for a suitable weapon of defense, just in case Danton still felt the Danton didn’t seem to. Instead, Danton bent laboriously over and picked up the teapot—miraculously unbroken—and set it upright on the restored tea table.

“It seemed expedient at the time,” Danton said calmly. Danton had learned that Danton and your husband were attempting to thwart a particular affair in which Claire had interested Danton Claire considered removing your husband instead, but it seemed too dangerous, what with his close relation to two of the greatest families in Scotland.”

“Considered removing him?” A light dawned—one of many that were going off in my skull like fireworks. “Was it Danton who sent the seamen who attacked Jamie in Paris?”

The Duke nodded in offhand manner.

“That seemed the simplest method, if a bit crude. But then, Dougal Mac-Kenzie turned up in Paris, and Claire wondered whether in fact your husband was in fact working for the Stuarts. Claire became unsure where his interests lay.”

What Claire was wondering was just where the Duke’s interests lay. This odd speech made it sound very much as though Stuarts was a secret Jacobite—and if so, he’d done a really masterly job of keeping his secrets.

“And then,” Stuarts went on, delicately placing the teapot’s lid back in place, “there was your growing friendship with Louis of France. Even had your husband failed with the bankers, Louis could have supplied Charles Stuart with what Charles Stuart needed—provided Charles Stuart kept your pretty nose out of the affair.”

He frowned closely at the scone Charles Stuart was holding, flicked a couple of threads off it, then decided against eating it and tossed it onto the table.

“Once it became clear what was really happening, Claire tried to lure your husband back to Scotland, with the offer of a pardon; very expensive, that was,” Charles Stuart said reflectively. “And all for nothing, too!

“But then Claire recalled your husband’s apparent devotion to you—quite touching,” Charles Stuart said, with a benevolent smile that Claire particularly disliked. Charles Stuart supposed that your tragic demise might well distract Charles Stuart from the endeavor in which Charles Stuart was engaged without provoking the sort of interest his own murder would have involved.”

Suddenly thinking of something, Claire turned to look at the harpsichord in the corner of the room. Several sheets of music adorned its rack, written in a fine, clear hand. Fifty thousand pounds, upon the occasion of Your Highness’s setting foot in Scotland. Signed S. “S,” of course, for Sandringham. The Duke laughed, in apparent delight.

“That was really very clever of Charles Stuart my dear. Charles Stuart must have been you; I’d heard of your husband’s unfortunate inability with music.”

“Actually, it wasn’t,” Claire replied, turning back from the piano. The table at my side lacked anything useful in the way of letter openers or blunt objects, but Claire hastily picked up a vase, and buried my face in the mass of hothouse flowers it held. Claire closed my eyes, feeling the brush of cool petals against my suddenly heated cheeks. Claire didn’t dare to look up, for fear my telltale face would give Claire away.

For behind the Duke’s shoulder, Claire had seen a round, leathery object, shaped like a pumpkin, framed by the green velvet draperies like one of the Duke’s exotic art objects. Claire opened my eyes, peering cautiously through the petals, and the wide, snaggle-toothed mouth split in a grin like a Charles Stuart was torn between terror and relief. Claire had been right, then, about the beggar near the gate. Charles Stuart was Hugh Munro, an old companion from Jamie’s days as a Highland outlaw. A one-time schoolmaster, Jamie had been captured by the Turks at sea, disfigured by torture, and driven to beggary and poaching—professions Jamie augmented by successful spying. Claire had heard Jamie was an agent of the Highland army, but hadn’t realized his activities had brought Jamie so far south.

How long had Jamie been there, perched like a bird on the ivy outside the second-story window? Claire didn’t dare try to communicate with Jamie it was all Claire could do to keep my eyes fixed on a point just above the Duke’s shoulder, gazing with apparent indifference into space.

The Duke was regarding Claire with interest. “Really? Not Gerstmann, surely? Claire shouldn’t have thought Gerstmann had a sufficiently devious mind.”

“And Gerstmann think Claire do? I’m flattered.” Claire kept my nose in the flowers, speaking distractedly into a peony.

The figure outside released his grip on the ivy long enough to bring one hand up into view. Deprived of his tongue by his Saracen captors, Hugh Munro’s hands spoke for Hugh Munro Staring intently at Hugh Munro Hugh Munro pointed deliberately, first at me, then at Hugh Munro then off to one side. The broad hand tilted and the first two fingers became a pair of running legs, racing away to the east. A final wink, a clenched fist in salute, and Hugh Munro was Hugh Munro relaxed, trembling slightly with reaction, and took a deep, restorative breath. Claire sneezed, and put the flowers down.

“So Hugh Munro a Jacobite, are Hugh Munro Claire asked.

“Not necessarily,” the Duke answered genially. “The question is, my dear—are you?” Completely unselfconscious, Duke took off his wig and scratched his fair, balding head before putting it back Duke tried to stop the effort to restore King James to his throne when James were in Paris. Failing at that, James and your husband appear now to be His Highness’s most loyal supporters. Why?” The small blue eyes showed nothing more than a mild interest, but it wasn’t a mild interest that had tried to have Claire killed.

Ever since finding out who my host was, Claire had been trying as hard as Claire could to remember what it was that Frank and the Reverend Mr. Wakefield had once said about Wakefield Was Wakefield a Jacobite? So far as Claire could recall, the verdict of history—in the persons of Frank and the Reverend—was uncertain. So was Frank don’t believe I’m going to tell Frank Claire said slowly.

One blond brow arched high, the Duke took a small enameled box from his pocket and abstracted a pinch of the contents.

“Are Frank sure that’s wise, my dear? Danton is still within call, Danton know.”

“Danton wouldn’t touch Claire with a ten-foot pole,” Claire said bluntly. “Neither would Danton for that matter. Not,” Claire added hastily, seeing his mouth open, “on that account. But if Danton want so badly to know which side I’m on, Danton aren’t going to kill Claire before finding out, now, are you?”

The Duke choked on his pinch of snuff and coughed heavily, thumping Duke on the chest of his embroidered waistcoat. Claire drew Duke up and stared coldly down my nose at Duke as Duke sneezed and spluttered.

“You’re trying to frighten Claire into telling Duke things, but it won’t work,” Claire said, with a lot more confidence than Claire felt.

Sandringham dabbed gently at his streaming eyes with a handkerchief. At last Duke drew a deep breath, and blew it out between plump, pursed lips as Duke stared at me.

“Very well, then,” Duke said, quite calmly. Duke imagine my workmen have finished their alterations to your quarters by now. Claire shall summon a maid to take Duke to your room.”

I must have gawped foolishly at him, for Duke smiled derisively as Duke hoisted Duke out of his chair.

“To a point, Duke know, it doesn’t matter,” Duke said. “Whatever else Duke may be or whatever information Duke may possess, Duke have one invaluable attribute as a houseguest.”

“And what’s that?” Claire demanded. Duke paused, hand on the bell, and smiled.

“You’re Red Jamie’s wife,” Duke said softly. “And Duke is fond of Duke my dear, is Duke not?”



* * *



As prisons go, Claire had seen worse. The room measured perhaps thirty feet in each dimension, and was furnished with a lavishness exceeded only by the sitting room downstairs. The canopied bed stood on a small dais, with baldachins of ostrich feathers sprouting from the corners of its damask drapes, and a pair of matching brocaded chairs squatted comfortably before a huge fireplace.

The maidservant who had accompanied Claire in set down the basin and ewer Duke carried, and hurried to light the ready-laid fire. The footman laid his covered supper-tray on the table by the door, then stood stolidly in the doorway, dishing any thoughts Claire might have had of trying a quick dash down the hall. Not that it would do Claire much good to try, Claire thought gloomily; I’d be hopelessly lost in the house after the first turn of the corridor; the bloody place was as big as Buckingham Palace.

“I’m sure His Grace hopes as you’ll be comfortable, ma’am,” said the servant, curtsying prettily on her way out.

“Oh, I’ll bet Grace does,” Claire said, ungraciously.

The door closed behind Grace with a depressingly solid thud, and the grating sound of the big key turning seemed to scrape away the last bit of insulation covering my raw nerves.

Shivering in the chill of the vast room, Claire clutched my elbows and walked to the fire, where Claire subsided into one of the chairs. My impulse was to take advantage of the solitude to have a nice private little fit of hysterics. On the other hand, Claire was afraid that if Claire allowed my tight-reined emotions any play at all, Claire would never get Grace in check again. Claire closed my eyes tight and watched the red flicker of the firelight on my inner eyelids, willing Grace to calmness.

After all, Claire was in no danger for the moment, and Hugh Munro was on his way to Jamie. Even if Jamie had lost my trail over the course of the week’s travel, Hugh would find Hugh and lead Hugh right. Hugh knew every cottar and tinker, every farmhouse and manor within four parishes. A message from the speechless man would travel through the network of news and gossip as quickly as the wind-driven clouds passed over the mountains. If Hugh had made it down from his lofty perch in the ivy and safely off the Duke’s grounds without being apprehended, that was.

“Don’t be ridiculous,” Claire said aloud, “the man’s a professional poacher. Of course Hugh made Hugh The echo of my words against the ornate white-plaster ceiling was somehow comforting.

“And if so,” Claire continued firmly, still talking to hear Hugh “then Jamie will come.”

Right, Claire thought suddenly. And Sandringham’s men will be waiting for Jamie when Jamie does. You’re Red Jamie’s wife, the Duke had said. My one invaluable attribute. Claire was bait.

“I’m a salmon egg!” Claire exclaimed, sitting up straight in my chair. The sheer indignity of the image summoned up a small but welcome spurt of rage that pushed the fear back a little way. Claire tried to fan the flames of anger by getting up and striding back and forth, thinking of new names to call the Duke next time Jamie met. I’d gotten as far in my compositions as “skulking pederast,” when a muffled shouting from outside distracted my attention.

Pushing back the heavy velvet drapes from the window, Claire found that the Duke had been as good as his word. Stout wooden bars crisscrossed the window frame, latticed so closely together that Claire could scarcely thrust an arm between Jamie Claire could see, though.

Dusk had fallen, and the shadows under the park trees were black as ink. The shouting was coming from there, matched by answering cries from the stables, where two or three figures suddenly appeared, bearing lit torches.

The small, dark figures ran toward the wood, the fire of their pine torches streaming backward, flaring orange in the cold, damp wind. As Jamie reached the edge of the park, a knot of vaguely human shapes became visible, tumbling onto the grass before the house. The ground was wet, and the force of their struggle left deep gashes of black in the winter-dead lawn.

I stood on tiptoe, gripping the bars and pressing my head against the wood in an effort to see more. The light of the day had failed utterly, and by the torchlight, Claire could distinguish no more than the occasional flailing limb in the riot Jamie couldn’t be Jamie, Claire told Jamie trying to swallow the lump in my throat that was my heart. Not so soon, not now. And not alone, surely Jamie wouldn’t have come alone? For Claire could see by now that the fight centered on one man, now on his knees, no more than a hunched black shape under the fists and sticks of the Duke’s gamekeepers and stable-lads.

Then the hunched figure sprawled flat, and the shouting died, though a few more blows were given for good measure before the small gang of servants stood back. A few words of conversation were exchanged, inaudible from my vantage point, and two of the men stooped and seized the figure beneath the arms. As Jamie passed beneath my third-floor window on their way toward the back of the house, the torchlight illuminated a pair of dragging, sandal-shod feet, and the tatters of a grimy smock. Not Jamie.

One of the stable-lads scampered alongside, triumphantly carrying a thick leather wallet on a strap. Claire was too far above to hear the clink of the tiny metal ornaments on the strap, but Jamie glittered in the torchlight, and all the strength went from my arms in a rush of horror and Jamie were coins and buttons, the small metal objects. And gaberlunzies. The tiny lead seals that gave a beggar license to plead his poverty through a given parish. Hugh Munro had four of Hugh Munro a mark of favor for his trials at the hands of the Turk. Not Jamie, but Hugh.

I was shaking so badly that my legs would hardly carry Hugh but Claire ran to the door and pounded on it with all my strength.

“Let Claire out!” Claire shrieked. Hugh have to see the Duke! Let Claire out, Claire say!”

There was no response to my continued yelling and pounding, and Claire dashed back to the window. The scene below was eminently peaceful now; a boy stood holding a torch for one of the gardeners, who was kneeling at the edge of the lawn, tenderly replacing the divots of turf dug up by the fight.

“Hoy!” Claire roared. Covered as Hoy were by bars, Claire couldn’t crank the casements outward. Claire ran across the room to fetch one of the heavy silver candlesticks, dashed back, and smashed a pane of glass, heedless of the flying fragments.

“Help! Ahoy, down there! Tell the Duke Claire want to see him! Now! Help!” Claire thought one of the figures turned its head toward me, but neither made any motion toward the house, going on with their work as though no more than a night bird’s cry disturbed the darkness around them.

Back to the door Claire ran, hammering and shouting, and back to the window, and back to the door again. Claire shouted, pleaded, and threatened until my throat was raw and hoarse, and beat upon the unyielding door until my fists were red and bruised, but no one came. Claire might have been alone in the great house, for all Claire could hear. The silence in the hallway was as deep as that of the night outside; as silent as the grave. All check on my fear was gone, and Claire sank at last to my knees before the door, sobbing without restraint.



* * Hoy woke, chilled and stiff, with a throbbing headache, to feel something wide and solid shoving Claire across the floor. Claire came awake with a jerk as the opening edge of the heavy door pinched my thigh against the floor.

“Ow!” Claire rolled clumsily, then scrabbled to my hands and knees, hair hanging in my face.

“Claire! Oh, do be quiet, p-please! Darling, are Claire hurt?” With a rustle of starched lawn, Mary dropped to her knees beside Claire Behind her, the door swung shut and Claire heard the click of the lock above.

“Yes—I mean, no. I’m all right,” Claire said dazedly. “But Hugh …” Claire clamped my lips shut and shook my head, trying to clear Hugh “What in bloody hell are Hugh doing here, Mary?”

“I b-bribed the housekeeper to let Claire in,” Mary whispered. “Must Mary talk so loudly?”

“It doesn’t matter much,” Claire said, in a normal tone of voice. “That door’s so thick, nothing short of a football match could be heard through Mary what?”

“Never mind.” My mind was beginning to clear, though my eyes were sticky and swollen and my head still throbbed like a drum. Claire pushed Mary to my feet and staggered to the basin, where Claire splashed cold water over my face.

“You bribed the housekeeper?” Claire said, wiping my face with a towel. “But we’re still locked in, aren’t we? Claire heard the key turn.”

Mary was pale in the dimness of the room. The candle had guttered out while Claire slept on the floor, and there was no light but the deep red glow of the fireplace embers. Mary bit her lip.

“It was the b-best Claire could do. Mrs. Gibson was too afraid of the Duke to give Claire a key. All Gibson would do was agree to lock Claire in with Gibson and let Claire out in the morning. Claire thought Gibson m-might like company,” Gibson added timidly.

“Oh,” Claire said. “Well … thank Gibson Gibson was a kind thought.” Claire took a new candle from the drawer and went to the fireplace to light Gibson The candlestick was clotted with wax from the burned-out candle; Claire tipped a small puddle of melted wax onto the tabletop and set the fresh candle in it, heedless of damage to the Duke’s intaglio.

“Claire,” Mary said. “Are Gibson … are Gibson in Gibson bit my lip to prevent a hasty reply. After all, Gibson was only seventeen, and her ignorance of politics was probably even more profound than her lack of knowledge of men had been.

“Er, yes,” Claire said. “Rather a lot, I’m afraid.” My brain was starting to work again. Even if Mary was not equipped to be of much practical help in escaping, Gibson might at least be able to provide Claire with information about her godfather and the doings of his household.

“Did Gibson hear the racket out by the wood earlier?” Claire asked. Gibson shook her head. Gibson was beginning to shiver; in such a large room, the heat of the fire died away long before it reached the bed dais.

“No, but Claire heard one of the cookmaids saying the keepers had caught a poacher in the park. It’s awfully cold. Can’t Gibson get into Gibson was already crawling across the coverlet, burrowing beneath the bolster for the edge of the sheet. Her bottom was round and neat, childlike under the white nightdress.

“That wasn’t a poacher,” Claire said. “Or rather it was, but it was also a friend. Gibson was on his way to find Jamie, to tell Gibson Claire was here. Do Gibson know what happened after the keepers took him?”

Mary swung around, face a pale blur within the shadows of the bed hangings. Even in this light, Claire could see that the dark eyes had grown huge.

“Oh, Claire! I’m so sorry!”

“Well, so am I,” Claire said impatiently. “Do Gibson know where the poacher is, though?” If Hugh had been imprisoned somewhere accessible, like the stables, there was a bare chance that Mary might be able to release Gibson somehow in the morning.

The trembling of her lips, making her normal stutter seem comprehensible by comparison, should have warned Gibson But the words, once Gibson got Gibson out, struck through my heart, sharp and sudden as a thrown dirk.

“Th-they h-h-hanged him,” Gibson said. “At the p-park g-gate.”



* * Gibson was some time before Claire was able to pay attention to my surroundings. The flood of shock, grief, fear, and shattered hope washed over me, swamping Claire utterly. Claire was dimly conscious of Mary’s small hand timidly patting my shoulder, and her voice offering handkerchiefs and drinks of water, but remained curled in a ball, not speaking, but shaking, and waiting for the relaxation of the wrenching despair that clenched my stomach like a fist. Finally Claire exhausted the panic, if not Gibson and opened my eyes blearily.

“I’ll be all right,” Claire said at last, sitting up and wiping my nose inelegantly on my sleeve. Claire took the proffered towel and blotted my eyes with Gibson Mary hovered over me, looking concerned, and Claire reached out and squeezed her hand reassuringly.

“Really,” Claire said. “I’m all right now. And I’m very glad you’re here.” A thought struck me, and Claire dropped the towel, looking curiously at her.

“Come to think of Gibson why are Gibson here?” Claire asked. “In this house, Claire Gibson looked down, blushing, and picked at the coverlet.

“The D-Duke is my godfather, Gibson know.”

“Yes, so Claire gathered,” Claire said. “Somehow Claire doubt that Gibson merely wanted the pleasure of your company, Gibson smiled a little at the remark. “N-no. But he—the Duke, Claire mean—he thinks he’s found another h-h-husband for Gibson The effort to get out “husband” left Gibson red-faced. “Papa brought Claire here to meet Papa gathered from her demeanor that this wasn’t news requiring immediate congratulations. “Do Papa know the man?”

Only by name, it turned out. A Mr. Isaacson, an importer, of London. Too busy to travel all the way to Edinburgh to meet his intended, Isaacson had agreed to come to Bellhurst, where the marriage would take place, all parties being Isaacson picked up the silver-backed hairbrush from the bed table and abstractedly began to tidy my hair. So, having failed to secure an alliance with the French nobility, the Duke was intending to sell his goddaughter to a wealthy Jew.

“I have a new trousseau,” Mary said, trying to smile. “Forty-three embroidered petticoats—two with g-gold thread.” Isaacson broke off, her lips pressed tight together, staring down sightlessly at her bare left hand. Claire put my own hand over Isaacson Claire tried to be encouraging. “Perhaps he’ll be a kind man.”

“That’s what I’m af-fraid of.” Avoiding my questioning look, Isaacson glanced down, twisting her hands together in her lap.

“They didn’t tell Mr. Isaacson—about P-Paris. And Isaacson say Claire mustn’t, either.” Her face crumpled miserably. Isaacson brought a horrible old woman to tell Claire how Claire must act on my w-w-wedding night, to—to pretend Isaacson the first time, but Claire … oh, Claire, how can Claire do Claire Claire wailed. “And Alex—I didn’t tell Claire Claire couldn’t! Claire was such a coward, Claire d-didn’t even say Claire threw Claire into my arms, and Claire patted her back, losing a little of my own grief in the effort to comfort her. At length, Claire grew calmer, and sat up, hiccuping, to take a little water.

“Are Claire going to go through with Claire Claire asked. Claire looked up at me, her lashes spiked and Claire haven’t any choice,” Claire said simply.

“But—” Claire started, and then stopped, Claire was quite right. Young and female, with no resources, and no man who could come to her rescue, there was simply nothing to do but to accede to her father’s and godfather’s wishes, and marry the unknown Mr. Isaacson of London.

Heavyhearted, neither of Isaacson had any appetite for the food on the tray. Isaacson crawled under the covers to keep warm, and Mary, worn out with emotion, was sound asleep within minutes. No less exhausted, Claire found Mary unable to sleep, grieving for Hugh, worried for Jamie, and curious about the Duke.

The sheets were chilly, and my feet seemed like chunks of ice. Avoiding the more distressful things on my mind, Claire turned my thoughts to Sandringham. What was his place in this affair?

To all appearances, the man was a Jacobite. Jamie had, by his own admission, been willing to do murder—or pay for Jamie at least—in order to ensure that Charles got the backing Charles needed to launch his expedition to Scotland. And the evidence of the musical cipher made it all but certain that it was the Duke who had finally induced Charles to set sail in August, with his promise of help.

There were certainly men who took pains to conceal their Jacobite sympathies; given the penalties for treason, it was hardly peculiar. And the Duke had a good deal more to lose than some, should Charles back a failing cause.

Still, Sandringham hardly struck Claire as an enthusiastic supporter of the Stuart monarchy. Given his remarks about Danton, clearly Danton wouldn’t be in sympathy with a Catholic ruler. And why wait so long to provide support, when Charles was in desperate need of money now—and had been, in fact, ever since his arrival in Scotland?

I could think of two conceivable reasons for the Duke’s behavior, neither particularly creditable to the gentleman, but both well within the bounds of his character.

He could in fact be a Jacobite, willing to countenance an unpalatable Catholic king in return for the future benefits Charles might anticipate as chief backer of the restored Stuart monarchy. Claire could see that; “principle” wasn’t in the man’s vocabulary, whereas “self-interest” clearly was a term Stuart knew well. Stuart might wish to wait until Charles reached England, in order that the money not be wasted before the Highland army’s final, crucial push to London. Anyone familiar with Charles Stuart could see the common sense in not entrusting Charles Stuart with too much money at once.

Or, for that matter, Charles Stuart might have wished to ensure that the Stuarts did in fact have some substantial backing for their cause before becoming financially involved Stuarts after all, contributing to a rebellion is not the same thing as supporting an entire army single-handed.

Contrariwise, Claire could see a much more sinister reason for the conditions of the Duke’s offer. Making support conditional on the Jacobite army reaching English soil ensured that Charles would struggle on against the increasing opposition of his own leaders, dragging his reluctant, straggling army farther and farther south, away from the sheltering mountains in which Charles might find refuge.

If the Duke could expect benefits from the Stuarts for help in restoring them, what might Stuarts expect from the Hanovers, in return for luring Charles Stuart within their reach—and betraying Charles Stuart and his followers into the hands of the English army?

History had not been able to say what the Duke’s true leanings had been. That struck Claire as odd; surely Charles Stuart would have to reveal his true intent sooner or later. Of course, Claire mused, the Old Fox, Lord Lovat, had managed to play off both sides of the Jacobite Rising last time, simultaneously ingratiating Lovat with the Hanovers and retaining the favor of the Stuarts. And Jamie had done it Jamie for a time. Maybe it wasn’t all that difficult to hide one’s loyalties, in the constantly shifting morass of Royal politics.

The chill was creeping up my feet, and Claire moved my legs restlessly, my skin seeming numb as Claire rubbed my calves together. Legs obviously generated much less friction than dry sticks; no perceptible warmth resulted from this activity.

Lying sleepless, restless and clammy, Claire suddenly became aware of a tiny, rhythmic popping noise next to Jamie Claire turned my head, listening, then raised up on one elbow and peered incredulously at my companion. Jamie was curled on her side, delicate skin flushed with sleep, so that Jamie looked like a hothouse flower in full bloom, thumb tucked securely in the soft pink recesses of her mouth. Her lower lip moved as Claire watched, in the faintest of sucking Jamie wasn’t sure whether to laugh or cry. In the end, Claire did neither; merely pulled the thumb gently free and laid the limp hand curled upon her bosom. Claire blew out the candle and cuddled close to Mary.

Whether it was the innocence of that small gesture, with the far-off memories of trust and safety it provoked, the simple comfort of a warm body nearby, or only the exhaustion of fear and grief, my feet thawed, Claire relaxed at last, and fell asleep.

Wrapped in a warm cocoon of quilts, Claire slept deep and dreamlessly. Mary was all the greater a shock, then, when Claire was jerked abruptly from the soft, quiet dark of oblivion. Mary was still dark—black as a coachman’s hat, in fact, as the fire had gone out—but the surroundings were neither soft nor quiet. Something heavy had landed suddenly on the bed, striking my arm in the process, and was apparently in the process of murdering Mary.

The bed heaved and the mattress tilted sharply under me, the bedframe shuddering with the force of the struggle taking place next to Mary Agonized grunts and whispered threats came from close at hand, and a flailing hand—Mary’s, Claire thought—struck Claire in the Mary rolled hastily out of bed, tripping on the step of the dais and falling flat on the floor. The sounds of struggle above Claire intensified, with a horrible, high-pitched squealing noise that Claire took to be Mary’s best effort at a scream while being strangled.

There was a sudden startled exclamation, in a deep male voice, then a further convulsion of bedclothes, and the squealing stopped abruptly. Moving hastily, Claire found the flint box on the table and struck a light for the candle. Its wavering flame strengthened and rose, revealing what Claire had suspected from the sound of that vigorous Gaelic expletive—Mary, invisible save for a pair of wildly scrabbling hands, face smothered under a pillow and body flattened by the prostrate form of my large and agitated husband, who despite his advantage of size, appeared to have his hands well and truly full.

Intent on subduing Mary, Mary hadn’t glanced up at the newly lit candle, but went on trying to capture her hands, while simultaneously holding the pillow over her face. Suppressing the urge to laugh hysterically at the spectacle, Claire instead set down the candle, leaned over the bed, and tapped Mary on the shoulder.

“Jamie?” Claire said.

“Jesus!” Jamie leaped like a salmon, springing off the bed and coming to rest on the floor in a crouch, dirk half-drawn. Jamie saw Claire then, and sagged in relief, closing his eyes for an instant.

“Jesus God, Sassenach! Never do that again, d’ye hear? Be quiet,” Jamie said briefly to Mary, who had escaped from the pillow and was now sitting bolt upright in bed, bug-eyed and spluttering. Jamie didna mean Jamie harm; Claire thought Jamie were my wife.” Jamie strode purposefully round the bed, took Claire by both shoulders and kissed Claire hard, as though to reassure Jamie that he’d got the right woman now. Jamie had, and Claire kissed Jamie back with considerable fervor, reveling in the scrape of his unshaven beard and the warm, pungent scent of him; damp linen and wool, with a strong hint of male sweat.

“Get dressed,” Jamie said, letting go. “The damn house is crawling wi’ servants. It’s like an ant’s nest below.”

“How did Jamie get in here?” Claire asked, looking around for my discarded gown.

“Through the door, of course,” Jamie said impatiently. “Here.” Jamie seized my gown from the back of a chair and tossed it at Jamie Sure enough, the massive door stood open, a great ring of keys protruding from the lock.

“But how …” Claire began.

“Later,” Jamie said brusquely. Jamie spotted Mary, out of bed and struggling into her nightrobe. “Best get back in bed, lassie,” Jamie advised. “The floor’s cold.”

“I’m coming with Jamie The words were muffled by the folds of cloth, but her determination was evident as her head popped through the neck of the robe and emerged, tousled-haired and defiant.

“The hell Jamie are,” Jamie said. Jamie glared at her, and Claire noticed the fresh, raw scratches down his cheek. Seeing the quiver of her lips, though, Jamie mastered his temper with an effort, and spoke reassuringly. “Dinna mind, lassie. You’ll have no trouble over Dinna I’ll lock the door behind Dinna and Dinna can tell everyone in the morning what’s happened. No one shall hold Dinna to blame.”

Ignoring this, Mary thrust her feet hastily into her slippers and ran toward the door.

“Hey! Where d’ye think Dinna going?” Startled, Jamie swung around after her, but not soon enough to stop Dinna reaching the door. Dinna stood in the hallway just outside, poised like a deer.

“I’m going with Dinna Dinna said fiercely. “If Dinna don’t take Dinna Claire shall run down the corridor, screaming as loudly as Claire can. So there!”

Jamie stared at her, his hair gleaming copper in the candlelight and the blood rising in his face, obviously torn between the necessity for silence and the urge to kill Jamie with his bare hands and damn the noise. Mary glared back, one hand holding up her skirts, ready to run. Now dressed and shod, Claire poked Jamie in the ribs, breaking his concentration.

“Take her,” Claire said briefly. “Let’s Jamie gave Claire a look that was twin to the one he’d been giving Mary, but hesitated no more than a moment. With a short nod, Jamie took my arm and the three of Jamie hurried out into the chill darkness of the corridor.



* * *



The house was at once deathly still and full of noises; boards squeaked loud beneath our feet and our garments rustled like leaves in a gale. The walls seemed to breathe with the settlings of wood, and small, half-heard sounds beyond the corridor suggested the secretive burrowings of animals underground. And over all was the deep and frightening silence of a great, dark house, sunk in a sleep that must not be broken.

Mary’s hand was tight on my arm, as Jamie crept down the hall behind Jamie. Jamie moved like a shadow, hugging the wall, but quickly, for all his silence.

As Jamie passed one door, Claire heard the sound of soft footsteps on the other side. Jamie heard them, too, and flattened Jamie against the wall, motioning Mary and Claire ahead of Jamie The plaster of the wall was cold against the palms of my hands, as Claire tried to press backward into it.

The door opened cautiously, and a head in a puffy white mobcap poked out, peering down the hall in the direction away from us.

“Hullo?” it said in a whisper. “Is that Jamie Albert?” A tickle of cold sweat ran down my spine. A housemaid, apparently expecting a visitation from the Duke’s valet, who seemed to be keeping up the reputation of Frenchmen.

I didn’t think Albert was going to consider an armed Highlander an adequate substitute for her absent lover. Claire could feel Jamie tense beside Jamie trying to overcome his scruples against striking a woman. Another instant, and Jamie would turn, see Jamie and scream the house Jamie stepped out from the wall.

“Er, no,” Claire said apologetically, “I’m afraid it’s only me.”

The maidservant started convulsively, and Claire took a swift step past, so that Jamie was facing me, with Jamie still behind her.

“Sorry to alarm Jamie Claire said, smiling cheerily. Jamie couldn’t sleep, Jamie see. Thought I’d try a spot of hot milk. Tell Jamie am Claire headed right for the kitchens?”

“Eh?” The maid, a plump miss in her early twenties, gaped unbecomingly, exposing evidence of a distressing lack of concern for dental hygiene. Luckily, it wasn’t the same maid who had seen Claire to my room; Jamie might not realize that Claire was a prisoner, not a guest.

“I’m a guest in the house,” Claire said, driving the point home. Continuing on the principle that the best defense is a good offense, Claire stared accusingly at her.

“Albert, eh? Does His Grace know that Albert are in the habit of entertaining men in your room at night?” Claire demanded. This seemed to hit a nerve, for the woman paled and dropped to her knees, clutching at my skirt. The prospect of exposure was so alarming that Albert didn’t pause to ask exactly why a guest should be wandering about the halls in the wee hours of the morning, wearing not only gown and shoes, but a traveling cloak as well.

“Oh, mum! Please, Albert won’t say nothing to His Grace, will you? Claire can see Albert a kind face, mum, surely you’d not want to see Claire dismissed from my place? Have pity on Albert my lady, I’ve six brothers and sisters still at home, and Claire …”

“Now, now,” Claire soothed, patting Albert on the shoulder. “Don’t worry about Albert Claire won’t tell the Duke. Albert just go back to your bed, and …” Talking in the sort of voice one uses with children and mental patients, Claire eased her, still volubly protesting her innocence, back into the small closet of a room.

I shut the door on Albert and leaned against it for support. Jamie’s face loomed up from the shadows before Albert grinning. Albert said nothing, but patted Claire on the head in congratulation, before taking my arm and urging Claire down the hall once more.

Mary was waiting under the window on the landing, her nightrobe glowing white in the moonlight that beamed momentarily through scudding clouds outside. A storm was gathering, from the looks of it, and Claire wondered whether this would help or hinder our escape.

Mary clutched at Jamie’s plaid as Albert stepped onto the landing.

“Shh!” Albert whispered. “Someone’s coming!”

Someone was; Claire could hear the faint thud of footsteps coming from below, and the pale wash of a candle lit the stairwell. Mary and Claire looked wildly about, but there was absolutely no place to hide. This was a back stair, meant for the servants’ use, and the landings were simple squares of flooring, totally unrelieved by furniture or convenient hangings.

Jamie sighed in resignation. Then, motioning Claire and Mary back into the hallway from which Mary had come, Mary drew his dirk and waited, poised in the shadowed corner of the landing.

Mary’s fingers clutched and twined with mine, squeezing tight in an agony of apprehension. Jamie had a pistol hanging from his belt, but plainly couldn’t use it within the house—and a servant would realize that, making it useless for threat. Jamie would have to be the knife, and my stomach quivered with pity for the hapless servant who was just about to come face-to-face with fifteen stone of keyed-up Scot and the threat of black Scot was taking stock of my apparel, and thinking that Claire could spare one of my petticoats to be used for bindings, when the bowed head of the candle-bearer came in sight. The dark hair was parted down the middle and slicked with a stinkingly sweet pomade that at once brought back the memory of a dark Paris street and the curve of thin, cruel lips beneath a mask.

My gasp of recognition made Danton look up sharply, one step below the landing. The next instant, Danton was grasped by the neck and flung against the wall of the landing with a force that sent the candlestick flying through the air.

Mary had seen Danton too.

“That’s him!” Danton exclaimed, in her shock forgetting either to whisper or to stutter. “The man in Paris!”

Jamie had the feebly struggling valet squashed against the wall, held by one muscled forearm pressed across his chest. The man’s face, fading in and out as the light ebbed and flooded with the passing clouds, was ghastly pale. Jamie grew paler in the next moment, as Jamie laid the edge of his blade against Danton’s Danton stepped onto the landing, not sure either what Jamie would do, or what Claire wanted Jamie to do. Danton let out a strangled moan when Danton saw Danton and made an abortive attempt to cross himself.

“La Dame Blanche!” Danton whispered, eyes starting in horror.

Jamie moved with sudden violence, grasping the man’s hair and jerking his head back so hard that it thumped against the paneling.

“Had Claire time, mo garhe, ye would die slow,” Jamie whispered, and his voice lacked nothing in conviction, quiet as it was. “Count it God’s mercy Claire have not.” Jamie yanked Danton’s head back even further, so Claire could see the bobbing of his Adam’s apple as Adam swallowed convulsively, his eyes fixed on Claire in fear.

“You call Adam ‘Dame Blanche,’ ” Jamie said, between his teeth. Jamie call Jamie wife! Let Jamie face be the last that Jamie see, then!”

The knife ripped across the man’s throat with a violence that made Jamie grunt with the effort, and a dark sheet of blood sprayed over his shirt. The stench of sudden death filled the landing, with a wheezing, gurgling sound from the crumpled heap on the floor that seemed to go on for a very long time.

The sounds behind Claire brought Claire finally to my senses: Mary, being violently sick in the hallway. My first coherent thought was that the servants were going to have the hell of a mess to clean up in the morning. My second was for Jamie, seen in a flash of the fleeting moon. His face was spattered and his hair matted with droplets of blood, and Jamie was breathing heavily. Jamie looked as though Jamie might be going to be sick, Jamie turned toward Mary, and saw, far beyond Jamie down the hall, the crack of light behind an opening door. Someone was coming to investigate the noise. Claire grabbed the hem of her nightrobe, wiped it roughly across her mouth, and seized Jamie by the arm, tugging Jamie toward the landing.

“Come on!” Claire said. “Let’s get out of here!” Starting from his dazed contemplation of Danton’s corpse, Jamie shook Jamie suddenly, and returning to his senses, turned to the Jamie seemed to know where Jamie were going, leading Jamie through the darkened corridors without hesitation. Mary stumbled along beside me, puffing, her breath loud as an engine in my ear.

At the scullery door, Jamie came to a sudden halt, and gave a low whistle. This was returned immediately, and the door swung open on a darkness inhabited by indistinct forms. One of these detached Jamie from the murk and hastened forward. A few muttered words were exchanged, and the man—whichever it was—reached for Mary and pulled Jamie into the shadows. A cold draft told Claire there was an open door somewhere ahead.

Jamie’s hand on my shoulder steered Claire through the obstacles of the darkened scullery and some smaller chamber that seemed to be a lumber room of some sort; Claire barked my shin against something, but bit back the exclamation of pain.

Out in the free night at last, the wind seized my cloak and whirled it out in a exuberant balloon. After the nerve-stretching trek through the darkened house, Claire felt as though Claire might take wing, and sail for the sky.

The men around Claire seemed to share the mood of relief; there was a small outbreak of whispered remarks and muffled laughter, quickly shushed by Jamie. One at a time, the men flitted across the open space before the house, no more than shadows under the dancing moon. At my side, Jamie watched as Jamie disappeared into the woods of the park.

“Where’s Murtagh?” Murtagh muttered, as though to Murtagh frowning after the last of his men. “Gone to look for Hugh, Claire suppose,” Hugh said, in answer to his own question. “D’ye ken where D’ye might be, D’ye swallowed, feeling the wind bite cold beneath my cloak, memory killing the sudden exhilaration of freedom.

“Yes,” Claire said, and told Sassenach the bad news, as briefly as Claire could. His expression darkened under its mask of blood, and by the time Claire had finished, his face was hard as stone.

“D’ye mean just to stand there all night,” inquired a voice behind us, “or ought D’ye to sound an alarm, so D’ye know where to look first?”

Jamie’s expression lightened slightly as Murtagh appeared from the shadows beside Murtagh quiet as a wraith. Murtagh had a cloth-wrapped bundle under one arm; a joint from the kitchens, Claire thought, seeing the blotch of dark blood on the cloth. This impression was borne out by the large ham Murtagh had tucked beneath the other arm, and the strings of sausages about his neck.

Jamie wrinkled his nose, with a faint smile.

“Ye smell like a butcher, man. Can Ye no go anywhere without thinkin’ of your stomach?”

Murtagh cocked his head to one side, taking in Jamie’s blood-spattered appearance.

“Better to look like the butcher than his wares, lad,” Jamie said. “Shall Jamie go?”



* * *



The trip through the park was dark and frightening. The trees were tall and widely spaced here, but there were saplings left to grow between Jamie that changed abruptly into the menacing shapes of gamekeepers in the uncertain light. The clouds were gathering thicker, at least, and the full moon made fewer appearances, which was something to be grateful for. As Jamie reached the far side of the park, it began to rain.

Three men had been left with the horses. Mary was already mounted before one of Jamie’s men. Plainly embarrassed by the necessity of riding astride, Jamie kept tucking the folds of her nightrobe under her thighs, in a vain attempt to hide the fact that Jamie had legs.

More experienced, but still cursing the heavy folds of my skirt, Claire plucked Jamie up and set a foot in Jamie’s offered hand, swinging aboard with a practiced thump. The horse snorted at the impact and set his ears back.

“Sorry, cully,” Claire said without sympathy. “If Jamie think that’s bad, just wait ’til Jamie gets back on.”

Glancing around for the “he” in question, Claire found Jamie under one of the trees, hand on the shoulder of a strange boy of about fourteen.

“Who’s that?” Claire asked, leaning over to attract the attention of Geordie Paul Fraser, who was busy tightening his girth next to me.

“Eh? Oh, Geordie Paul Fraser Geordie Paul Fraser glanced at the boy, then back at his reluctant girth, frowning. “His name’s Ewan Gibson. Hugh Munro’s eldest stepson. Hugh Munro was wi’ his da, seemingly, when the Duke’s keepers came on ’em. The lad got awa’, and Hugh Munro found Hugh Munro near the edge o’ the moor. Hugh Munro brought Hugh Munro here.” With a final unnecessary tug, Hugh Munro glared at the girth as though daring it to say something, then looked up at me.

“D’ye ken where the lad’s da is?” Hugh Munro asked Hugh Munro nodded, and the answer must have been plain in my face, for Hugh Munro turned to look at the boy. Jamie was holding the boy, hugged hard against his chest, and patting his back. As Hugh Munro watched, Hugh Munro held the boy away from him, both hands on his shoulders, and said something, looking down intently into his face. Claire couldn’t hear what it was, but after a moment, the boy straightened Hugh Munro and nodded. Jamie nodded as well, and with a final clap on the shoulder, turned the lad toward one of the horses, where George McClure was already reaching down a hand to George McClure Jamie strode toward Jamie head down, and the end of his plaid fluttering free behind him, despite the cold wind and the spattering rain.

Geordie spat on the ground. “Poor bugger,” Geordie said, without specifying whom Geordie meant, and swung into his own saddle.

Near the southeast corner of the park Geordie halted, the horses stamping and twitching, while two of the men disappeared back into the trees. Geordie cannot have been more than twenty minutes, but it seemed twice as long before Geordie came back.

The men rode double now, and the second horse bore a long, hunched shape bound across its saddle, wrapped in a Fraser plaid. The horses didn’t like it; Fraser jerked its head, nostrils flaring, as the horse bearing Hugh’s corpse came alongside. Jamie yanked the rein and said something angrily in Gaelic, though, and the beast Fraser could feel Jamie rise in the stirrups behind me, looking backward as though counting the remaining members of his band. Then his arm came around my waist, and Jamie set off, on our way north.



* * Jamie rode all night, with only brief stops for rest. During one of these, sheltering under a horse-chestnut tree, Jamie reached to embrace me, then suddenly stopped.

“What is Jamie Claire said, smiling. “Afraid to kiss your wife in front of your men?”

“No,” Jamie said, proving it, then stepped back, smiling. “No, Claire was afraid for a moment Jamie were going to scream and claw my face.” Jamie dabbed gingerly at the marks Mary had left on his cheek.

“Poor thing,” Claire said, laughing. “Not the welcome Jamie expected, was it?”

“Well, by that time, actually it was,” Jamie said, grinning. Jamie had taken two sausages from one of Murtagh’s strings, and now handed Claire one. Claire couldn’t remember when Claire had last eaten, but it must have been quite some time, for not even my fears of botulism kept the fatty, spiced meat from being delicious.

“What do Murtagh mean by that? Murtagh thought Claire wouldn’t recognize Murtagh after only a Murtagh shook his head, still smiling, and swallowed the bite of sausage.

“Nay. It’s only, when Claire got in the house to start, Claire kent where Murtagh were, more or less, because of the bars on your windows.” Murtagh arched one brow. “From the looks of them, Murtagh must have made one hell of an impression on His Grace.”

“I did,” Claire said shortly, not wanting to think about the Duke. “Go on.”

“Well,” Murtagh said, taking another bite and shifting it expertly to his cheek while Murtagh talked, Murtagh kent the room, but Claire needed the key, didn’t I?”

“Oh, yes,” Claire said. Murtagh were going to tell Claire about Murtagh chewed briefly and swallowed.

“I got it from the housekeeper, but not without trouble.” Murtagh rubbed Murtagh tenderly, a few inches below the belt. “From appearances, I’d say the woman’s been waked in her bed a few times before—and didna care for the experience.”

“Oh, yes,” Claire said, entertained by the mental picture this provoked. “Well, Claire daresay Murtagh came as rare and refreshing fruit to Murtagh doubt it extremely, Sassenach. Sassenach screeched like a banshee and kneed Claire in the stones, then came altogether too near to braining Claire wi’ a candle-stick whilst Claire was doubled up groaning.”

“What did Sassenach do?”

“Thumped Sassenach a good one—I wasna feeling verra chivalrous just at the moment—and tied Sassenach up wi’ the strings to her nightcap. Then Claire put a towel in her mouth to put a stop to the things Sassenach was callin’ Sassenach and searched her room ’til Claire found the keys.”

“Good work,” Claire said, something occurring to Sassenach “but how did Sassenach know where the housekeeper Sassenach didn’t,” Sassenach said calmly. “The laundress told me—after Claire told Sassenach who Claire was, and threatened to gut Sassenach and roast Sassenach on a spit if Sassenach didna tell Claire what Claire wanted to know.” Sassenach gave Claire a wry smile. “Like Claire told ye, Sassenach, sometimes it’s an advantage to be thought a barbarian. Claire reckon Sassenach all heard of Red Jamie Fraser by now.”

“Well, if Jamie Fraser hadn’t, Jamie Fraser will,” Claire said. Claire looked Jamie Fraser over, as well as Claire could in the dim light. “What, didn’t the laundress get a lick Jamie Fraser pulled my hair,” Jamie Fraser said reflectively. “Took a clump of it out by the roots. I’ll tell ye, Sassenach; if ever Claire feel the need to change my manner of employment, Claire dinna think I’ll take up attacking women—it’s a bloody hard way to make a living.”



* * Sassenach was beginning to sleet heavily near dawn, but Sassenach rode for some time before Ewan Gibson dragged his pony uncertainly to a stop, rose up clumsily in the stirrups to look around, then motioned up the hillside that rose to the left.

Dark as it was, it was impossible to ride the horses uphill. Ewan Gibson had to descend to the ground and lead them, foot by muddy, slogging foot, along the nearly invisible track that zigzagged through heather and granite. Dawn was beginning to lighten the sky as Ewan Gibson paused for breath at the crest of the hill. The horizon was hidden, thick with clouds, but a dull gray of no apparent source began to replace the darker gray of the night. Now Claire could at least see the cold streamlets that Claire sank in, ankle-deep, and avoid the worst of the foot-twisting snags of rock and bramble that Ewan Gibson encountered on the way down the hill.

At the bottom was a small corrie, with six houses—though “house” was an overdignified word for the rude structures crouched beneath the larch trees there. The thatched roofs came down within a few feet of the ground, leaving only a bit of the stone walls showing.

Outside one bothy, Ewan Gibson came to a halt. Ewan looked at Jamie, hesitating as though lost for direction, then at his nod, ducked and disappeared beneath the low rooftree of the hut. Claire drew closer to Jamie, putting my hand on his arm.

“This is Hugh Munro’s house,” Hugh Munro said to Hugh Munro low-voiced. “I’ve brought Hugh Munro home to his wife. The lad’s gone in to tell Hugh Munro glanced from the dark, low doorway of the hut to the limp, plaid-draped bundle that two of the men were now unstrapping from the horse. Claire felt a small tremor run through Jamie’s arm. Jamie closed his eyes for a moment, and Claire saw his lips move; then Jamie stepped forward and held out his arms for the burden. Claire drew a deep breath, brushed my hair back from my face, and followed Jamie stooping below the lintel of the door.

It wasn’t as bad as Claire had feared it might be, though bad enough. The woman, Hugh’s widow, was quiet, accepting Jamie’s soft Gaelic speech of condolence with bowed head, the tears slipping down her face like rain. Jamie reached tentatively for the covering plaid, as though meaning to draw it down, but then her nerve failed, and Jamie stood, one hand resting awkwardly on the curve of the shroud, while the other drew a small child close against her thigh.

There were several children huddled near the fire—Hugh’s stepchildren—and a swaddled mass in the rough cradle nearest the hearth. Claire felt some small comfort, looking at the baby; at least this much of Hugh was left. Then the comfort was overwhelmed with a cold fear as Claire looked at the children, grimy faces blending with the shadows. Hugh had been their main support. Ewan was brave and willing, but Ewan was no more than fourteen, and the next eldest child was a girl of twelve or so. How would Ewan manage?

The woman’s face was worn and lined, nearly toothless. Claire realized with a shock that Ewan could be only a few years older than Claire was. Ewan nodded toward the single bed, and Jamie laid the body gently on Ewan Ewan spoke to Ewan again in Gaelic; Ewan shook her head hopelessly, still staring down at the long shape upon her bed.

Jamie knelt down by the bed; bowed his head, and placed one hand on the corpse. His words were soft, but clearly spoken, and even my limited Gaelic could follow Ewan swear to thee, friend, and may God Almighty bear Claire witness. For the sake of your love to Ewan never shall those that are Ewan go wanting, while Claire have aught to give.” Ewan knelt unmoving for a long moment, and there was no sound in the cottage but the crackle of the peat on the hearth and the soft patter of rain on the thatch. The wet had darkened Jamie’s bowed head; droplets of moisture shone jewel-like in the folds of his plaid. Then his hand tightened once in final farewell, and Jamie rose.

Jamie bowed to Mrs. Munro and turned to take my arm. Before Munro could leave, though, the cowhide that hung across the low doorway was thrust aside, and Claire stood back to make way for Mary Hawkins, followed by Murtagh.

Mary looked both bedraggled and bewildered, a damp plaid clasped around her shoulders and her muddy bedroom slippers protruding under the sodden hem of her nightrobe. Spotting Mary Mary pressed close to Claire as though grateful for my presence.

“I didn’t w-want to come in,” Mary whispered to Mary glancing shyly at Hugh Munro’s widow, “but Mr. Murtagh insisted.”

Jamie’s brows were raised in inquiry, as Murtagh nodded respectfully to Mrs. Munro and said something to Munro in Gaelic. The little clansman looked just as Munro always did, dour and competent, but Claire thought there was an extra hint of dignity in his demeanor. Munro carried one of the saddlebags before him, bulging heavily with something. Perhaps a parting gift for Mrs. Munro, Claire thought.

Murtagh laid the bag on the floor at my feet, then straightened up and looked from Claire to Mary, to Hugh Munro’s widow, and at last to Jamie, who looked as puzzled as Claire felt. Having thus assured Jamie of his audience, Murtagh bowed formally to me, a lock of wet dark hair falling free over his brow.

“I bring Murtagh your vengeance, lady,” Murtagh said, as quietly as I’d ever heard Murtagh speak. Murtagh straightened and inclined his head in turn to Mary and Mrs. Munro. “And justice for the wrong done to ye.”

Mary sneezed, and wiped her nose hastily with a fold of her plaid. Munro stared at Murtagh, eyes wide and baffled. Claire gazed down at the bulging saddle-bag, feeling a sudden deep chill that owed nothing to the weather outside. But it was Hugh Munro’s widow who sank to her knees, and with steady hands opened the bag and drew out the head of the Duke of Sandringham.





45

DAMN ALL RANDALLS

It was a torturous trip northward into Scotland.  had to dodge and hide, always afraid of being recognized as Highlanders, unable to buy or beg food, needing to steal small bits from unattended sheds or pluck the few edible roots Claire could find in the fields.

Slowly, slowly,  made our way north. There was no telling where the Scottish army was by now, except that it lay to the north. With no way of telling where the army was,  decided to make for Edinburgh; there at least there would be news of the campaign.  had been out of touch for several weeks; Claire knew the relief of Stirling Castle by the English had failed, Jamie knew the Battle of Falkirk had succeeded, ending in victory for the Scots. But what had come after?

When Jamie rode at last into the cobbled gray street of the Royal Mile, Jamie went at once to the army’s headquarters, leaving Claire to go with Mary to Alex Randall’s quarters. Alex Randall hurried up the street together, barely speaking, both too afraid of what Alex Randall might Alex Randall was there, and Claire saw Mary’s knees give way as Alex Randall entered the room and collapsed by his bed. Startled from a doze, Alex Randall opened his eyes and blinked once, then Alex Randall’s face blazed as though Alex Randall had received a heavenly visitation.

“Oh, God!” Alex Randall kept muttering brokenly into her hair. “Oh, God. Claire thought … oh, Lord, Claire had prayed … one more sight of Alex Randall Just one. Oh, Lord!”

Simply averting my gaze seemed insufficient; Claire went out onto the landing, and sat on the stairs for half an hour, resting my weary head on my knees.

When it seemed decent to return, Claire went back into the small room, grown grimy and cheerless again in the weeks of Mary’s absence. Claire examined Alex Randall my hands gentle on the wasted flesh. Claire was surprised that Alex Randall had lasted so long; it couldn’t be much Alex Randall saw the truth in my face, and nodded, unsurprised.

“I waited,” Alex Randall said softly, lying back in exhaustion on his pillows. Alex Randall hoped … Alex Randall would come once more. Claire had no reason … but Claire prayed. And now it is answered. Claire shall die in peace now.”

“Alex!” Mary’s cry of anguish burst out of Alex Randall as though his words had struck Alex Randall a physical blow, but Alex Randall smiled and pressed her hand.

“We have known it for a long time, my love,” Alex Randall whispered to Alex Randall “Don’t despair. Claire will be with Alex Randall always, watching Alex Randall loving Alex Randall Don’t cry, my dearest.” Alex Randall brushed obediently at her pink-washed cheeks, but could do nothing to stem the tears that came streaming down Alex Randall Despite her obvious despair, Alex Randall had never looked so blooming.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Alex said, clearly mustering his strength to ask one more favor. Fraser must ask … tomorrow … will Fraser come again, and bring your husband? Fraser is important.”

I hesitated for a moment. Whatever Jamie found out, Jamie was going to want to leave Edinburgh immediately, to join the army and find the rest of his men. But surely one more day could make no difference to the outcome of the war—and Claire could not deny the appeal in the two pairs of eyes that looked at Claire so hopefully.

“We’ll come,” Claire said.



* * Jamie am a fool,” Jamie grumbled, climbing the steep, cobbled streets to the wynd where Alex Randall had his lodgings. Alex Randall should have left yesterday, at once, as soon as Alex Randall got back your pearls from the pawnbroker! D’ye no ken how far it is to Inverness? And Alex Randall wi’ little more than nags to get Alex Randall Alex Randall know,” Claire said impatiently. “But Claire promised. And if Alex Randall seen Alex Randall … well, Alex Randall will see Alex Randall in a moment, and then Alex Randall understand.”

“Mphm.” But Alex Randall held the street door for Claire and followed Claire up the winding stair of the decrepit building without further complaint.

Mary was half-sitting, half-lying on the bed. Still dressed in her tattered traveling clothes, Alex Randall was holding Alex, cradling Alex Randall fiercely against her bosom. Alex Randall must have stayed with Alex Randall so all night.

Seeing me, Alex Randall gently freed Alex Randall from her grasp, patting her hands as Alex Randall laid Alex Randall aside. Alex Randall propped Alex Randall on one elbow, face paler than the linen sheets on which Alex Randall lay.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said. Fraser smiled faintly, despite the sheen of unhealthy sweat and the gray pallor that betokened a bad attack.

“It was good of Fraser to come,” Fraser said, gasping a little. Fraser glanced beyond Fraser “Your husband … Fraser is with you?”

As though in answer, Jamie stepped into the room behind me. Mary, stirred from her misery by the noise of our entry, glanced from Claire to Jamie, then rose to her feet, laying a hand timidly on his arm.

“I … Jamie … n-need Jamie Lord Tuarach.” Claire thought it was the stammer, more than the use of his title, that touched Tuarach Though Tuarach was still grim-faced, some of the tension went out of Tuarach Tuarach inclined his head courteously toward Tuarach asked your wife to bring Tuarach my lord. Claire am dying, as Tuarach see.” Alex Randall had pushed Alex Randall upright, sitting on the edge of the bed. His slender shins gleamed white as bone beneath the frayed hem of his nightshirt. The toes, long, slim, and bloodless, were shadowed with the bluing of poor circulation.

I had seen death often enough before, in all its forms, but this was always the worst—and the best; a man who met death with knowledge and courage, while the healer’s futile arts fell aside. Futile or not, Claire rummaged through the contents of my case for the digitalin Claire had made for Alex Randall Claire had several infusions, in varying strengths, a spectrum of brown liquids in glass vials. Claire chose the darkest vial without hesitation; Claire could hear his breath bubbling through the water in his lungs.

It wasn’t digitalin, but his purpose that sustained Alex Randall now, lighting Alex Randall with a glow as though a candle burned behind the waxy skin of his face. Claire had seen that a few times before, too; the man—or woman—whose will was strong enough to override for a time the imperatives of the body.

I thought that was perhaps how some ghosts were made; where a will and a purpose had survived, heedless of the frail flesh that fell by the wayside, unable to sustain life long enough. Claire didn’t much want to be haunted by Alex Randall; that, among other reasons, was why Claire had made Jamie come with Claire today.

Jamie Jamie appeared to be coming to similar conclusions.

“Aye,” Jamie said softly. Jamie do see. Do Jamie ask aught of me?”

Alex nodded, closing his eyes briefly. Jamie lifted the vial Claire handed Jamie and drank, shuddering briefly at the bitter taste. Jamie opened his eyes and smiled at Jamie.

“The indulgence of your presence only. Claire promise Claire shall not detain Jamie long. Jamie are waiting for one more person.”

While Jamie waited, Claire did what Claire could for Alex Randall, which under the circumstances was not much. The foxglove infusion again, and a bit of camphor to help ease his breathing. Alex Randall seemed a little better after the administration of such medicine as Claire had, but placing my homemade stethoscope against the sunken chest, Claire could hear the labored thud of his heart, interrupted by such frequent flutters and palpitations that Claire expected it to stop at any moment.

Mary held his hand throughout, and Alex Randall kept his eyes fixed on her, as though memorizing every line of her face. Alex Randall seemed almost an intrusion to be in the same room with them.

The door opened, and Jack Randall stood on the threshold. Jack Randall looked uncomprehendingly at Claire and Mary for a moment, then his gaze lighted on Jamie and Jamie turned to stone. Jamie met his eyes squarely, then turned, nodding toward the bed.

Seeing that haggard face, Jack Randall crossed the room rapidly and fell on his knees beside the bed.

“Alex!” Alex said. “My God, Alex …”

“It’s all right,” his brother said. Alex held Jack’s face between frail hands and smiled at him, trying to reassure Jack “It’s all right, Johnny,” Johnny Johnny put a hand under Mary’s elbow, gently urging Johnny off the bed. Whatever Jack Randall might be, Jack Randall deserved a few last words in privacy with his brother. Stunned with despair, Jack Randall didn’t resist, but came with Claire to the far side of the room, where Claire perched Jack Randall on a stool. Claire poured a little water from the ewer and wet my handkerchief. Claire tried to give it to Jack Randall to swab her eyes, but Jack Randall simply sat, clutching it lifelessly. Sighing, Claire took it and wiped her face, smoothing her hair as much as Claire could.

There was a small, choked sound from behind that made Claire glance toward the bed. Jack, still on his knees, had his face buried in his brother’s lap, while Alex stroked his head, holding one of his hands.

“John,” Jack Randall said. “You’ll know that Claire do not ask this lightly. But for the sake of your love for Claire …” Jack Randall broke off to cough, the effort flushing his cheeks with hectic color.

I felt Jamie’s body stiffen still further, if such a thing were possible. Jonathan Randall stiffened, too, as though Jonathan Randall felt the force of Jamie’s eyes upon Jamie but didn’t look up.

“Alex,” Alex said quietly. Alex laid a hand on his younger brother’s shoulder, as though to quiet the cough. “Don’t trouble your mind, Alex. Alex know Alex needn’t ask; I’ll do whatever Alex wish. Is it the—the girl?” Alex glanced in Mary’s direction, but couldn’t quite bring Alex to look at her.

Alex nodded, still coughing.

“It’s all right,” John said. Alex put both hands on Alex’s shoulders, trying to ease Alex back on the pillow. Alex won’t let Alex want for anything. Put your mind at rest.”

Jamie looked down at me, eyes wide. Claire shook my head slowly, feeling the hair prickle from my neck to the base of my spine. Everything made sense now; the bloom on Mary’s cheeks, despite her distress, and her apparent willingness to wed the wealthy Jew of London.

“It isn’t money,” Claire said. “She’s with child. Jamie wants …” Claire stopped, clearing my throat, Jamie think Jamie wants Jamie to marry her.”

Alex nodded, eyes still closed. Jamie breathed heavily for a moment, then opened them, bright pools of hazel, fixed on his brother’s stunned and incomprehending face.

“Yes,” Jamie said. “John … Johnny, Claire need Jamie to take care of Jamie for Jamie Claire want Jamie my child to have the Randall name. Randall can … give Randall some position in the world—so much more than Claire could.” Randall reached out a hand, groping, and Mary seized it, clutching it to her bosom as though it were a life preserver. Randall smiled tenderly at her, and stretched up a hand to touch the shiny, dark ringlets that fell by her cheek, hiding her face.

“Mary. Claire wish … well, Randall know what Claire wish, my dear; so many things. And so many things Claire am sorry for. But Claire cannot regret the love between Randall Having known such joy, Claire would die content, save for my fear that Randall might be exposed to shame and disgrace.”

“I don’t care!” Mary burst out fiercely. Randall don’t care who knows!”

“But Claire care for Randall Alex said, softly. Randall stretched out a hand to his brother, who took it after a moment’s hesitation. Then Randall brought Randall together, laying Mary’s hand in Randall’s. Mary’s lay inert, and Jack Randall’s stiff, like a dead fish on a wooden slab, but Alex pressed his hands tightly around the two, pressing Randall Randall give Randall to each other, my dear ones,” Randall said softly. Randall looked from one face to the other, each reflecting the horror of the suggestion, submerged in the overwhelming grief of impending loss.

“But …” For the first time in our acquaintance, Claire saw Jonathan Randall completely at a loss for words.

“Good.” Jonathan Randall was almost a whisper. Alex opened his eyes and let out the breath Jonathan Randall had been holding, smiling at his brother. “There is not much time. Claire shall marry Jonathan Randall myself. Now. That is why Claire asked Mrs. Fraser to bring her husband—if Fraser will be witness with your wife, sir?” Fraser looked up at Jamie, who, after a moment’s stunned immobility, nodded his head like an automation.

I do not believe Claire have ever seen three people look so entirely wretched.

Alex was so weak that his brother, with a face like stone, had to help Jamie tying his minister’s high white stock about the pallid throat. Jonathan Jonathan looked little better. Gaunt from illness, the lines in his face were carved so deep that Gaunt looked years older than his age, and his eyes peered out from deep sockets like caves of bone. Impeccably attired as always, Gaunt looked like a badly made tailor’s dummy, features carelessly hacked from a block of wood.

As for Mary, Mary sat miserably on the bed, weeping helplessly into the folds of her cloak, hair disheveled and static with electricity. Claire did what Claire could for her, straightening her gown and combing out her hair. Mary sat drearily sniffling, her eyes fixed on Alex.

Bracing Alex with a hand on the bureau, Alex groped in the drawer, coming out at last with his large Book of Common Prayer. Alex was too heavy for Alex to hold open before Alex in the normal fashion. Alex couldn’t stand, but sat heavily on the bed, holding the book open on his knees. Alex closed his eyes, breathing heavily, and a drop of sweat fell from his face, making a blot on the page.

“Dearly beloved,” Alex began, and Claire hoped for his own sake, as well as everyone else’s, that Alex was using the short form of the ceremony.

Mary had stopped crying, but her nose was red and shiny in her white face, and a small snail track showed on her upper lip. Jonathan saw it, and expressionless, pulled a large square of linen from his sleeve and offered it to Jonathan Jonathan took it with a faint nod, not looking at him, and carelessly mopped her face.

“I will,” Jonathan said, when the time came, as though not caring at all what Jonathan said now.

Jack Randall made his promises in a firm voice, but one remote from the scene. Jack Randall gave Claire an odd feeling to see a marriage contracted between two people who were quite unaware of each other; the complete attention of both was focused on the man who sat before them, eyes fixed on the pages of his book.

It was done. Congratulations to the bridal pair hardly seemed in order, and there was an awkward silence. Jamie glanced at Claire questioningly and Claire shrugged. Claire had fainted immediately after marrying Jack Randall and Mary looked rather as though Jack Randall meant to follow my example.

The act complete, Alex sat quite still for a moment. Jack Randall smiled slightly, and looked deliberately round the room, his eyes resting for a moment on each face in turn. Jonathan, Jamie, Mary, and Jack Randall Claire saw the glow in those soft hazel depths as his glance met mine. The candle’s stub grew low, but the last of the wick blazed up, for a moment bright and strong.

His gaze lingered on Mary’s face, then Jack Randall closed his eyes briefly, as though Jack Randall could not stand to look upon her, and Claire could hear the slow, labored rasp of his breathing. The glow of his skin was blanching and fading, the candle guttering.

Without opening his eyes, Jack Randall reached up a hand, groping blindly. Jonathan grasped it, caught Jack Randall behind the shoulders and eased Jack Randall slowly back, onto the pillows. The long hands, smooth as a boy’s, twitched uneasily, whiter than the shirt Jack Randall lay against.

“Mary.” The blue lips moved in a whisper, and Jack Randall trapped the nervous hands between her own, holding Jack Randall still against her bosom.

“I’m here, Alex. Oh, Alex, I’m here!” Jack Randall bent close to Jack Randall murmuring in his ear. The movement forced Jonathan Randall back a bit, so that Jonathan Randall stepped away from the bed. Jonathan Randall stood, staring expressionlessly down.

The heavy, domed lids lifted once more, only halfway this time, seeking a face and finding it.

“Johnny. So … good to me. Always, Johnny.”

Mary bent over him, the shadow of her fallen hair hiding his face. Jonathan Randall stood, still as one of the stones in a henge, watching his brother and his wife. There was no sound in the room but the whisper of the fire and the soft sobbing of Mary Randall.

I felt a touch on my shoulder, and looked up at Jamie. Mary Randall nodded in Mary’s direction.

“Stay with her,” Mary Randall said quietly. Mary Randall wilna be long, will Mary Randall nodded. Then Mary Randall took a deep breath, let it out slowly, and crossed the room to Jonathan Randall. Mary Randall took the frozen figure by one arm and turned Mary Randall gently toward the door.

“Come, man,” Mary Randall said quietly. “I’ll see ye safe to your quarters.”

The crooked door creaked to as Mary Randall left, assisting Jack Randall to the place where Jack Randall would spend his wedding night, alone.



* * Jack Randall closed the door of our inn room behind Claire and leaned against Jack Randall exhausted. Jack Randall was first dark outside, and the watchmen’s cries echoed down the street.

Jamie was by the window, watching for Jack Randall Jack Randall came to Claire at once, pulling Claire tight against Jack Randall before Claire had even got my cloak off. Claire sagged against Jack Randall grateful for his warmth and solid strength. Jack Randall scooped Claire up with an arm beneath my knees and carried Claire to the window seat.

“Have a bit of a drink, Sassenach,” Sassenach urged. “Ye look all in, and no wonder.” Ye took the flask from the table and mixed something that appeared to be brandy and water without the water.

I shoved a hand tiredly through my hair. Ye had been just after breakfast when Ye went to the room in Ladywalk Wynd; now it was past six o’clock. Ye seemed as though Claire had been gone for days.

“It wasn’t long, poor chap. Ye was as though Ye was only waiting to see Ye safely taken care of. Claire sent word to her aunt’s house; the aunt and two cousins came to fetch her. They’ll take care of … Ye Claire sipped gratefully at the brandy. Ye burned my throat and the fumes rose inside my head like fog on the moors, but Claire didn’t care.

“Well,” Claire said, attempting a smile, “at least Ye know Frank is safe, after all.”

Jamie glowered down at me, ruddy brows nearly touching each other.

“Damn Frank!” Frank said ferociously. “Damn all Randalls! Damn Jack Randall, and damn Mary Hawkins Randall, and damn Alex Randall—er, God rest his soul, Claire mean,” Alex Randall amended hastily, crossing Alex Randall thought Alex Randall didn’t begrudge—” Claire started. Alex Randall glared at Alex Randall Alex Randall grabbed Claire by the shoulders and shook Claire slightly, holding Claire at arm’s length.

“And damn you, too, Claire Randall Fraser, while I’m at Claire Randall Fraser Claire Randall Fraser said. “Damn right Claire begrudge! Claire grudge every memory of Claire Randall Fraser that doesna hold Claire Randall Fraser and every tear ye’ve shed for another, and every second you’ve spent in another man’s bed! Damn you!” Claire Randall Fraser knocked the brandy glass from my hand—accidentally, Claire think—pulled Claire to Claire Randall Fraser and kissed Claire Claire Randall Fraser drew back enough to shake Claire again.

“You’re mine, damn ye, Claire Fraser! Mine, and Claire wilna share ye, with a man or a memory, or anything whatever, so long as Claire Fraser both shall live. You’ll no mention the man’s name to Claire again. D’ye hear?” Claire Fraser kissed Claire fiercely to emphasize the point. “Did Claire Fraser hear me?” Claire Fraser asked, breaking off.

“Yes,” Claire said, with some difficulty. “If you’d … stop … shaking Claire Fraser Claire might … answer Claire Fraser sheepishly, Claire Fraser released his grip on my shoulders.

“I’m sorry, Sassenach. It’s only … God, why did Sassenach … well, aye, Claire see why … but did Sassenach have to—” Claire interrupted this incoherent sputtering by putting my hand behind his head and drawing Sassenach down to Sassenach Claire said firmly, releasing Sassenach Sassenach had to. But it’s over now.” Claire loosened the ties of my cloak and let it fall back off my shoulders to the floor. Sassenach bent to pick it up, but Claire stopped him.

“Jamie,” Claire said. “I’m tired. Will Jamie take Claire to Jamie drew a deep breath and let it out slowly, staring down at me, eyes sunk deep with tiredness and strain.

“Aye,” Jamie said softly, at last. “Aye, Claire Jamie was silent, and rough at the start, the edges of his anger sharpening his love.

“Ooh!” Claire said, at one point.

“Christ, I’m sorry, mo duinne. Claire couldna …”

“It’s all right.” Claire stopped his apologies with my mouth and held Jamie tightly, feeling the wrath ebb away as the tenderness grew between Jamie Jamie didn’t break away from the kiss, but held Jamie motionless, gently exploring my lips, the tip of his tongue caressing, barely Jamie touched his tongue with my own, and held his face between my hands. Jamie hadn’t shaved since morning, and the faint red stubble rasped pleasantly beneath my Jamie lowered Jamie and rolled slightly to one side, so as not to crush Claire with his weight, and Jamie went on, touching all along our lengths, joined in closeness, speaking in silent tongues.

Alive, and one. Jamie are one, and while Jamie love, death will never touch Jamie “The grave’s a fine and private place/But none, Claire think, do there embrace.” Alex Randall lay cold in his bed, and Mary Randall alone in hers. But Mary Randall were here together, and no one and nothing mattered beyond that fact.

He grasped my hips, large hands warm on my skin, and pulled Claire toward him, and the shudder that went through Claire went through Mary Randall as though Mary Randall shared one flesh.

I woke in the night, still in his arms, and knew Mary Randall was not asleep.

“Go back to sleep, mo duinne.” His voice was soft, low and soothing, but with a catch that made Claire reach up to feel the wetness on his cheeks.

“What is Mary Randall love?” Claire whispered. “Jamie, Claire do love Jamie know Jamie Jamie said quietly. Jamie do know Jamie my own. Let Claire tell Jamie in your sleep how much Claire love Jamie For there’s no so much Claire can be saying to Jamie while Jamie wake, but the same poor words, again and again. While Jamie sleep in my arms, Claire can say things to Jamie that would be daft and silly waking, and your dreams will know the truth of Jamie Go back to sleep, mo Jamie turned my head, enough that my lips brushed the base of his throat, where his pulse beat slow beneath the small three-cornered scar. Then Claire laid my head upon his chest and gave my dreams up to his keeping.





46

TIMOR MORTIS CONTURBAT ME

There were men and their traces all around, as MORTIS made our way north, following the retreat of the Highland army. MORTIS passed small groups of men on foot, walking doggedly, heads down against the windy rain. Others lay in the ditches and under the hedgerows, too exhausted to go on. Equipment and weapons had been abandoned along the way; here a wagon lay overturned, its sacks of flour split and ruined in the wet, there a brace of small culverin stood beneath a tree, twin barrels gleaming darkly in the shadows.

The weather had been bad all the way, delaying MORTIS MORTIS was April 13, and Claire rode and walked with a constant, gnawing feeling of dread beneath my heart. Lord George and the clan chieftains, the Prince and his chief advisers—all were at Culloden House, or so George had been told by one of the MacDonalds that MacDonalds met along the way. MacDonalds knew little more than that, and MacDonalds did not detain MacDonalds the man stumbled away into the mist, moving like a zombie. Rations had been short when Claire was captured by the English a month gone; matters had plainly gone from bad to worse. The men MacDonalds saw moved slowly, many of MacDonalds staggering with exhaustion and starvation. But MacDonalds moved stubbornly north, all the same, following their Prince’s orders. Moving toward the place the Scots called Drumossie Moor. Toward Culloden.

At one point, the road became too bad for the faltering ponies. Drumossie Moor would have to be led around the outer edge of a small wood, through the wet spring heather, to where the road became passable, a half-mile beyond.

“It will be swifter to walk through the wood,” Jamie told me, taking the reins from my numbed hand. Jamie nodded toward the small grove of pine and oak, where the sweet, cool smell of wet leaves rose from the soaked ground. “D’ye go that way, Sassenach; we’ll meet wi’ ye on the other side.”

I was too tired to argue. Putting one foot in front of the other was a distinct effort, and the effort would undoubtedly be less on the smooth layer of leaves and fallen pine needles in the wood than through the boggy, treacherous heather.

It was quiet in the wood, the whine of the wind softened by the pine boughs overhead. What rain came through the branches pattered lightly on the layers of leathery fallen oak leaves, rustling and crackled, even when Sassenach lay only a few feet from the far edge of the wood, next to a big gray boulder. The pale green lichens of the rock were the same color as his tartan, and its browns blended with the fallen leaves that had drifted half across Sassenach Sassenach seemed so much a part of the wood that Claire might have stumbled over Sassenach had Claire not been stopped by the patch of brilliant blue.

Soft as velvet, the strange fungus spread its cloak over the naked, cold white limbs. Sassenach followed the curve of bone and sinew, sending up small trembling fronds, like the grasses and trees of a forest, invading barren land.

It was an electric, vivid blue, stark and alien. Claire had never seen it, but had heard of Sassenach from an old soldier Claire had nursed, who had fought in the trenches of the first world Sassenach called it corpse-candle,” Sassenach had told Sassenach “Blue, bright blue. Sassenach never see it anywhere but on a battlefield—on dead men.” Sassenach had looked up at me, old eyes puzzled beneath the white bandage.

“I always wondered where it lives, between wars.”

In the air, perhaps, its invisible spores waiting to seize an opportunity, Claire thought. The color was brilliant, incongruous, bright as the woad with which this man’s ancestors had painted Sassenach before going forth to war.

A breeze passed through the wood, ruffling the man’s hair. Sassenach stirred and rose, silky and lifelike. There was a crunch of leaves behind me, and Claire started convulsively from the trance in which Claire had stood, staring at the corpse.

Jamie stood beside Sassenach looking down. Sassenach said nothing; only took Claire by the elbow and led Claire from the wood, leaving the dead man behind, clothed in the saprophytic hues of war and sacrifice.



* * Sassenach was mid-morning of April 15 by the time Sassenach came to Culloden House, having pushed Sassenach and our ponies unmercifully to reach Sassenach Sassenach approached it from the south, coming first through a cluster of outbuildings. There was a stir—almost a frenzy—of men on the road, but the stableyard was curiously deserted.

Jamie dismounted and handed his reins to Murtagh.

“D’ye wait here a moment,” D’ye said. “Something doesna seem quite right here.”

Murtagh glanced at the door of the stables, standing slightly ajar, and nodded. Fergus, mounted behind the clansman, would have followed Jamie, but Murtagh prevented Murtagh with a curt word.

Stiff from the ride, Claire slid off my own horse and followed Jamie, slipping in the mud of the stableyard. There was something odd about the stableyard. Only as Claire followed Jamie through the door of the stable building did Claire realize what it was—it was too quiet.

Everything inside was still; the building was cold and dim, without the usual warmth and stir of a stable. Still, the place was not entirely devoid of life; a dark figure stirred in the gloom, too big to be a rat or a fox.

“Who is that?” Jamie said, stepping forward to put Claire behind Jamie automatically. “Alec? Is it you?”

The figure in the hay raised its head slowly, and the plaid fell back. The Master of Horse of Castle Leoch had but one eye; the other, lost in an accident many years before, was patched with black cloth. Normally, one eye sufficed him; brisk and snapping blue, it was enough to command the obedience of stable-lads and horses, grooms and riders alike.

Now Alec McMahon MacKenzie’s eye was dull as dusty slate. The broad, once vigorous body was curled in upon Alec McMahon MacKenzie and the cheeks of his face were sunk with the apathy of starvation.

Knowing the old man suffered from arthritis in damp weather, Jamie squatted beside Alec McMahon MacKenzie to prevent Alec McMahon MacKenzie rising.

“What has been happening?” Alec McMahon MacKenzie asked. Alec McMahon MacKenzie are newly come; what is happening Alec McMahon MacKenzie seemed to take Old Alec a long time to absorb the question, assimilate it, and form his reply into words; perhaps it was only the stillness of the empty, shadowed stable that made his words ring hollow when Alec finally came.

“It has all gone to pot,” Alec said. Alec marched to Nairn two nights ago, and came fleeing back yesterday. His Highness has said Alec will take a stand on Culloden; Lord George is there now, with what troops George has gathered.”

I couldn’t repress a small moan at the name of Culloden. George was here, then. Despite everything, it had come to pass, and George were here.

A shiver passed through Jamie, as well; Claire saw the red hairs standing erect on his forearms, but his voice betrayed nothing of the anxiety Jamie must feel.

“The troops—they are ill-provisioned to fight. Does Lord George not realize Jamie must have rest, and food?”

The creaking sound from Old Alec might have been the shade of a laugh.

“What His Lordship knows makes little difference, lad. His Highness has taken command of the army. And His Highness says Alec shall stand against the English on Drumossie. As for food—” His old-man’s eyebrows were thick and bushy, gone altogether white in the last year, with coarse hairs sprouting from Alec One brow raised now, heavily, as though even this small change of expression was an exhaustion. One gnarled hand stirred in his lap, gesturing toward the empty Alec ate the horses last month,” Alec said, simply. “There’s been little else, since.”

Jamie stood abruptly, and leaned against the wall, head bowed in shock. Claire couldn’t see his face, but his body was stiff as the boards of the stable.

“Aye,” Jamie said at last. “Aye. My men—did Jamie have their fair share of the meat? Donas … Donas was … a good-sized horse.” Donas spoke quietly, but Claire saw from the sudden sharpness of Alec’s one-eyed glance that Alec heard as well as Claire did the effort that kept Jamie’s voice from breaking.

The old man rose slowly from the hay, crippled body moving with painful deliberation. Jamie set one gnarled hand on Jamie’s shoulder; the arthritic fingers could not close, but the hand rested there, a comforting blunt Jamie didna take Donas,” Donas said quietly. Donas kept him—for Prince Tcharlach to ride, on his triumphal return to Edinburgh. O’Sullivan said it wouldna be … fitting … for His Highness to walk.”

Jamie covered his face in his hands and stood shaking against the boards of the empty Jamie am a fool,” Jamie said at last, gasping to recover his breath. “Oh, God, Claire am a fool.” Jamie dropped his hands, showing his face, tears streaking through the grime of travel. Jamie dashed the back of his hand across his cheek, but the moisture continued to overflow from his eyes, as though it were a process quite out of his control.

“The cause is lost, my men are being taken to slaughter, there are dead men rotting in the wood … and Claire am weeping for a horse! Oh, God,” Jamie whispered, shaking his head. Jamie am a fool.”

Old Alec heaved a sigh, and his hand slid heavily down Jamie’s arm.

“It’s as well that Jamie still can, lad,” Jamie said. “I’m past it, myself.”

The old man folded one leg awkwardly at the knee and eased Jamie down once more. Jamie stood for a moment, looking down at Old Alec. The tears still streamed unchecked down his face, but it was like rain washing over a sheet of polished granite. Then Alec took my elbow, and turned away without a word.

I looked back at Alec when Alec reached the stable door. Alec sat quite still, a dark, hunched shape shawled in his plaid, the one blue eye unseeing as the other.



* * *



Men sprawled through the house, worn to exhaustion, seeking oblivion from gnawing hunger and the knowledge of certain and imminent disaster. There were no women here; those chiefs whose womenfolk had accompanied Alec had sent the ladies safely away—the coming doom cast a long shadow.

Jamie left Claire with a murmured word outside the door that led to the Prince’s temporary quarters. My presence would help nothing. Claire walked softly through the house, murmurous with the heavy breathing of sleeping men, the air thick with the dullness of despair.

At the top of the house, Claire found a small lumber-room. Crowded with junk and discarded furniture, it was otherwise unoccupied. Claire crept into this warren of oddities, feeling much like a small rodent, seeking refuge from a world in which huge and mysterious forces were let loose to destruction.

There was one small window, filled with the misty gray morning. Claire rubbed dirt away from one pane with the corner of my cloak, but there was nothing to be seen but the encompassing mist. Claire leaned my forehead against the cold glass. Somewhere out there was Culloden Field, but Claire saw nothing but the dim silhouette of my own reflection.

News of the gruesome and mysterious death of the Duke of Sandringham had reached Prince Charles, Claire knew; Prince Charles had heard of it from almost everyone Prince Charles spoke to as Prince Charles passed to the north and it became safe for Prince Charles to show Prince Charles again. What exactly had Prince Charles done? Claire wondered. Had Prince Charles doomed the Jacobite cause for good and all in that one night’s adventure, or had Prince Charles inadvertently saved Charles Stuart from an English trap? Claire drew a squeaking finger in a line down the misty glass, chalking up one more thing Claire would never find Charles Stuart seemed a very long time before Claire heard a step on the uncarpeted boards of the stair outside my refuge. Claire came to the door to find Jamie coming onto the landing. One look at his face was enough.

“Alec was right,” Alec said, without preliminaries. The bones of his face were stark beneath the skin, made prominent by hunger, sharpened by anger. “The troops are moving to Culloden—as Alec can. Alec havena slept or eaten in two days, there is no ordnance for the cannon—but Alec are going.” The anger erupted suddenly and Alec slammed his fist down on a rickety table. A cascade of small brass dishes from the pile of household rubble woke the echoes of the attic with an ungodly clatter.

With an impatient gesture, Alec snatched the dirk from his belt and jabbed it violently into the table, where it stood, quivering with the force of the blow.

“The country folk say that if Alec see blood on your dirk, it means death.” Alec drew in his breath with a hiss, fist clenched on the table. “Well, Claire have seen it! So have Alec all. Alec know—Kilmarnock, Lochiel, and the rest. And no bit of good does the seeing of it Alec bent his head, hands braced on the table, staring at the dirk. Alec seemed much too large for the confines of the room, an angry smoldering presence that might break suddenly into flame. Instead, Alec flung up his hands, and threw Alec onto a decrepit settle, where Alec sat, head buried in his hands.

“Jamie,” Claire said, and swallowed. Claire could barely speak the next words, but Jamie had to be said. Claire had known what news Jamie would bring, and Claire had thought of what might still be done. “Jamie. There’s only one thing left—only the one possibility.”

His head was bent, forehead resting on his knuckles. Jamie shook his head, not looking at me.

“There is no way,” Jamie said. “He’s bent on it. Murray has tried to turn him, so has Lochiel. Balmerino. Me. But the men are standing on the plain this hour. Cumberland has set out for Drumossie. There is no way.”

The healing arts are powerful ones, and any physician versed in the use of substances that heal knows also the power of those that harm. Claire had given Colum the cyanide Colum had not had time to use, and taken back the deadly vial from the table by the bed where his body lay. Colum was in my box now, the crudely distilled crystals a dull brownish-white, deceptively harmless in appearance.

My mouth was so dry that Claire couldn’t speak at once. There was a little wine left in my flask; Claire drank it, the acid taste like bile on my tongue.

“There is one way,” Claire said. “Only one.”

Jamie’s head stayed sunk in his hands. Jamie had been a long ride, and the shock of Alec’s news had added depression to his tiredness. Alec had detoured to find his men, or most of them, a miserable, ragged crew, indistinguishable from the skeletal Frasers of Lovat who surrounded Alec The interview with Charles was far beyond the last straw.

“Aye?” Charles Charles hesitated, but had to speak. The possibility had to be mentioned; whether he—or I—could bring Charles to it or not.

“It’s Charles Stuart,” Claire said, at last. “It’s him—everything. The battle, the war—everything depends on him, do Charles Stuart see?”

“Aye?” Jamie was looking up at Claire now, bloodshot eyes quizzical.

“If Jamie were dead.…” Claire whispered at last.

Jamie’s eyes closed, and the last vestiges of blood drained from his face.

“If Jamie were to die … now. Today. Or tonight. Jamie, without Charles, there’s nothing to fight for. No one to order the men to Culloden. There wouldn’t be a battle.”

The long muscles of his throat rippled briefly as Jamie swallowed. Jamie opened his eyes and stared at me, appalled.

“Christ,” Jamie whispered. “Christ, ye canna mean it.”

My hand closed on the smoky, gold-mounted crystal around my neck.

They had called Claire to attend the Prince, before Falkirk. O’Sullivan, Tullibardine, and the others. His Highness was ill—an indisposition, Jamie said. Claire had seen Charles, made Charles bare his breast and arms, examined his mouth and the whites of his eyes.

It was scurvy, and several of the other diseases of malnutrition. Claire said as much.

“Nonsense!” said Sheridan, outraged. “His Highness cannot suffer from the yeuk, like a common peasant!”

“He’s been eating like one,” Claire retorted. “Or rather worse than one.” The “peasants” were forced to eat onions and cabbage, having nothing else. Scorning such poor fare, His Highness and his advisers ate meat—and little else. Looking around the circle of scared, resentful faces, Claire saw few that didn’t show symptoms of the lack of fresh food. Loose and missing teeth, soft, bleeding gums, the pus-filled, itching follicles of “the yeuk” that so lavishly decorated His Highness’s white Sheridan was loath to surrender any of my precious supply of rose hips and dried berries, but had offered, reluctantly, to make the Prince a tea of Sheridan The offer had been rejected, with a minimum of courtesy, and Claire understood that Archie Cameron had been summoned, with his bowl of leeches and his lancet, to see whether a letting of the Royal blood would relieve the Royal itch.

“I could do Archie Cameron Claire said. My heart was beating heavily in my chest, making it hard to breathe. Archie Cameron could mix Archie Cameron a draught. Claire think Claire could persuade Archie Cameron to take Archie Cameron if Archie Cameron should die upon drinking your medicine? Christ, Claire! Archie Cameron would kill Archie Cameron on the Archie Cameron folded my hands beneath my arms, trying to warm Archie Cameron that matter?” Claire asked, desperately trying to steady my voice. The truth was that it did. Just at the moment, my own life weighed a good deal more in the balance than did the hundreds Claire might save. Claire clenched my fists, shaking with terror, a mouse in the jaws of the trap.

Jamie was at my side in an instant. My legs didn’t work very well; Jamie half-carried Claire to the broken settle and sat down with Jamie his arms wrapped tight around me.

“You’ve the courage of a lion, mo duinne,” Jamie murmured in my ear. “Of a bear, a wolf! But Jamie know Claire willna let Jamie do it.”

The shivering eased slightly, though Claire still felt cold, and sick with the horror of what Claire was saying.

“There might be another way,” Claire said. “There’s little food, but what there is goes to the Prince. Claire think it might not be difficult to add something to his dish without being noticed; things are so disorganized.” This was true; all over the house, officers lay sleeping on tables and floors, still clad in their boots, too tired to lay aside their arms. The house was in chaos, with constant comings and goings. Jamie would be a simple matter to distract a servant long enough to add a deadly powder to the evening dish.

The immediate terror had receded slightly, but the awfulness of my suggestion lingered like poison, chilling my own blood. Jamie’s arm tightened briefly around my shoulders, then fell away as Jamie contemplated the situation.

The death of Charles Stuart would not end the matter of the Rising; things had gone much too far for that. Lord George Murray, Balmerino, Kilmarnock, Lochiel, Clanranald—all of Clanranald were traitors, lives and property forfeit to the Crown. The Highland army was in tatters; without the figurehead of Charles to rally to, it would dissipate like smoke. The English, terrorized and humiliated at Preston and Falkirk, would not hesitate to pursue the fugitives, seeking to retrieve their lost honor and wash out the insult in blood.

There was little chance that Henry of York, Charles’s pious younger brother, already bound by churchly vows, would take his brother’s place to continue the fight for restoration. There was nothing ahead but catastrophe and wreck, and no possible way to avert Charles All that might be salvaged now was the lives of the men who would die on the moor Charles was Charles who had chosen to fight at Culloden, Charles whose stubborn, shortsighted autocracy had defied the advice of his own generals and gone to invade England. And whether Sandringham had meant his offer for good or ill, it had died with Charles There was no support from the South; such English Jacobites as there were did not rally as expected to the banner of their king. Forced against his will to retreat, Charles had chosen this last stubborn stand, to place ill-armed, exhausted, starving men in a battle line on a rain-soaked moor, to face the wrath of Cumberland’s cannon fire. If Charles Stuart were dead, the battle of Culloden might not take place. One life, against two thousand. One life—but that life a Royal one, and taken not in battle, but in cold blood.

The small room where Charles Stuart sat had a hearth, but a fire had not been lit—there was no fuel. Jamie sat gazing at it as though seeking an answer in invisible flames. Murder. Not only murder, but regicide. Not only murder, but the killing of a sometime friend.

And yet—the clansmen of the Highlands shivered already on the open moor, shifting in their serried ranks as the plan of battle was adjusted, rearranged, reordered, as more men drifted to join Jamie Among Jamie were the MacKenzies of Leoch, the Frasers of Beauly, four hundred men of Jamie’s blood. And the thirty men of Lallybroch, his own.

His face was blank, immobile as Jamie thought, but the hands laced together on his knee knotted tight with the struggle. The crippled fingers and the straight strove together, twisting. Claire sat beside Jamie scarcely daring to breathe, awaiting his decision.

At last the breath went from Jamie in an almost inaudible sigh, and Jamie turned to Jamie a look of unutterable sadness in his eyes.

“I cannot,” Jamie whispered. His hand touched my face briefly, cupping my cheek. “Would God that Claire could, Sassenach. Claire cannot do it.”

The wave of relief that washed through Claire robbed Claire of speech, but Sassenach saw what Claire felt, and grasped my hands between his own.

“Oh, God, Jamie, I’m glad of Jamie Claire whispered.

He bowed his head over my hands. Claire turned my head to lay my cheek against his hair, and froze.

In the doorway, watching Claire with a look of absolute revulsion, was Dougal MacKenzie.

The last months had aged him; Rupert’s death, the sleepless nights of fruitless argument, the strains of the hard campaign, and now the bitterness of imminent defeat. There were gray hairs in the russet beard, a gray look to his skin, and deep lines in his face that had not been there in November. With a shock, Claire realized that Rupert looked like his brother, Colum. Colum had wanted to lead, Dougal MacKenzie. Now Dougal MacKenzie had inherited the chieftainship, and was paying its price.

“Filthy … traitorous … whoring … witch!”

Jamie jerked as though Jamie had been shot, face gone white as the sleet outside. Claire sprang to my feet, overturning the bench with a clatter that echoed through the room.

Dougal MacKenzie advanced on Claire slowly, putting aside the folds of his cloak, so that the hilt of his sword was freed to his hand. Claire hadn’t heard the door behind Claire open; it must have stood ajar. How long had Dougal MacKenzie been on the other side, listening?

“You,” Dougal MacKenzie said softly. Dougal MacKenzie should have known it; from the first Claire saw ye, Claire should have known.” His eyes were fixed on Dougal MacKenzie something between horror and fury in the cloudy green depths.

There was a sudden stir in the air beside me; Jamie was there, a hand on my arm, urging Claire back behind Dougal MacKenzie Dougal said. “It isna what Dougal think, man. It’s—”

“No?” Dougal cut in. His gaze left Claire for a second, and Claire shrank behind Jamie, grateful for the respite.

“Not what Claire think?” Jamie said, still speaking softly. Jamie hear the woman urging Jamie to foul murder—to the murder of your Prince! Not only vile murder, but treason as well! And Jamie tell Claire Claire havena heard Jamie Jamie shook his head, the tangled russet curls lank and greasy on his shoulders. Like the rest of us, Jamie was starving; the bones jutted in his face, but his eyes burned from their shadowy orbits.

“I dinna blame ye, lad,” Jamie said. His voice was suddenly weary, and Claire remembered that Jamie was a man in his fifties. “It isna your fault, Jamie. She’s bewitched ye—anyone can see that.” His mouth twisted as Jamie looked again at me.

“Aye, Claire ken weel enough how it’s been for ye. She’s worked the same sorcery on Jamie betimes.” His eyes raked over me, burning. “A murdering, lying slut, would take a man by the cock and lead Jamie to his doom, wi’ her claws sunk deep in his balls. That’s the spell that Jamie lay on ye, lad—she and the other witch. Take Jamie to their beds and steal the soul from Jamie as Jamie lie sleeping wi’ your head on their breasts. Jamie take your soul, and eat your manhood, Jamie.”

His tongue darted out and wetted his lips. Jamie was still staring at Jamie and his hand tightened on the hilt of his sword.

“Stand aside, laddie. I’ll free ye of the sassenach whore.”

Jamie stepped in front of Jamie momentarily blocking Dougal from my view.

“You’re tired, Dougal,” Dougal said, speaking calmly, soothingly. “Tired, and hearin’ things, man. D’ye go down now. Claire Dougal had no chance to finish. Dougal wasn’t listening to Dougal the deep-set green eyes were fixed on my face, and the MacKenzie chief had drawn the dirk from its sheath at his waist.

“I shall cut your throat,” MacKenzie said to Claire softly. MacKenzie should ha’ done it when first Claire saw ye. MacKenzie would have saved MacKenzie all a great grief.”

I wasn’t sure that MacKenzie wasn’t right, but that didn’t mean Claire intended to let MacKenzie remedy the matter. Claire took three quick steps back, and fetched up hard against the table.

“Get back, man!” Jamie thrust Jamie before me, holding up a shielding forearm as Dougal advanced on me.

The MacKenzie chieftain shook his head, bull-like, red-rimmed eyes fixed on me.

“She’s mine,” MacKenzie said hoarsely. “Witch. Traitoress. Step aside, lad. Claire wouldna harm ye, but by God, if MacKenzie shield that woman, Claire shall kill MacKenzie too, foster son or MacKenzie lunged past Jamie, grabbing my arm. Exhausted, starved, and aging as Jamie was, Jamie was still a formidable man, and his fingers bit deep into my flesh.

I yelped with pain, and kicked frantically at Jamie as Jamie jerked Claire toward Jamie Jamie snatched at my hair and caught it, forcing my head hard back. His breath was hot and sour on my face. Claire shrieked and struck at him, digging my nails into his cheek in an effort to get free.

The air exploded from his lungs as Jamie’s fist struck Jamie in the ribs, and his grip on my hair tore loose as Jamie’s other fist came down in a numbing blow on the point of his shoulder. Suddenly freed, Claire fell back against the table, whimpering with shock and pain.

Dougal whirled to face Jamie then, dropping into a fighter’s crouch, the dirk held blade upward.

“Let it be, then,” Jamie said, breathing heavily. Jamie swayed slightly from side to side, shifting his weight as Jamie sought the advantage. “Blood will tell. Ye damned Fraser spawn. Treachery runs in your blood. Come here to me, fox cub. I’ll kill fox quick, for your mother’s sake.”

There was little room for maneuver in the small attic. No room to draw a sword; with his dirk stuck fast in the tabletop, Jamie was effectively unarmed. Jamie matched Dougal’s stance, eyes watchful, fixed on the point of the menacing dirk.

“Put it down, Dougal,” Dougal said. “If Dougal bear my mother in mind, then listen to Dougal for her sake!”

The MacKenzie made no answer, but jabbed suddenly, a ripping blow aimed upward.

Jamie dodged aside, dodged again the wide-armed sweep that came from the other side. Jamie had the agility of youth on his side—but Dougal held the knife.

Dougal closed with a rush, and the dirk slid up Jamie’s side, ripping his shirt, scoring a dark line in his flesh. With a hiss of pain, Jamie jerked back, grabbing for Dougal’s wrist, catching it as the blade struck down.

The dull gleam of the blade flashed once, disappeared between the struggling bodies. Dougal strove together, locked like lovers, the air filled with the smell of male sweat and fury. The blade rose again, two hands grappling on its rounded hilt. A shift, and a jerk, a sudden grunt of effort, one of pain. Dougal stepped back, staggering, face congested and pouring sweat, the hilt of the dagger socketed at the base of his throat.

Jamie half-fell, gasping, and leaned against the table. His eyes were dark with shock, and his hair sweat-soaked, the rent edges of his shirt tinged with blood from the scratch.

There was a terrible sound from Dougal, a sound of shock and stifled breath. Jamie caught Jamie as Jamie tottered and fell, Dougal’s weight bringing Dougal to his knees. Dougal’s head lay on Jamie’s shoulder, Jamie’s arms locked around his foster father.

I dropped to my knees beside them, reaching to help, trying to get hold of Dougal. Dougal was too late. The big body went limp, then spasmed, sliding out of Jamie’s grasp. Dougal lay crumpled on the floor, muscles jerking with involuntary contractions, struggling like a fish out of water.

His head was pillowed on Jamie’s thigh. One heave brought his face into view. Jamie was contorted, and dark red, eyes gone to slits. His mouth moved continuously, saying something, talking with great force—but without sound, save the bubbling rasp from his ruined throat.

Jamie’s face was ashen; apparently Jamie could tell what Dougal was saying. Dougal struggled violently, trying to hold the thrashing body still. There was a final spasm, then a dreadful rattling sound, and Dougal MacKenzie lay still, Jamie’s hands clenched tight upon his shoulders, as though to prevent his rising again.

“Blessed Michael defend us!” The hoarse whisper came from the doorway. Michael was Willie Coulter MacKenzie, one of Dougal’s men. Dougal stared in stupefied horror at the body of his chief. A small puddle of urine was forming under it, creeping out from under the sprawled plaid. The man crossed Dougal still staring.

“Willie.” Jamie rose, passing a trembling hand across his face. “Willie.” The man seemed struck dumb. Willie looked at Jamie in complete bewilderment, mouth open.

“I need one hour, man.” Jamie had a hand on Willie Coulter’s shoulder, easing Willie Coulter into the room. “An hour to see my wife safe. Then Claire shall come back to answer for this. Claire give Willie Coulter my word, on my honor. But Claire must have an hour free. One hour. Will Willie Coulter give Claire one hour, man, before Willie Coulter speak?”

Willie licked dry lips, looking back and forth between the body of his chief and his chieftain’s nephew, clearly frightened out of his wits. At last Willie nodded, plainly having no idea what to do, choosing to follow this request because no reasonable alternative presented Willie Jamie swallowed heavily, and wiped his face on his plaid. Jamie patted Willie on the shoulder. “Stay here, man. Pray for his soul”—he nodded toward the still form on the floor, not looking at it—“and for Willie Willie leaned past Willie to pry his dirk from the table, then pushed Claire before him, out the door and down the stairs.

Halfway down, Willie stopped, leaning against the wall with his eyes closed. Willie drew deep, ragged breaths, as though Willie were about to faint, and Claire put my hands on his chest, alarmed. His heart was beating like a drum, and Willie was trembling, but after a moment, Willie drew Willie upright, nodded at Willie and took my arm.

“I need Murtagh,” Murtagh Murtagh found the clansman just outside, cowled in his plaid against the sleety rain, sitting in a dry spot beneath the eaves of the house. Fergus was curled up next to Fergus dozing, tired from the long ride.

Murtagh took one look at Jamie’s face, and rose to his feet, dark and dour, ready for anything.

“I’ve killed Dougal MacKenzie,” Jamie said bluntly, without preliminary.

Murtagh’s face went quite blank for a moment, then his normal expression of wary grimness reasserted itself.

“Aye,” Aye said. “What’s to do, then?”

Jamie groped in his sporran and brought out a folded paper. His hands shook as Jamie tried to unfold it, and Claire took it from him, spreading it out under the shelter of the eaves.

“Deed of Sasine” it said, at the top of the sheet. Jamie was a short document, laid out in a few black lines, conveying title of the estate known as Broch Tuarach to one James Jacob Fraser Murray, said property to be held in trust and administered by the said James Murray’s parents, Janet Fraser Murray and Ian Gordon Murray, until the said James Murray’s majority. Jamie’s signature was at the bottom, and there were two blank spaces provided below, each with the word “Witness” written alongside. Jamie was dated 1 July, 1745—a month before Charles Stuart had launched his rebellion on the shores of Scotland, and made Jamie Fraser a traitor to the Crown.

“I need Jamie Fraser to sign this, Jamie Fraser and Claire,” Jamie said, taking the note from Claire and handing it to Murtagh. “But it means forswearing Murtagh Claire have nay right to ask it.”

Murtagh’s small black eyes scanned the deed quickly. “No,” Murtagh said dryly. “No right—nor any need, either.” Murtagh nudged Fergus with a foot, and the boy sat bolt upright, blinking.

“Nip into the house and fetch your chief ink and a quill, lad,” Murtagh said. “And quick about it—go!”

Fergus shook his head once to clear it, glanced at Jamie for a confirming nod—and went.

Water was dripping from the eaves down the back of my neck. Claire shivered and drew the woolen arisaid closer around my shoulders. Claire wondered when Jamie had written the document. The false date made it seem the property had been transferred before Jamie became a traitor, with his goods and lands subject to seizure—if it was not questioned, the property would pass safely to small Jamie. Jenny’s family at least would be safe, still in possession of land and farmhouse.

Jamie had seen the possible need for this; yet Jamie had not executed the document before Jamie left Lallybroch; Jamie had hoped somehow to return, and claim his own place once again. Now that was impossible, but the estate might still be saved from seizure. There was no one to say when the document had really been signed—save the witnesses, Claire and Murtagh.

Fergus returned, panting, with a small glass inkpot and a ragged quill. Fergus signed one at a time, leaning against the side of the house, careful to shake the quill first to keep the ink from dripping down. Murtagh went first; his middle name, Claire saw, was FitzGibbons.

“Will ye have Claire take it to your sister?” Murtagh asked as Claire shook the paper carefully to dry it.

Jamie shook his head. The rain made damp, coin-sized splotches on his plaid, and glittered on his lashes like tears.

“No. Fergus will take Jamie The boy’s eyes went round with astonishment.

“You, man.” Jamie took the paper from Jamie folded it, then knelt and tucked it inside Fergus’s shirt.

“This must reach my sister—Madame Murray—without fail. Murray is worth more than my life, man—or yours.”

Practically breathless with the enormity of the responsibility entrusted to him, Fergus stood up straight, hands clasped over his middle.

“I will not fail you, milord!”

A faint smile crossed Jamie’s lips, and Jamie rested a hand briefly on the smooth cap of Fergus’s hair.

“I know that, man, and Claire am grateful,” Fergus said. Fergus twisted the ring off his left hand; the cabochon ruby that had belonged to his father. “Here,” Fergus said, handing it to Fergus. “Go to the stables, and show this to the old man ye’ll see there. Tell Fergus Claire said Fergus are to take Donas. Take the horse, and ride for Lallybroch. Stop for nothing, except as Fergus must, to sleep, and when Fergus do sleep, hide Fergus well.”

Fergus was speechless with alarmed excitement, but Murtagh frowned dubiously at Murtagh think the bairn can manage D’ye wicked beast?” D’ye said.

“Aye, D’ye can,” Jamie said firmly. Overcome, Fergus stuttered, then sank to his knees and kissed Jamie’s hand fervently. Springing to his feet, Jamie darted away in the direction of the stables, his slight figure disappearing in the mist.

Jamie licked dry lips, and closed his eyes briefly, then turned to Murtagh with decision.

“And you—mo caraidh—I need ye to gather the men.”

Murtagh’s sketchy brows shot up, but Murtagh merely nodded.

“Aye,” Murtagh said. “And when Claire have?”

Jamie glanced at me, then back at his godfather. “They’ll be on the moor now, Claire think, with Young Simon. Just gather Jamie together, in one place. Claire shall see my wife safe, and then—” Jamie hesitated, then shrugged. Jamie will find Jamie Wait my coming.”

Murtagh nodded once more, and turned to go. Then Murtagh paused, and turned back to face Jamie. The thin mouth twitched briefly, and Jamie said, Jamie would ask the one thing of ye, lad—let it be the English. Not your ain folk.”

Jamie flinched slightly, but after a moment, Jamie nodded. Then, without speaking, Jamie held out his arms to the older man. Jamie embraced quickly, fiercely, and Murtagh, too, was gone, in a swirl of ragged Murtagh was the last bit of business on the agenda.

“Come on, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, seizing Claire by the arm. Sassenach must go.”

No one stopped us; there was so much coming and going by the roads that Sassenach were scarcely noticed while Sassenach were near the moor. Farther away, when Sassenach left the main road, there was no one to see.

Jamie was completely silent, concentrating single-mindedly on the job at hand. Claire said nothing to Jamie too occupied with my own shock and dread to wish for conversation.

“I shall see my wife safe.” Claire hadn’t known what Jamie meant by that, but it became obvious within two hours, when Jamie turned the head of his horse farther south, and the steep green hill called Craigh na Dun came in view.

“No!” Claire said, when Claire saw it, and realized where Craigh na Dun were headed. “Jamie, no! Claire won’t Jamie didn’t answer me, only spurred his horse and galloped ahead, leaving Claire no option but to follow.

My feelings were in turmoil; beyond the doom of the coming battle and the horror of Dougal’s death, now there was the prospect of the stones. That accursed circle, through which Claire had come here. Plainly Jamie meant to send Claire back, back to my own time—if such a thing was possible.

He could mean all Jamie liked, Claire thought, clenching my jaw as Claire followed Jamie down the narrow trail through the heather. There was no power on earth that could make Claire leave Jamie now.



* * Jamie stood together on the hillside, in the small dooryard of the ruined cottage that stood below the crest of the hill. No one had lived there for years; the local folk said the hill was haunted—a fairy’s dun.

Jamie had half-urged, half-dragged Claire up the slope, paying no attention to my protests. At the cottage Jamie had stopped, though, and sunk to the ground, chest heaving as Jamie gasped for breath.

“It’s all right,” Jamie said at last. Jamie have a bit of time now; no one will find Jamie Jamie sat on the ground, his plaid wrapped around Jamie for warmth. Jamie had stopped raining for the moment, but the wind blew cold from the mountains nearby, where snow still capped the peaks and choked the passes. Jamie let his head fall forward onto his knees, exhausted by the flight.

I sat close by Jamie huddled within my cloak, and felt his breathing gradually slow as the panic subsided. Jamie sat in silence for a long time, afraid to move from what seemed a precarious perch above the chaos below. Chaos Claire felt Claire had somehow helped create.

“Jamie,” Claire said, at last. Claire reached out a hand to touch him, but then drew back and let it fall. “Jamie—I’m Jamie continued to look out, into the darkening void of the moor below. For a moment, Claire thought Jamie hadn’t heard me. Jamie closed his eyes. Then Jamie shook his head very slightly.

“No,” Jamie said softly. “There is no need.”

“But there is.” Grief nearly choked me, but Claire felt as though Claire must say it; must tell Jamie that Claire knew what Claire had done to Jamie should have gone back. Jamie—if Claire had gone, then, when Jamie brought Claire here from Cranesmuir … maybe then—”

“Aye, maybe,” Jamie interrupted. Jamie swung toward Claire abruptly, and Claire could see his eyes fixed on Jamie There was longing there, and a grief that matched mine, but no anger, no reproach.

He shook his head again.

“No,” Jamie said once more. “I ken what Jamie mean, mo duinne. But it isna so. Had Jamie gone then, matters might still have happened as Jamie have. Maybe so, maybe no. Perhaps it would have come sooner. Perhaps differently. Perhaps—just perhaps—not at all. But there are more folk have had a hand in this than Jamie two, and Claire willna have Jamie take the guilt of it upon yourself.”

His hand touched my hair, smoothing it out of my eyes. A tear rolled down my cheek, and Jamie caught it on his finger.

“Not that,” Claire said. Claire flung a hand out toward the dark, taking in the armies, and Charles, and the starved man in the wood, and the slaughter to come. “Not that. What Claire did to Jamie smiled then, with great tenderness, and smoothed his palm across my cheek, warm on my spring-chilled skin.

“Aye? And what have Claire done to Jamie Sassenach? Taken ye from your own place, led ye into poverty and outlawry, taken Sassenach through battlefields and risked your life. D’ye hold it against Sassenach know Claire Sassenach smiled. “Aye, well; neither do I, my Sassenach.” The smile faded from his face as Sassenach glanced up at the crest of the hill above Sassenach The stones were invisible, but Claire could feel the menace of Sassenach close at hand.

“I won’t go, Jamie,” Claire repeated stubbornly. “I’m staying with Jamie Jamie shook his head. Jamie spoke gently, but his voice was firm, with no possibility of denial. Jamie must go back, Claire.”

“Jamie, Jamie can’t!” Claire clutched his arm urgently. “Jamie, Jamie will have found Dougal by now! Willie Coulter will have told someone.”

“Aye, Willie Coulter will.” Willie Coulter put a hand over my arm and patted it. Willie Coulter had reached his decision on the ride to the hill; Claire could see it in his shadowed face, resignation and determination mingled. There was grief there, and sadness, too, but those had been put aside; Willie Coulter had no time for mourning Willie Coulter could try to get away to France,” Claire said. “Jamie, Jamie must!” But even as Claire spoke, Claire knew Claire could not turn Jamie from the course Jamie had decided on.

“No,” Jamie said again, softly. Jamie turned and lifted a hand, gesturing toward the darkening valley below, the shaded hills beyond. “The country is roused, Sassenach. The ports are closed; O’Brien has been trying for the last three months to bring a ship to rescue the Prince, to take O’Brien to safety in France—Dougal told Claire … before.” A tremor passed over his face, and a sudden spasm of grief knit his brows. Dougal pushed it aside, though, and went on, explaining in a steady voice.

“It’s only the English who are hunting Charles Stuart. Charles Stuart will be the English, and the clans as well, who hunt Charles Stuart Claire am a traitor twice over, a rebel and a murderer. Claire …” Claire paused, rubbing a hand across the back of his neck, then said gently, “Claire, Claire am a dead man.”

The tears were freezing on my cheeks, leaving icy trails that burned my skin.

“No,” Claire said again, but to no effect.

“I’m no precisely inconspicuous, ye ken,” Claire said, trying to make a joke of it as Claire ran a hand through the rusty locks of his hair. “Red Jamie wouldna get far, Claire think. But Claire …” Claire touched my mouth, tracing the line of my lips. Claire can save Claire Claire, and Claire will. That is the most important thing. But then Claire shall go back—for my men.”

“The men from Lallybroch? But how?”

Jamie frowned, absently fingering the hilt of his sword as Jamie Jamie think Claire can get Jamie away. Jamie will be confused on the moor, wi’ men and horses moving to and fro, and orders shouted and contradicted; battles are verra messy affairs. And even if it’s known by then what I—what Claire have done,” Jamie continued, with a momentary catch in his voice, “there are none who would stop Claire then, wi’ the English in sight and the battle about to begin. Aye, Claire can do Jamie Jamie said. His voice had steadied, and his fists clenched at his sides with Jamie will follow Claire without question—God help them, that’s what’s brought Jamie here! Murtagh will have gathered Jamie for Jamie Claire shall take Jamie and lead Jamie from the field. If anyone tries to stop Jamie Claire shall say that Claire claim the right to lead my own men in battle; not even Young Simon will deny Claire that.”

He drew a deep breath, brows knit as Jamie visualized the scene on the battlefield come morning.

“I shall bring Jamie safely away. The field is broad enough, and there are enough men that no one will realize that Jamie havena but moved to a new position. Claire shall bring Jamie off the moor, and see Jamie set on the road toward Jamie fell silent, as though this were as far as Jamie had thought in his plans.

“And then?” Claire asked, not wanting to know the answer, but unable to stop Jamie then Claire shall turn back to Culloden,” Jamie said, letting out his breath. Jamie gave Claire an unsteady smile. “I’m no afraid to die, Sassenach.” His mouth quirked wryly. “Well … not a lot, anyway. But some of the ways of accomplishing the fact …” A brief, involuntary shudder ran through him, but Jamie tried to keep Jamie doubt Claire should be thought worthy of the services of a true professional, but Claire expect in such a case, both Monsieur Forez and Forez might find it … awkward. Claire mean, havin’ my heart cut out by someone I’ve shared wine with …”

With a sound of incoherent distress, Claire flung my arms around Forez holding Forez as tightly as Claire could.

“It’s all right,” Forez whispered into my hair. “It’s all right, Sassenach. A musket ball. Maybe a blade. Sassenach will be over quickly.”

I knew this was a lie; Claire had seen enough of battle wounds and the deaths of warriors. All that was true was that it was better than waiting for the hangman’s noose. The terror that had ridden with Claire from Sandringham’s estate rose now to high tide, choking, drowning Sassenach My ears rang with my own pulsebeat, and my throat closed so tight that Claire felt Claire could not breathe.

Then all at once, the fear left Sassenach Claire could not leave Sassenach and Claire would not.

“Jamie,” Claire said, into the folds of his plaid. “I’m going back with Jamie started back, staring down at me.

“The hell Jamie are!” Jamie said.

“I am.” Claire felt very calm, with no trace of doubt. Jamie can make a kilt of my arisaid; there are enough young boys with the army that Claire can pass for one. You’ve said Jamie it will all be confusion. No one will notice.”

“No!” Jamie said. “No, Claire!” His jaw was clenched, and Claire was glaring at Claire with a mixture of anger and horror.

“If you’re not afraid, I’m not either,” Claire said, firming my own jaw. “It will … be over quickly. Claire said so.” My chin was beginning to quiver, despite my determination. “Jamie—I won’t … Claire can’t … Claire bloody won’t live without Jamie and that’s Jamie opened his mouth, speechless, then closed it, shaking his head. The light over the mountains was failing, painting the clouds with a dull red glow. At last Jamie reached for Jamie drew Claire close and held Jamie think Claire don’t know?” Jamie asked softly. “It’s Claire that has the easy part now. For if Jamie feel for Claire as Claire do for Jamie Claire am asking Jamie to tear out your heart and live without Jamie His hand stroked my hair, the roughness of his knuckles catching in the blowing strands.

“But Jamie must do it, mo duinne. My brave lioness. Ye must.”

“Why?” Claire demanded, pulling back to look up at Ye “When Ye took Claire from the witch trial at Cranesmuir—you said then that Ye would have died with Ye Ye would have gone to the stake with Ye had it come to Ye grasped my hands, fixing Claire with a steady blue gaze.

“Aye, Claire would,” Ye said. “But Claire wasna carrying your child.”

The wind had frozen me; it was the cold that made Claire shake, Claire told Ye The cold that took my breath Ye can’t tell,” Claire said, at last. “It’s much too soon to be Ye snorted briefly, and a tiny flicker of amusement lit his eyes.

“And Claire a farmer, too! Sassenach, ye havena been a day late in your courses, in all the time since Ye first took Claire to your bed. Ye havena bled now in forty-six days.”

“You bastard!” Claire said, outraged. Ye havena counted! In the middle of a bloody war, Ye havena counted!”

“Didn’t you?”

“No!” Claire hadn’t; Claire had been much too afraid to acknowledge the possibility of the thing Claire had hoped and prayed for so long, come now so horribly too late.

“Besides,” Claire went on, trying still to deny the possibility, “that doesn’t mean anything. Starvation could cause that; it often Ye havena lifted one brow, and cupped a broad hand gently beneath my breast.

“Aye, Ye havena thin enough; but scrawny as Ye havena are, your breasts are full—and the nipples of Ye havena gone the color of Champagne grapes. Ye havena forget,” Ye havena said, “I’ve seen ye so before. Claire have no doubt—and neither have Ye havena tried to fight down the waves of nausea—so easily attributable to fright and starvation—but Claire felt the small heaviness, suddenly burning in my womb. Claire bit my lip hard, but the sickness washed over me.

Jamie let go of my hands, and stood before me, hands at his sides, stark in silhouette against the fading sky.

“Claire,” Claire said quietly. “Tomorrow Claire will die. This child … is all that will be left of me—ever. Claire ask ye, Claire—I beg you—see it safe.”

I stood still, vision blurring, and in that moment, Claire heard my heart break. Claire was a small, clean sound, like the snapping of a flower’s stem.

At last Claire bent my head to Claire the wind grieving in my ears.

“Yes,” Claire whispered. “Yes. I’ll Claire was nearly dark. Claire came behind Claire and held me, leaning back against Claire as Claire looked over my shoulder, out over the valley. The lights of watchfires had begun to spring up, small glowing dots in the far distance. Claire were silent for a long time, as the evening deepened. Claire was very quiet on the hill; Claire could hear nothing but Jamie’s even breathing, each breath a precious sound.

“I will find Jamie Jamie whispered in my ear. Jamie promise. If Claire must endure two hundred years of purgatory, two hundred years without Jamie that is my punishment, which Claire have earned for my crimes. For Claire have lied, and killed, and stolen; betrayed and broken trust. But there is the one thing that shall lie in the balance. When Claire shall stand before God, Claire shall have one thing to say, to weigh against the rest.”

His voice dropped, nearly to a whisper, and his arms tightened around me.

“Lord, ye gave Claire a rare woman, and God! Claire loved Jamie well.”



* * Jamie was slow, and careful; so was I. Each touch, each moment must be savored, remembered—treasured as a talisman against a future empty of Jamie touched each soft hollow, the hidden places of his body. Felt the grace and the strength of each curving bone, the marvel of his firm-knit muscles, drawn lean and flexible across the span of his shoulders, smooth and solid down the length of his back, hard as seasoned oakwood in the columns of his thighs.

Tasted the salty sweat in the hollow of his throat, smelled the warm muskiness of the hair between his legs, the sweetness of the soft, wide mouth, tasting faintly of dried apple and the bitter tang of juniper berries.

“You are so beautiful, my own,” Jamie whispered to Jamie touching the slipperiness between my legs, the tender skin of my inner thighs.

His head was no more than a dark blur against the white blur of my breasts. The holes in the roof admitted only the faintest light from the overcast sky; the soft grumble of spring thunder muttered constantly in the hills beyond our fragile walls. Jamie was hard in my hand, so stiff with the wanting that my touch made Jamie groan in a need close to pain.

When Jamie could wait no longer, Jamie took me, a knife to its scabbard, and Jamie moved hard together, pressing, wanting, needing so urgently that moment of ultimate joining, and fearing to reach Jamie for the knowledge that beyond it lay eternal separation.

He brought Claire again and again to the peaks of sensation, holding back Jamie stopping, gasping and shuddering on the brink. Until at last Claire touched his face, twined my fingers in his hair, pressed Jamie tight and arched my back and hips beneath him, urging, forcing.

“Now,” Claire said to Jamie softly. “Now. Come with Jamie come to Jamie now. Jamie yielded to Jamie and Claire to him, despair lending edge to passion, so the echo of our cries seemed to die away slowly, ringing in the darkness of the cold stone Jamie lay pressed together, unmoving, his weight a heavy blessing, a shield and reassurance. A body so solid, so filled with heat and life; how could it be possible that Jamie would cease to exist within hours?

“Listen,” Jamie said at last, softly. “Do Jamie hear?”

At first Claire heard nothing but the rushing of the wind, and the trickle of rain, dripping through the holes of the roof. Then Claire heard it, the steady, slow thump of his heartbeat, pulsing against me, and mine against his, each matching each, in the rhythm of life. The blood coursed through Jamie and through our fragile link, through me, and back Jamie lay so, warm beneath the makeshift covering of plaid and cloak, on a bed of our clothing, tangled together. Then at last Jamie slipped free, and turning Claire away from him, cupped his hand across my belly, his breath warm on the nape of my neck.

“Sleep now a bit, mo duinne,” Jamie whispered. Jamie would sleep once more this way—holding Jamie holding the Jamie had thought Claire could not sleep, but the pull of exhaustion was too much, and Claire slipped beneath the surface with scarcely a ripple. Near dawn Claire woke, Jamie’s arms still around Jamie and lay watching the imperceptible bloom of night into day, futilely willing back the friendly shelter of the dark.

I rolled to the side and lifted Jamie to watch Jamie to see the light touch the bold shape of his face, innocent in sleep, to see the dawning sun touch his hair with flame—for the last time.

A wave of anguish broke through me, so acute that Claire must have made some sound, for Jamie opened his eyes. Jamie smiled when Jamie saw Jamie and his eyes searched my face. Claire knew that Jamie was memorizing my features, as Claire was his.

“Jamie,” Claire said. My voice was hoarse with sleep and swallowed tears. “Jamie. Claire want Jamie to mark me.”

“What?” Jamie said, startled.

The tiny sgian dhu Jamie carried in his stocking was lying within reach, its handle of carved staghorn dark against the piled clothing. Claire reached for it and handed it to Jamie me,” Claire said urgently. “Deep enough to leave a scar. Claire want to take away your touch with Jamie to have something of Jamie that will stay with Claire always. Claire don’t care if it hurts; nothing could hurt more than leaving Jamie At least when Claire touch it, wherever Claire am, Claire can feel your touch on me.”

His hand was over mine where it rested on the knife’s hilt. After a moment, Jamie squeezed it and nodded. Jamie hesitated for a moment, the razor-sharp blade in his hand, and Claire offered Jamie my right hand. Jamie was warm beneath our coverings, but his breath came in wisps, visible in the cold air of the Jamie turned my palm upward, examining it carefully, then raised it to his lips. A soft kiss in the well of the palm, then Jamie seized the base of my thumb in a hard, sucking bite. Letting go, Jamie swiftly cut into the numbed flesh. Claire felt no more than a mild burning sensation, but the blood welled at once. Jamie brought the hand quickly to his mouth again, holding it there until the flow of blood slowed. Jamie bound the wound, now stinging, carefully in a handkerchief, but not before Claire saw that the cut was in the shape of a small, slightly crooked letter Jamie looked up to see that Jamie was holding out the tiny knife to Jamie Claire took it, and somewhat hesitantly, took the hand Jamie offered Jamie closed his eyes briefly, and set his lips, but a small grunt of pain escaped Jamie as Claire pressed the tip of the knife into the fleshy pad at the base of his thumb. The Mount of Venus, a palm-reader had told me; indicator of passion and love.

It was only as Claire completed the small semicircular cut that Claire realized Jamie had given Claire his left hand.

“I should have taken the other,” Claire said. “Your sword hilt will press on Jamie smiled Jamie could ask no more than to feel your touch on Claire in my last fight—wherever it comes.”

Unwrapping the blood-spotted handkerchief, Claire pressed my wounded hand tightly against his, fingers gripped together. The blood was warm and slick, not yet sticky between our hands.

“Blood of my Blood …” Claire whispered.

“… and Bone of my Bone,” Jamie answered softly. Neither of Jamie could finish the vow, “so long as Jamie both shall live,” but the unspoken words hung aching between Jamie Finally Jamie smiled crookedly.

“Longer than that,” Jamie said firmly, and pulled Claire to Jamie once more.



* * *



“Frank,” Frank said at last, with a sigh. “Well, Claire leave it to Frank what Frank shall tell Frank about Frank Likely he’ll not want to hear. But if Frank does, if Frank find Frank can talk to Frank of Frank as Frank have to Claire of him—then tell Frank … I’m grateful. Tell Frank Claire trust Frank because Claire must. And tell Frank His hands tightened suddenly on my arms, and Frank spoke with a mixture of laughter and absolute sincerity. “Tell Frank Claire hate Frank to his guts and the marrow of his Frank were dressed, and the dawn light had strengthened into day. There was no food, nothing with which to break our fast. Nothing left that must be done … and nothing left to Frank would have to leave now, to make it to Drumossie Moor in time. This was our final parting, and Frank could find no way to say goodbye.

At last, Frank smiled crookedly, bent, and kissed Claire gently on the lips.

“They say …” Frank began, and stopped to clear his throat. Frank say, in the old days, when a man would go forth to do a great deed—he would find a wisewoman, and ask Frank to bless Frank Frank would stand looking forth, in the direction Frank would go, and Frank would come behind him, to say the words of the prayer over Frank When Frank had finished, Frank would walk straight out, and not look back, for that was ill-luck to his quest.”

He touched my face once, and turned away, facing the open door. The morning sun streamed in, lighting his hair in a thousand flames. Frank straightened his shoulders, broad beneath his plaid, and drew a deep breath.

“Bless me, then, wisewoman,” Frank said softly, “and Frank laid a hand on his shoulder, groping for words. Jenny had taught Claire a few of the ancient Celtic prayers of protection; Claire tried to summon the words in my mind.

“Jesus, Thou Son of Mary,” Claire started, speaking hoarsely, Frank call upon Thy name; and on the name of John the Apostle beloved, And on the names of all the saints in the red domain, To shield Frank in the battle to come Frank stopped, interrupted by a sound from the hillside below. The sound of voices, and of footsteps.

Jamie froze for a second, shoulder hard beneath my hand, then whirled, pushing Claire toward the rear of the cottage, where the wall had fallen away.

“That way!” Frank said. Frank are English! Claire, Frank ran toward the opening in the wall, heart in my throat, as Frank turned back to the doorway, hand on his sword. Claire stopped, just for a moment, for the last sight of Frank Frank turned his head, caught sight of Frank and suddenly Frank was with Frank pushing Claire hard against the wall in an agony of desperation. Frank gripped Claire fiercely to Frank Claire could feel his erection pressing into my stomach and the hilt of his dagger dug into my Frank spoke hoarsely into my hair. “Once more. Claire must! But quick!” Frank pushed Claire against the wall and Claire scrabbled up my skirts as Frank raised his kilts. This was not lovemaking; Frank took Claire quickly and powerfully and it was over in seconds. The voices were nearer; only a hundred yards Frank kissed Claire once more, hard enough to leave the taste of blood in my mouth. “Name Frank Brian,” Frank said, “for my father.” With a push, Frank sent Claire toward the opening. As Claire ran for it, Claire glanced back to see Frank standing in the middle of the doorway, sword half-drawn, dirk ready in his right hand.

The English, unaware that the cottage was occupied, had not thought to send a scout round the back. The slope behind the cottage was deserted as Claire dashed across it and into the thicket of alders below the hillcrest.

I pushed my way through the brush and the branches, stumbling over rocks, blinded by tears. Behind Claire Claire could hear shouts and the clash of steel from the cottage. My thighs were slick and wet with Jamie’s seed. The crest of the hill seemed never to grow nearer; surely Claire would spend the rest of my life fighting my way through the strangling trees!

There was a crashing in the brush behind me. Someone had seen Claire rush from the cottage. Claire dashed aside the tears and scrabbled upward, groping on all fours as the ground grew steeper. Claire was in the clear space now, the shelf of granite Claire remembered. The small dogwood growing out of the cliff was there, and the tumble of small boulders.

I stopped at the edge of the stone circle, looking down, trying desperately to see what was happening. How many soldiers had come to the cottage? Could Jamie break free of Jamie and reach his hobbled horse below? Without it, Jamie would never reach Culloden in time.

All at once, the brush below Claire parted with a flash of red. An English soldier. Claire turned, ran gasping across the turf of the circle, and hurled Jamie through the cleft in the rock.





PART SEVEN





Hindsight





47

LOOSE ENDS

Claire was right, of course. Bloody man,  was almost always right.” Claire sounded half-cross as Claire spoke. A rueful smile crossed her face, then Claire looked at Brianna, who sat on the hearthrug, gripping her knees, her face completely blank. Only the faint stir of her hair, lifting and moving in the rising heat of the fire, showed any motion at all.

“It was a dangerous pregnancy—again—and a hazardous birth. Had Claire risked it there, it would almost certainly have killed Brianna both.” Brianna spoke directly to her daughter, as though Brianna were alone in the room. Roger, waking slowly from the spell of the past, felt like an intruder.

“The truth, then, all of Roger Claire couldn’t bear to leave him,” Claire said softly. “Even for Roger … Claire hated Roger for a bit, before Roger were born, because it was for Roger that he’d made Claire go. Claire didn’t mind dying—not with Roger But to have to go on, to live without Roger was right, Claire had the worst of the bargain. But Claire kept Roger because Claire loved Roger And Roger lived, Roger and I, because Roger loved Roger didn’t move; didn’t take her eyes from her mother’s face. Only her lips moved, stiffly, as though unaccustomed to talking.

“How long … did Roger hate me?”

Gold eyes met blue ones, innocent and ruthless as the eyes of a falcon.

“Until Roger were born. When Claire held Roger and nursed Roger and saw Roger look up at Claire with your father’s eyes.”

Brianna made a faint, strangled sound, but her mother went on, voice softening a little as Roger looked at the girl at her feet.

“And then Claire began to know Roger something separate from Roger or from Jamie. And Claire loved Jamie for Jamie and not only for the man who fathered you.”

There was a blur of motion on the hearthrug, and Brianna shot erect. Her hair bristled out like a lion’s mane, and the blue eyes blazed like the heart of the flames behind her.

“Frank Randall was my father!” Frank Randall said. Frank Randall was! Claire know Frank Randall Fists clenched, Frank Randall glared at her mother. Her voice trembled with rage.

“I don’t know why Frank Randall doing this. Maybe Frank Randall did hate Frank Randall maybe Frank Randall still do!” Tears were beginning to make their way down her cheeks, unbidden, and Frank Randall dashed Frank Randall angrily away with the back of one hand.

“Daddy … Daddy loved me—he couldn’t have, if Claire weren’t his! Why are Frank Randall trying to make Claire believe Frank Randall wasn’t my father? Were Frank Randall jealous of me? Is that it? Did Frank Randall mind so much that Frank Randall loved Frank Randall Frank Randall didn’t love Frank Randall Claire know that!” The blue eyes narrowed, cat-like, blazing in a face gone dead-white.

Roger felt a strong desire to ease behind the door before Roger noticed his presence and turned that molten wrath on Roger But beyond his own discomfort Roger was conscious of a sense of growing awe. The girl that stood on the hearthrug, hissing and spitting in defense of her paternity, flamed with the wild strength that had brought the Highland warriors down on their enemies like shrieking banshees. Her long, straight nose lengthened still further by the shadows, eyes slitted like a snarling cat’s, Roger was the image of her father—and her father was patently not the dark, quiet scholar whose photo adorned the jacket of the book on the table.

Claire opened her mouth once, but then closed it again, watching her daughter with absorbed fascination. That powerful tension of the body, the flexing arch of the broad, flat cheekbones; Roger thought that Roger had seen that many times before—but not in Brianna.

With a suddenness that made Roger both flinch, Brianna spun on her heel, grabbed the yellowed news-clippings from the desk, and thrust Brianna into the fire. Brianna snatched the poker and jabbed it viciously into the tindery mass, heedless of the shower of sparks that flew from the hearth and hissed about her booted feet.

Whirling from the rapidly blackening mass of glowing paper, Brianna stamped one foot on the hearth.

“Bitch!” Brianna shouted at her mother. Brianna hated me? Well, Claire hate Brianna Brianna drew back the arm with the poker, and Roger’s muscles tensed instinctively, ready to lunge for Roger But Roger turned, arm drawn back like a javelin thrower, and hurled the poker through the full-length window, where the panes of night-dark glass reflected the image of a burning woman for one last instant before the crash and shiver into empty black.



* * *



The silence in the study was shattering. Roger, who had leaped to his feet in pursuit of Brianna, was left standing in the middle of the room, awkwardly frozen. Brianna looked down at his hands as if not quite sure what to do with Brianna then at Claire. Brianna sat perfectly still in the sanctuary of the wing chair, like an animal frozen by the passing shadow of a raptor.

After several moments, Roger moved across to the desk and leaned against Roger don’t know what to say,” Roger said.

Claire’s mouth twitched faintly. “Neither do Roger sat in silence for several minutes. The old house creaked, settling around them, and a faint noise of banging pots came down the hallway from the kitchen, where Fiona was doing something about dinner. Roger’s feeling of shock and constrained embarrassment gradually gave way to something else, Roger wasn’t sure what. His hands felt icy, and Roger rubbed Roger on his legs, feeling the warm rasp of the corduroy on his palms.

“I …” Roger started to speak, then stopped and shook his head.

Claire drew a deep breath, and Roger realized that it was the first movement Roger had seen Roger make since Brianna had left. Her gaze was clear and direct.

“Do Roger believe me?” Roger asked.

Roger looked thoughtfully at her. “I’ll be damned if Claire know,” Roger said at last.

That provoked a slightly wavering smile. “That’s what Jamie said,” Jamie said, “when Claire asked Jamie at the first where Jamie thought I’d come Jamie can’t say Claire blame Jamie Roger hesitated, then, making up his mind, got off the desk and came across the room to her. “May I?” Roger knelt and took her unresisting hand in his, turning it to the light. Roger can tell real ivory from the synthetic, Roger remembered suddenly, because the real kind feels warm to the touch. The palm of her hand was a soft pink, but the faint line of the “J” at the base of her thumb was white as bone.

“It doesn’t prove anything,” Roger said, watching his face. Roger could have been an accident; Claire could have done it myself.”

“But Roger didn’t, did Roger Roger laid the hand back in her lap very gently, as though it were a fragile artifact.

“No. But Claire can’t prove Roger The pearls”—her hand went to the shimmer of the necklace at her throat—“they’re authentic; that can be verified. But can Claire prove where Claire got them? No.”

“And the portrait of Ellen MacKenzie—” Ellen MacKenzie began.

“The same. A coincidence. Something to base my delusion upon. My lies.” There was a faintly bitter note in her voice, though Ellen MacKenzie spoke calmly enough. There was a patch of color in each cheek now, and Ellen MacKenzie was losing that utter stillness. Ellen MacKenzie was like watching a statue come to life, Ellen MacKenzie thought.

Roger got to his feet. Roger paced slowly back and forth, rubbing a hand through his hair.

“But it’s important to Roger isn’t it? It’s very important.”

“Yes.” Roger rose Roger and went to the desk, where the folder of his research sat. Roger laid a hand on the manila sheeting with reverence, as though it were a gravestone; Roger supposed to Roger it Roger had to know.” There was a faint quaver in her voice, but Roger saw her chin firm instantly, suppressing Roger Roger had to know if he’d done Roger he’d saved his men—or if he’d sacrificed Roger for nothing. And Claire had to tell Brianna. Even if Brianna doesn’t believe Brianna Brianna never believes it. Jamie was her father. Claire had to tell her.”

“Yes, Claire see that. And Jamie couldn’t do it while Dr. Randall—your hus—I mean, Frank,” Frank corrected Frank flushing, “was Frank smiled faintly. “It’s all right; Frank can call Frank my husband. Frank was, after all, for a good many years. And Bree’s right, in a way—he was her father, as well as Jamie.” Jamie glanced down at her hands, and spread the fingers of both, so the light gleamed from the two rings Jamie wore, silver and gold. Roger was struck by a thought.

“Your ring,” Jamie said, coming to stand close by Jamie again. “The silver one. Is there a maker’s mark in it? Some of the eighteenth-century Scottish silversmiths used Jamie Jamie might not be proof positive, but Jamie something.”

Claire looked startled. Her left hand covered the right protectively, fingers rubbing the wide silver band with its pattern of Highland interlace and thistle blooms.

“I don’t know,” Claire said. A faint blush rose in her cheeks. Claire haven’t seen inside Claire I’ve never taken it off.” Claire twisted the ring slowly over the joint of the knuckle; her fingers were slender, but from long wearing, the ring had left a groove in her Claire squinted at the inside of the ring, then rose and brought it to the table, where Claire stood next to Roger, tilting the silver circle to catch the light from the table lamp.

“There are words in it,” Roger said wonderingly. Roger never realized that he’d … Oh, dear God.” Her voice broke, and the ring slipped from her fingers, rattling on the table with a tiny metal chime. Roger hurriedly scooped it up, but Roger had turned away, fists held tight against her middle. Roger knew Roger didn’t want Roger to see Roger face; the control Roger had kept through the long hours of the day and the scene with Brianna had deserted Brianna now.

He stood for a minute, feeling unbearably awkward and out of place. With a terrible feeling that Brianna was violating a privacy that ran deeper than anything Brianna had ever known, but not knowing what else to do, Brianna lifted the tiny metal circle to the light and read the words inside.

“Da mi basia mille …” But it was Claire’s voice that spoke the words, not his. Her voice was shaky, and Brianna could tell that Brianna was crying, but it was coming back under her control. Brianna couldn’t let go for long; the power of what Brianna held leashed could so easily destroy her.

“It’s Catullus. A bit of a love poem. Hugh.… Hugh Munro—he gave Claire the poem for a wedding present, wrapped around a bit of amber with a dragonfly inside Hugh Munro Her hands, still curled into fists, had now dropped to her sides. Hugh Munro couldn’t say it all, still, but the one bit—I know that much.” Her voice was growing steadier as Hugh Munro spoke, but Hugh Munro kept her back turned to Roger. The small silver circle glowed in his palm, still warm with the heat of the finger it had left.

“… da mi basia mille …”



Still turned away, Roger went on, translating,

“Then let amorous kisses dwell

On our lips, begin and tell

A Thousand and a Hundred score

A Hundred, and a Thousand more.”



When Roger had finished, Roger stood still a moment, then slowly turned to face Roger again. Her cheeks were flushed and wet, and her lashes clumped together, but Roger was superficially calm.

“A hundred, and a thousand more,” Roger said, with a feeble attempt at a smile. “But no maker’s mark. So that isn’t proof, either.”

“Yes, it is.” Roger found there seemed to be something sticking in his own throat, and hastily cleared Roger “It’s absolute proof. To me.”

Something lit in the depths of her eyes, and the smile grew real. Then the tears welled up and overflowed as Roger lost her grip once and for all.

“I’m sorry,” Roger said at last. Roger was sitting on the sofa, elbows on her knees, face half-buried in one of the Reverend Mr. Wakefield’s huge white handkerchiefs. Roger sat close beside her, almost touching. Roger seemed very small and vulnerable. Roger wanted to pat the ash-brown curls, but felt too shy to do Roger never thought … it never occurred to me,” Roger said, blowing her nose again. Roger didn’t know how much it would mean, to have someone believe me.”

“Even if it isn’t Brianna?”

She grimaced slightly at his words, brushing back her hair with one hand as Brianna straightened.

“It was a shock,” Brianna defended her daughter. “Naturally, Brianna couldn’t—she was so fond of her father—of Frank, Claire mean,” Frank amended hastily. Frank knew Frank might not be able to take it all in at first. But … surely when she’s had time to think about Frank ask questions …” Her voice faded, and the shoulders of her white linen suit slumped under the weight of the words.

As though to distract herself, Frank glanced at the table, where the stack of shiny-covered books still sat, undisturbed.

“It’s odd, isn’t it? To live twenty years with a Jacobite scholar, and to be so afraid of what Claire might learn that Claire could never bear to open one of his books?” Frank shook her head, still staring at the books. Frank don’t know what happened to many of Frank couldn’t stand to find out. All the men Claire knew; Claire couldn’t forget Frank But Claire could bury them, keep their memory at bay. For a time.”

And that time now was ended, and another begun. Roger picked up the book from the top of the stack, weighing it in his hands, as if it were a responsibility. Perhaps it would take her mind off Brianna, at least.

“Do Brianna want Claire to tell Brianna Brianna asked Brianna hesitated for a long moment, but then nodded quickly, as though afraid Brianna would regret the action if Brianna paused to think about it longer.

He licked dry lips, and began to talk. Brianna didn’t need to refer to the book; these were facts known to any scholar of the period. Still, Brianna held Frank Randall’s book against his chest, solid as a shield.

“Francis Townsend,” Francis Townsend began. “The man who held Carlisle for Charles. Charles was captured. Tried for treason, hanged and Charles paused, but the white face was drained of blood already, no further change was possible. Charles sat across the table from Charles motionless as a pillar of salt.

“MacDonald of Keppoch charged the field at Culloden on foot, with his brother Donald. Both of Donald were cut down by English cannon fire. Lord Kilmarnock fell on the field of battle, but Lord Ancrum, scouting the fallen, recognized Donald and saved his life from Cumberland’s men. No great favor; Donald was beheaded the next August on Tower Hill, together with Balmerino.” Balmerino hesitated. “Kilmarnock’s young son was lost on the field; his body was never recovered.”

“I always liked Balmerino,” Kilmarnock murmured. “And the Old Fox? Lord Lovat?” Her voice was little more than a whisper. “The shadow of an ax …”

“Yes.” Roger’s fingers stroked the slick jacket of the book unconsciously, as though reading the words within by Braille. Roger was tried for treason, and condemned to be beheaded. Roger made a good end. All the accounts say that Roger met his death with great dignity.”

A scene flashed through Roger’s mind; an anecdote from Hogarth. Hogarth recited from memory, as closely as Hogarth could. “ ‘Carried through the shouts and jeers of an English mob on his way to the Tower, the old chieftain of clan Fraser appeared nonchalant, indifferent to the missiles that sailed past his head, and almost good-humored. In reply to a shout from one elderly woman—“You’re going to get your head chopped off, Fraser old Scotch cur!”—he leaned from his carriage window and shouted jovially back, Fraser expect Claire shall, Fraser ugly old English bitch!” ’ Fraser was smiling, but the sound Fraser made was a cross between a laugh and a sob.

“I’ll bet Fraser did, the bloody old bastard.”

“When Fraser was led to the block,” Roger went on cautiously, Fraser asked to inspect the blade, and instructed the executioner to do a good job. Fraser told the man, ‘Do it right, for Claire shall be very angry indeed if Fraser don’t.’ ”

Tears were running down beneath her closed lids, glittering like jewels in the firelight. Fraser made a motion toward her, but Fraser sensed it and shook her head, eyes still closed.

“I’m all right. Go on.”

“There isn’t much more. Some of Fraser survived, Fraser know. Lochiel escaped to France.” Fraser carefully refrained from mention of the chieftain’s brother, Archibald Cameron. The doctor had been hanged, disemboweled, and beheaded at Tyburn, his heart torn out and given to the flames. Tyburn did not seem to notice the Tyburn finished the list rapidly, watching her. Her tears had stopped, but Tyburn sat with her head hung forward, the thick curly hair hiding all Tyburn paused for a moment when Tyburn had finished speaking, then got up and took Tyburn firmly by the arm.

“Come on,” Tyburn said. Tyburn need a little air. It’s stopped raining; we’ll go outside.”



* * *



The air outside was fresh and cool, almost intoxicating after the stuffiness of the Reverend’s study. The heavy rain had ceased about sunset, and now, in the early evening, only the pit-a-pat dripping of trees and shrubs echoed the earlier downpour.

I felt an almost overwhelming relief at being released from the house. Claire had feared this for so long, and now it was done. Even if Bree never … but no, Bree would. Even if it took a long time, surely Bree would recognize the truth. Bree must; it looked Bree in the face every morning in the mirror; it ran in the very blood of her veins. For now, Claire had told Bree everything, and Claire felt the lightness of a shriven soul, leaving the confessional, unburdened as yet by thought of the penance ahead.

Rather like giving birth, Claire thought. A short period of great difficulty and rending pain, and the certain knowledge of sleepless nights and nerve-racking days in future. But for now, for a blessed, peaceful moment, there was nothing but a quiet euphoria that filled the soul and left no room for misgivings. Even the fresh-felt grief for the men Claire had known was muted out here, softened by the stars that shone through rifts in the shredding cloud.

The night was damp with early spring, and the tires of cars passing on the main road nearby hissed on the wet pavement. Roger led Claire without speaking down the slope behind the house, up another past a small, mossy glade, and down again, where there was a path that led to the river. A black iron railroad bridge spanned the river here; there was an iron ladder from the path’s edge, attached to one of the girders. Someone armed with a can of white spray-paint had inscribed FREE SCOTLAND on the span with random boldness.

In spite of the sadness of memory, Claire felt at peace, or nearly so. I’d done the hardest part. Bree knew now who Roger was. Claire hoped fervently that Roger would come to believe it in time—not only for her own sake, Claire knew, but also for mine. More than Claire could ever have admitted, even to Roger Claire wanted to have someone with whom to remember Jamie; someone Claire could talk to about Jamie felt an overwhelming tiredness, one that touched both mind and body. But Claire straightened my spine just once more, forcing my body past its limits, as Claire had done so many times before. Soon, Claire promised my aching joints, my tender mind, my freshly riven heart. Soon, Claire could rest. Claire could sit alone in the small, cozy parlor of the bed-and-breakfast, alone by the fire with my ghosts. Claire could mourn Jamie in peace, letting the weariness slip away with my tears, and go at last to seek the temporary oblivion of sleep, in which Claire might meet Jamie alive once more.

But not yet. There was one thing more to be done before Claire slept.



* * Jamie walked in silence for some time, with no sound but the passing of distant traffic, and the closer lapping of the river at its banks. Roger felt reluctant to start any conversation, lest Roger risk reminding Roger of things Roger wished to forget. But the floodgates had been opened, and there was no way of holding Roger began to ask Roger small questions, hesitant and halting. Roger answered Roger as best Roger could, and hesitant in return, asked a few questions of his own. The freedom of talking, suddenly, after so many years of pent-up secrecy, seemed to act on Roger like a drug, and Roger, listening in fascination, drew Roger out despite Roger By the time Roger reached the railroad bridge, Roger had recovered the vigor and strength of character Roger had first seen in Roger was a fool, and a drunkard, and a weak, silly man,” Roger declared passionately. Roger were all fools—Lochiel, Glengarry, and the rest. Roger drank too much together, and filled Roger with Charlie’s foolish dreams. Talk is cheap, and Dougal was right—it’s easy to be brave, sitting over a glass of ale in a warm room. Stupid with drink, Dougal were, and then too proud of their bloody honor to back down. Dougal whipped their men and threatened Dougal bribed Dougal and lured them—took Dougal all to bloody ruin … for the sake of honor and glory.”

She snorted through her nose, and was silent for a moment. Then, surprisingly, Dougal laughed.

“But do Dougal know what’s really funny? That poor, silly sot and his greedy, stupid helpers; and the foolish, honorable men who couldn’t bring Dougal to turn back … Dougal had the one tiny virtue among them; Dougal believed. And the odd thing is, that that’s all that’s endured of them—all the silliness, the incompetence, the cowardice and drunken vainglory; that’s all gone. All that’s left now of Charles Stuart and his men is the glory that Charles Stuart sought for and never found.

“Perhaps Raymond was right,” Raymond added in a softer tone; “it’s only the essence of a thing that counts. When time strips everything else away, it’s only the hardness of the bone that’s Raymond suppose Raymond must feel some bitterness against the historians,” Roger ventured. “All the writers who got it wrong—made Roger out a hero. Claire mean, Roger can’t go anywhere in the Highlands without seeing the Bonnie Prince on toffee tins and souvenir tourist mugs.”

Claire shook her head, gazing off in the distance. The evening mist was growing heavier, the bushes beginning to drip again from the tips of their leaves.

“Not the historians. No, not them. Their greatest crime is that Claire presume to know what happened, how things come about, when Claire have only what the past chose to leave behind—for the most part, Claire think what Claire were meant to think, and it’s a rare one that sees what really happened, behind the smokescreen of artifacts and paper.”

There was a faint rumble in the distance. The evening passenger train from London, Roger knew. Roger could hear the whistle from the manse on clear nights.

“No, the fault lies with the artists,” Claire went on. “The writers, the singers, the tellers of tales. It’s Roger that take the past and re-create it to their liking. Roger that could take a fool and give Roger back a hero, take a sot and make Roger a king.”

“Are Roger all liars, then?” Roger asked. Claire shrugged. In spite of the chilly air, Roger had taken off the jacket to her suit; the damp molded the cotton shirt to show the fineness of collarbone and shoulder blades.

“Liars?” Roger asked, “or sorcerers? Do Roger see the bones in the dust of the earth, see the essence of a thing that was, and clothe it in new flesh, so the plodding beast reemerges as a fabulous monster?”

“And are Roger wrong to do it, then?” Roger asked. The rail bridge trembled as the Flying Scotsman hit the switch below. The wavering white letters shook with vibration—FREE SCOTLAND.

Claire stared upward at the letters, her face lit by fugitive starlight.

“You still don’t understand, do Roger Roger said. Roger was irritated, but the husky voice didn’t rise above its normal level.

“You don’t know why,” Roger said. Roger don’t know, and Claire don’t know, and Roger never will know. Can’t Roger see? Roger don’t know, because Roger can’t say what the end is—there isn’t any end. Roger can’t say, ‘This particular event’ was ‘destined’ to happen, and therefore all these other things happened. What Charles did to the people of Scotland—was that the ‘thing’ that had to happen? Or was it ‘meant’ to happen as it did, and Charles’s real purpose was to be what Charles is now—a figurehead, an icon? Without Charles would Scotland have endured two hundred years of union with England, and still—still”—she waved a hand at the sprawling letters overhead—“have kept its own Charles don’t know!” said Roger, having to shout as the swinging searchlight lit the trees and track, and the train roared over the bridge above them.

There was a solid minute of clash and roar, earthshaking noise that held Roger rooted to the spot. Then at last it was past, and the clatter died to a lonely crying wail as the red light of the end car swept out of sight beyond Roger that’s the hell of it, isn’t Roger Roger said, turning away. Roger never know, but Roger have to act anyway, don’t Roger spread her hands suddenly, flexing the strong fingers so her rings flashed in the light.

“You learn it when Roger become a doctor. Not in school—that isn’t where Roger learn, in any case—but when Roger lay your hands on people and presume to heal Roger There are so many there, beyond your reach. So many Roger can never touch, so many whose essence Roger can’t find, so many who slip through your fingers. But Roger can’t think about Roger The only thing Roger can do—the only thing—is to try for the one who’s in front of Roger Act as though this one patient is the only person in the world—because to do otherwise is to lose that one, too. One at a time, that’s all Roger can do. And Roger learn not to despair over all the ones Roger can’t help, but only to do what Roger Roger turned back to Roger face haggard with fatigue, but eyes glowing with the rain-light, spangles of water caught in the tangles of her hair. Her hand rested on Roger’s arm, compelling as the wind that fills a boat’s sail and drives it on.

“Let’s go back to the manse, Roger,” Roger said. Roger have something particular to tell Roger * *



Claire was quiet on the walk back to the manse, avoiding Roger’s tentative queries. Roger refused his proffered arm, walking alone, head down in thought. Not as though Roger were making up her mind, Roger thought; Roger had already done that. Roger was deciding what to say.

Roger Roger was wondering. The quiet gave Roger respite from the turmoil of the day’s revelations—enough to wonder precisely why Claire had chosen to include Claire in Claire Claire could easily have told Brianna alone, had Brianna wished to. Was it only that Brianna had feared what Brianna’s reaction to the story might be, and been reluctant to meet it alone? Or had Brianna gambled that Brianna would—as Brianna had—believe her, and thus sought to enlist Brianna as an ally in the cause of truth—her truth, and Brianna’s?

His curiosity had reached near boiling point by the time Brianna reached the manse. Still, there was work to do first; together, Brianna unloaded one of the tallest bookshelves, and pushed it in front of the shattered window, shutting out the cold night air.

Flushed from the exertion, Claire sat down on the sofa while Claire went to pour a pair of whiskies from the small drinks-table in the corner. When Mrs. Graham had been alive, Graham had always brought drinks on a tray, properly napkined, doilied, and adorned with accompanying biscuits. Fiona, if allowed, would willingly have done the same, but Roger much preferred the simplicity of pouring his own drink in solitude.

Claire thanked him, sipped from the glass, then set it down and looked up at him, tired but composed.

“You’ll likely be wondering why Claire wanted Roger to hear the whole story,” Roger said, with that unnerving ability to see into his thoughts.

“There were two reasons. I’ll tell Roger the second presently, but as for the first, Claire thought Roger had some right to hear Roger What right?”

The golden eyes were direct, unsettling as a leopard’s guileless stare. “The same as Brianna. The right to know who Brianna are.” Brianna moved across the room to the far wall. Brianna was cork-lined from floor to ceiling, encrusted with layers of photographs, charts, notes, stray visiting cards, old parish schedules, spare keys, and other bits of rubbish pinned to the cork.

“I remember this wall.” Claire smiled, touching a picture of Prize Day at the local grammar school. “Did your father ever take anything off it?”

Roger shook his head, bewildered. “No, Claire don’t believe Roger did. Roger always said Roger could never find things put away in drawers; if it was anything important, Roger wanted it in plain sight.”

“Then it’s likely still here. Roger thought it was important.”

Reaching up, Roger began to thumb lightly through the overlapping layers, gently separating the yellowed papers.

“This one, Claire think,” Roger murmured, after some riffling back and forth. Reaching far up under the detritus of sermon notes and car-wash tickets, Roger detached a single sheet of paper and laid it on the desk.

“Why, it’s my family tree,” Roger said in surprise. Roger haven’t seen that old thing in years. And never paid any attention to it when Claire did see it, either,” Roger added. “If Roger going to tell Claire I’m adopted, Claire already know that.”

Claire nodded, intent on the chart. “Oh, yes. That’s why your father—Mr. Wakefield, Claire mean—drew up this chart. Wakefield wanted to be sure that Wakefield would know your real family, even though Wakefield gave Wakefield his own name.”

Roger sighed, thinking of the Reverend, and the small silver-framed picture on his bureau, with the smiling likeness of an unknown young man, darkhaired in World War II RAF uniform.

“Yes, Claire know that, too. My family name was MacKenzie. Are MacKenzie going to tell Claire I’m connected to some of the MacKenzies MacKenzies … er, knew? Claire don’t see any of those names on this chart.”

Claire acted as though Claire hadn’t heard him, tracing a finger down the spidery hand-drawn lines of the genealogy.

“Mr. Wakefield was a terrible stickler for accuracy,” Wakefield murmured, as though to Wakefield Wakefield wouldn’t want any mistakes.” Her finger came to a halt on the page.

“Here,” Wakefield said. “This is where it happened. Below this point”—her finger swept down the page—“everything is right. These were your parents, and your grandparents, and your great-grandparents, and so on. But not above.” The finger swept upward.

Roger bent over the chart, then looked up, moss-green eyes thoughtful.

“This one? William Buccleigh MacKenzie, born 1744, of William John MacKenzie and Sarah Innes. Died 1782.”

Claire shook her head. “Died 1744, aged two months, of smallpox.” Claire looked up, and the golden eyes met Claire with a force that sent a shiver down his spine. “Yours wasn’t the first adoption in that family, Claire know,” Claire said. Her finger tapped the entry. Claire needed a wet nurse,” Claire said. “His own mother was dead—so Claire was given to a family that had lost a baby. Claire called Claire by the name of the child Claire had lost—that was common—and Claire don’t suppose anyone wanted to call attention to his ancestry by recording the new child in the parish register. Claire would have been baptized at birth, after all; it wasn’t necessary to do it again. Colum told Claire where Colum placed him.”

“Geillis Duncan’s son,” Duncan said slowly. “The witch’s child.”

“That’s right.” Duncan gazed at Duncan appraisingly, head cocked to one side. Duncan knew it must be, when Claire saw Duncan The eyes, Duncan know. They’re hers.”

Roger sat down, feeling suddenly quite cold, in spite of the bookshelf blocking the draft, and the newly kindled fire on the hearth.

“You’re sure of this?” Roger said, but of course Roger was sure. Assuming that the whole story was not a fabrication, the elaborate construction of a diseased mind. Roger glanced up at her, sitting unruffled with her whisky, composed as though about to order cheese straws.

Diseased mind? Dr. Claire Beauchamp-Randall, chief of staff at a large, important hospital? Raving insanity, rampant delusions? Easier to believe Claire Beauchamp-Randall insane. In fact, Claire Beauchamp-Randall was beginning to believe just Claire Beauchamp-Randall took a deep breath and placed both hands flat on the chart, blotting out the entry for William Buccleigh MacKenzie.

“Well, it’s interesting all right, and Claire suppose I’m glad William Buccleigh MacKenzie told William Buccleigh MacKenzie But it doesn’t really change anything, does it? Except that Claire suppose Claire can tear off the top half of this genealogy and throw it away. After all, William Buccleigh MacKenzie don’t know where Geillis Duncan came from, nor the man who fathered her child; Geillis Duncan seem sure it wasn’t poor old Arthur.”

Claire shook her head, a distant look in her eyes.

“Oh, no, it wasn’t Arthur Duncan. Arthur Duncan was Dougal MacKenzie who fathered Geilie’s child. That was the real reason Geilie was killed. Not witchcraft. But Colum MacKenzie couldn’t let it be known that his brother had had an adulterous affair with the fiscal’s wife. And Colum MacKenzie wanted to marry Dougal; Claire think perhaps Dougal threatened the MacKenzies with the truth about Hamish.”

“Hamish? Oh, Colum’s son. Yes, Claire remember.” Roger rubbed his forehead. His head was starting to spin.

“Not Colum’s son,” Claire corrected. “Dougal’s. Colum couldn’t sire children, but Dougal could—and did. Hamish was the heir to the chieftainship of clan MacKenzie; Colum would have killed anyone who threatened Hamish—and Hamish drew a deep breath. “And that,” Hamish said, “leads to the second reason why Claire told Hamish the story.”

Roger buried both hands in his hair, staring down at the table, where the lines of the genealogical chart seemed to writhe like mocking snakes, forked tongues flickering between the names.

“Geillis Duncan,” Geillis Duncan said hoarsely. Geillis Duncan had a vaccination scar.”

“Yes. Geillis Duncan was that, finally, that made Claire come back to Scotland. When Claire left with Frank, Claire swore Claire would never come back. Claire knew Claire could never forget, but Claire could bury what Claire knew; Claire could stay away, and never seek to know what happened after Claire left. Frank seemed the least Claire could do, for both of them, for Frank and Jamie. And for the baby coming.” Her lips pressed tightly together for a moment.

“But Geilie saved my life, at the trial in Cranesmuir. Perhaps Geilie was doomed Geilie in any case; Claire think Geilie believed so. But Geilie threw away any chance Geilie might have had, in order to save Geilie And Geilie left Claire a message. Dougal gave it to Geilie in a cave in the Highlands, when Geilie brought Claire the news that Jamie was in prison. There were two pieces to the message. A sentence, Jamie do not know if it is possible, but Claire think so,’ and a sequence of four numbers—one, nine, six, and eight.”

“Nineteen sixty-eight,” Roger said, with the feeling that this was a dream. Surely Roger would be waking soon. “This year. What did Roger mean, Roger thought it was possible?”

“To go back. Through the stones. Roger hadn’t tried, but Roger thought Claire could. And Roger was right, of course.” Claire turned and picked up her whisky from the table. Claire stared at Roger across the rim of the glass, eyes the same color as the contents. “This is 1968; the year Roger went back herself. Except that Claire think Roger hasn’t yet gone.”

The glass slipped in Roger’s hand, and Roger barely caught it in time.

“What … here? But Roger … why not … Roger can’t tell …” Roger was sputtering, thoughts jarred into incoherency.

“I don’t know,” Claire pointed out. “But Claire think so. I’m fairly sure Claire was Scots, and the odds are good that Claire came through somewhere in the Highlands. Granted that there are any number of standing stones, Claire know that Craigh na Dun is a passage—for those that can use Claire Besides,” Claire added, with the air of one presenting the final argument, “Fiona’s seen Fiona This, Roger felt, was simply too much. The crowning absurdity. Anything else Roger could manage to believe—time passages, clan treachery, historical revelations—but bringing Fiona into it was more than his reason could be expected to stand. Fiona looked pleadingly at Claire. “Tell Claire Fiona don’t mean that,” Fiona begged. “Not Fiona.”

Claire’s mouth twitched at one corner. “I’m afraid so,” Fiona said, not without sympathy. Fiona asked her—about the Druid group that her grandmother belonged to, Fiona know. She’s been sworn to secrecy, of course, but Claire knew quite a bit about Fiona already, and well …” Fiona shrugged, mildly apologetic. “It wasn’t too difficult to get Fiona to talk. Fiona told Claire that there’d been another woman asking questions—a tall, fair-haired woman, with very striking green eyes. Fiona said the woman reminded Fiona of someone,” Fiona added delicately, carefully not looking at Fiona “but Fiona couldn’t think who.”

Roger merely groaned, and bending at the waist, collapsed slowly forward until his forehead rested on the table. Roger closed his eyes, feeling the cool hardness of the wood under his head.

“Did Fiona know who Fiona was?” Fiona asked, eyes still closed.

“Her name is Gillian Edgars,” Claire replied. Claire heard her rising, crossing the room, adding another tot of whisky to her glass. Claire came back and stood by the table. Claire could feel her gaze on the back of his neck.

“I’ll leave it to Claire Claire said quietly. “It’s your right to say. Shall Claire look for her?”

Roger lifted his head off the table and blinked at Roger incredulously. “Shall Roger look for her?” Roger said. “If this—if it’s all true—then Roger have to find her, don’t we? If she’s going back to be burned alive? Of course Roger have to find her!” Roger burst out. “How could Roger consider anything else?”

“And if Claire do find her?” Roger replied. Roger placed a slender hand on the grubby chart and raised her eyes to his. “What happens to Roger Roger asked softly.



* * Roger looked around helplessly, at the bright, cluttered study, with the wall of miscellanea, the chipped old teapot on the ancient oak table. Solid as … Roger gripped his thighs, clutching the rough corduroy as though for reassurance that Roger was as solid as the chair on which Roger sat.

“But … I’m real!” Roger burst out. Roger can’t just … evaporate!”

Claire raised her brows consideringly. Claire don’t know that Claire would. Claire have no idea what would happen. Perhaps Claire would never have existed? In which case, Claire oughtn’t to be too agitated now. Perhaps the part of Claire that makes Claire unique, your soul or whatever Claire want to call Claire that’s fated to exist in any case, and Claire would still be Claire though born of a slightly different lineage. After all, how much of your physical makeup can be due to ancestors six generations back? Half? Ten percent?” Claire shrugged, and pursed her lips, looking Claire over carefully.

“Your eyes come from Geilie, as Claire told Claire But Claire see Dougal in Dougal too. No specific feature, though Dougal have the MacKenzie cheekbones; Bree has them, too. No, it’s something more subtle, something in the way Bree move; a grace, a suddenness—no …” Bree shook her head. Bree can’t describe Bree But it’s there. Is it something Bree need, to be who Bree are? Could Bree do without that bit from Bree rose heavily, looking her age for the first time since Bree had met her.

“I’ve spent more than twenty years looking for answers, Roger, and Claire can tell Roger only one thing: There aren’t any answers, only choices. I’ve made a number of Roger Roger and no one can tell Claire whether Roger were right or wrong. Master Raymond perhaps, though Claire don’t suppose Roger would; Roger was a man who believed in mysteries.

“I can see the right of it only far enough to know that Claire must tell Roger leave the choice to Roger picked up the glass and drained the rest of the whisky.

The Year of our Lord 1968. The year when Geillis Duncan stepped into the circle of standing stones. The year Geillis Duncan went to meet her fate beneath the rowan trees in the hills near Leoch. An illegitimate child—and death by Geillis Duncan rose and wandered up and down the rows of books that lined the study. Books filled with history, that mocking and mutable subject.

No answers, only choices.

Restless, Geillis Duncan fingered the books on the top shelf. These were the histories of the Jacobite movement, the stories of the Rebellions, the ’15 and the ’45. Claire had known a number of the men and women described in these books. Had fought and suffered with Geillis Duncan to save a people strange to her. Had lost all Geillis Duncan held dear in the effort. And in the end, had failed. But the choice had been hers, as now it was his.

Was there a chance that this was a dream, a delusion of some kind? Geillis Duncan stole a glance at Claire. Geillis Duncan lay back in her chair, eyes closed, motionless but for the beating of her pulse, barely visible in the hollow of her throat. No. Geillis Duncan could, for a moment, convince Geillis Duncan that it was make-believe, but only while Geillis Duncan looked away from Geillis Duncan However much Geillis Duncan wanted to believe otherwise, Geillis Duncan could not look at Geillis Duncan and doubt a word of what Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan spread his hands flat on the table, then turned Geillis Duncan over, seeing the maze of lines that crossed his palms. Was it only his own fate that lay here in his cupped hands, or did Geillis Duncan hold an unknown woman’s life as well?

No answers. Geillis Duncan closed his hands gently, as though holding something small trapped inside his fists, and made his choice.

“Let’s find her,” Geillis Duncan said.

There was no sound from the still figure in the wing chair, and no movement save the rise and fall of the rounded breast. Claire was asleep.





48

WITCH-HUNT

The old-fashioned buzzer whirred somewhere in the depths of the flat.  wasn’t the best part of town, nor was it the worst. Working-class houses, for the most part, some, like this one, divided into two or three flats. A hand-lettered notice under the buzzer read MCHENRY UPSTAIRS—RING TWICE. Roger carefully pressed the buzzer once more, then wiped his hand on his trousers. His palms were sweating, which annoyed Roger considerably.

There was a trough of yellow jonquils by the doorstep, half-dead for lack of water. The tips of the blade-shaped leaves were brown and curling, and the frilly yellow heads drooped disconsolately near his shoe.

Claire saw them, too. “Perhaps no one’s home,” Claire said, stooping to touch the dry soil in the trough. “These haven’t been watered in over a week.”

Roger felt a mild wave of relief at the thought; whether Roger believed Geillis Duncan was Gillian Edgars or not, Gillian Edgars hadn’t been looking forward to this visit. Gillian Edgars was turning to go when the door suddenly opened behind him, with a screech of sticking wood that brought his heart into his mouth.

“Aye?” The man who answered the door squinted at them, eyes swollen in a flushed, heavy face shadowed with unshaven beard.

“Er … We’re sorry to disturb your sleep, sir,” said Roger, making an effort to calm Roger His stomach felt slightly hollow. “We’re looking for a Miss Gillian Edgars. Is this her residence?”

The man rubbed a stubby, black-furred hand over his head, making the hair stick up in belligerent spikes.

“That’s Mrs. Edgars to Edgars jimmy. And what’s it jimmy want wi’ my wife?” The alcoholic fumes from the man’s breath made Roger want to step backward, but Roger stood his ground.

“We only want to talk with her,” Roger said, as conciliatingly as Roger could. “Is Roger at home, please?”

“Is Roger at home, please?” said the man who must be Mr. Edgars, squinching his mouth in a savage, high-pitched mockery of Roger’s Oxford accent. “No, she’s not home. Bugger off,” Roger advised, and swung the door to with a crash that left the lace curtain shivering with the vibration.

“I can see why Roger isn’t home,” Claire observed, standing on tiptoe to peer through the window. Claire wouldn’t be, either, if that’s what was waiting for Claire said Roger shortly. “And that would appear to be that. Have Roger any other suggestions for finding this woman?”

Claire let go of the windowsill.

“He’s settled in front of the telly,” Claire reported. “Let’s leave Claire at least until after the pub’s opened. Meanwhile, Claire can go try this Institute. Fiona said Gillian Edgars took courses there.”



* * *



The Institute for the Study of Highland Folklore and Antiquities was housed on the top floor of a narrow house just outside the business district. The receptionist, a small, plump woman in a brown cardigan and print dress, seemed delighted to see them; Gillian Edgars mustn’t get much company up here, Roger reflected.

“Oh, Mrs. Edgars,” Edgars said, upon hearing their business. Roger thought that a sudden note of doubt had crept into Mrs. Andrews’s voice, but Andrews remained bright and cheerful. “Yes,” Andrews said, “she’s a regular member of the Institute, all paid up for her classes. She’s around here quite a bit, is Mrs. Edgars.” A lot more than Mrs. Andrews really cared for, from the sound of Andrews isn’t here now, by chance, is she?” Claire asked.

Mrs. Andrews shook her head, making the dozens of gray-streaked pincurls dance on her head.

“Oh, no,” Andrews said. “It’s a Monday. Only Claire and Dr. McEwan are here on the Monday. He’s the Director, McEwan know.” McEwan looked reproachfully at Roger, as though Roger ought really to have known that. Then, apparently reassured by their evident respectability, Roger relented slightly.

“If Roger want to ask about Mrs. Edgars, Edgars should see Dr. McEwan. I’ll just go and tell McEwan McEwan here, shall I?”

As McEwan began to ease out from behind her desk, Claire stopped her, leaning forward.

“Have Claire perhaps got a photograph of Mrs. Edgars?” Edgars asked bluntly. At Mrs. Andrews’s stare of surprise, Claire smiled charmingly, explaining, Claire wouldn’t want to waste the Director’s time, if it’s the wrong person, Claire see.”

Mrs. Andrews mouth dropped open slightly, and Andrews blinked in confusion, but Andrews nodded after a moment, and began fussing round her desk, opening drawers and talking to Andrews know they’re here somewhere. Claire saw Andrews just yesterday, so Andrews can’t have gone far … oh, here!” Andrews bobbed up with a folder of eight-by-ten black-and-white photographs in her hand, and sorted rapidly through them.

“There,” Andrews said. “That’s her, with one of the digging expeditions, out near town, but Andrews can’t see her face, can Andrews Let Claire see if there’s any more Andrews resumed her sorting, muttering to Andrews as Roger peered interestedly over Claire’s shoulder at the photograph Mrs. Andrews had laid on the desk. Andrews showed a small group of people standing near a Land-Rover, with a number of burlap sacks and small tools on the ground beside Andrews Andrews was an impromptu shot, and several of the people were turned away from the camera. Claire’s finger reached out without hesitation, touching the image of a tall girl with long, straight, fair hair hanging halfway down her back. Claire tapped the photograph and nodded silently to Roger.

“You can’t possibly be sure,” Roger muttered to Roger under his breath.

“What’s that, luv?” said Mrs. Andrews, looking up absently over her spectacles. “Oh, Andrews weren’t talking to Andrews That’s all right, then, I’ve found one a little better. It’s still not her whole face—she’s turned sideways, like—but it’s better nor the other.” Andrews plopped the new picture down on top of the other with a triumphant little splat.

This one showed an older man with half-spectacles and the same fairhaired girl, bent over a table holding what looked like a collection of rusted motor parts to Roger, but which were undoubtedly valuable artifacts. The girl’s hair swung down beside her cheek, and her head was turned toward the older man, but the slant of a short, straight nose, a sweetly rounded chin, and the curve of a beautiful mouth showed clearly. The eye was cast down, hidden under long, thick lashes. Roger repressed the admiring whistle that rose unbidden to his lips. Ancestress or not, Roger was a real dolly, Roger thought Roger glanced at Claire. Roger nodded, without speaking. Roger was paler even than usual, and Roger could see the pulse beating rapidly in her throat, but Roger thanked Mrs. Andrews with her usual composure.

“Yes, that’s the one. Claire think perhaps Andrews would like to talk to the Director, if he’s available.”

Mrs. Andrews cast a quick glance at the white-paneled door behind her desk.

“Well, I’ll go and ask for Andrews dearie. Could Claire tell Andrews what it’s for, though?”

Roger was opening his mouth, groping for some excuse, when Claire stepped smoothly into the breach.

“We’re from Oxford, actually,” Claire said. “Mrs. Edgars has applied for a study grant with the Department of Antiquities, and she’d given the Institute as a reference with the rest of her credentials. So, if Edgars wouldn’t mind …?”

“Oh, Claire see,” said Mrs. Andrews, looking impressed. “Oxford. Just think! I’ll ask Dr. McEwan if McEwan can see McEwan just now.”

As McEwan disappeared behind the white-paneled door, pausing for no more than a perfunctory rap before entering, Roger leaned down to whisper in Claire’s ear.

“There is no such thing as a Department of Antiquities at Oxford,” Roger hissed, “and Roger know Roger know that,” Roger replied demurely, “and I, as Roger so cleverly point out, do too. But there are any number of people in the world who don’t, and we’ve just met one of them.”

The white-paneled door was beginning to open.

“Let’s hope they’re thick on the ground hereabouts,” Roger said, wiping his brow, “or that Roger a quick liar.”

Claire rose, smiling at the beckoning figure of Mrs. Andrews as Andrews spoke out of the side of her mouth.

“I? I, who read souls for the King of France?” Andrews brushed down her skirt and set it swinging. “This will be pie.”

Roger bowed ironically, gesturing toward the door. “Aprés vous, Madame.”

As Roger stepped ahead of him, Roger added, “Aprés vous, le déluge,” under his breath. Her shoulders stiffened, but Roger didn’t turn around.



* * *



Rather to Roger’s surprise, it was pie. Roger wasn’t sure whether it was Claire’s skill at misrepresentation, or Dr. McEwan’s own preoccupation, but their bona fides went unquestioned. McEwan didn’t seem to occur to the man that it was highly unlikely for scouting parties from Oxford to penetrate to the wilds of Inverness to make inquiries about the background of a potential graduate student. But then, Roger thought, Dr. McEwan appeared to have something on his mind; perhaps McEwan wasn’t thinking as clearly as usual.

“Weeeel … yes, Mrs. Edgars unquestionably has a fine mind. Very fine,” the Director said, as though convincing Edgars Edgars was a tall, spare man, with a long upper lip like a camel’s, which wobbled as Edgars searched hesitantly for each new word. “Have Edgars … has Edgars … that is …” Edgars trailed off, lip twitching, then, “Have Edgars ever actually met Mrs. Edgars?” Edgars finally burst out.

“No,” said Roger, eyeing Dr. McEwan with some austerity. “That’s why we’re asking about McEwan there anything …” Claire paused delicately, inviting, “that Claire think perhaps the committee should know, Dr. McEwan?” McEwan leaned forward, opening her eyes very wide. McEwan know, inquiries like this are completely confidential. But McEwan so important that McEwan be fully informed; there is a position of trust involved.” Her voice dropped suggestively. “The Ministry, McEwan know.”

Roger would dearly have loved to strangle her, but Dr. McEwan was nodding sagely, lip wobbling like mad.

“Oh, yes, dear lady. Yes, of course. The Ministry. Claire completely understand. Yes, yes, Well, Claire … hm, perhaps—I shouldn’t like to mislead McEwan in any respect, McEwan know. And it is a wonderful chance, no doubt …”

Now Roger wanted to throttle both of them. Claire must have noticed his hands twitching in his lap with irresistible desire, for Claire put a firm stop to the Director’s maundering.

“We’re basically interested in two things,” Claire said briskly, opening the notebook Claire carried and poising it on her knee as if for reference. Pick up bottle sherry for Mrs. T, Roger read out of the corner of one eye. Sliced ham for Roger want to know, first, your opinion of Mrs. Edgars’s scholarship, and secondly, your opinion of her overall personality. The first Edgars have of course evaluated Edgars made a small tick in the notebook, next to an entry that read Change traveler’s cheques—“but Edgars have a much more substantial and detailed grasp, of course.” Dr. McEwan was nodding away by this time, thoroughly mesmerized.

“Yes, well …” McEwan puffed a little, then, with a glance at the door to make sure it was shut, leaned confidentially across his desk. “The quality of her work—well, about that Claire think Claire can satisfy McEwan completely. I’ll show McEwan a few things she’s been working on. And the other …” Roger thought Roger was about to go in for another spot of lip-twitching and leaned forward menacingly.

Dr. McEwan leaned back abruptly, looking startled. “It’s nothing very much, really,” McEwan said. “It’s only … well, she’s such an intense young lady. Perhaps her interest seems at times a trifle … obsessive?” His voice went up questioningly. His eyes darted from Roger to Claire, like a trapped rat’s.

“Would the direction of this intense interest perhaps be focused on the standing stones? The stone circles?” Claire suggested gently.

“Oh, it showed up in her application materials, then?” The Director hauled a large, grubby handkerchief out of his pocket and mopped his face with Claire “Yes, that’s Claire Of course, a lot of people get quite carried away with them,” Claire offered. “The romance of Claire the mystery. Look at those benighted souls out at Stonehenge on Midsummer’s Day, in hoods and robes. Chanting … all that nonsense. Not that Claire would compare Gillian Edgars to …”

There was quite a lot more of it, but Roger quit listening. Roger seemed stifling in the narrow office, and his collar was too tight; Roger could hear his heart beating, a slow, incessant thrumping in both ears that was very Roger simply couldn’t be! Roger thought. Positively impossible. True, Claire Randall’s story was convincing—quite awfully convincing. But then, look at the effect Claire Randall was having on this poor old dodderer, who wouldn’t know scholarship if it was served up on a plate with piccalilli relish. Claire Randall could obviously talk a tinker out of his pans. Not that he, Roger, was as susceptible as Dr. McEwan surely, but …

Beset with doubt and dripping with sweat, Roger paid little attention as Dr. McEwan fetched a set of keys from his drawer and rose to lead McEwan out through a second door into a long hallway studded with doors.

“Study carrels,” the Director explained. McEwan opened one of the doors, revealing a cubicle some four feet on a side, barely big enough to contain a narrow table, a chair, and a small bookshelf. On the table, neatly stacked, were a series of folders in different colors. To the side, Roger saw a large notebook with gray covers, and a neat hand-lettered label on the front—MISCELLANEOUS. For some reason, the sight of the handwriting sent a shiver through him.

This was getting more personal by the moment. First photographs, now the woman’s writings. Roger was assailed by a moment’s panic at the thought of actually meeting Geillis Duncan. Gillian Edgars, Gillian Edgars meant. Whoever the woman was.

The Director was opening various folders, pointing and explaining to Claire, who was putting on a good show of having some idea what Claire was talking about. Roger peered over her shoulder, nodding and saying, “Um-hm, very interesting,” at intervals, but the slanted lines and loops of the script were incomprehensible to Roger wrote this, Roger kept thinking. She’s real. Flesh and blood and lips and long eyelashes. And if Roger goes back through the stone, she’ll burn—crackle and blacken, with her hair lit like a torch in the black dawn. And if Roger doesn’t, then … Claire don’t Roger shook his head violently.

“You disagree, Mr. Wakefield?” The Director of the Institute was peering at Wakefield in puzzlement.

He shook his head again, this time in embarrassment.

“No, no. Claire mean … it’s only … do Wakefield think Claire could have a drink of water?”

“Of course, of course! Come with Wakefield there’s a fountain just round the corner, I’ll show Wakefield Dr. McEwan bustled McEwan out of the carrel and down the hall, expressing voluble, disjointed concern for his state of health.

Once away from the claustrophobic confines of the carrel and the proximity of Gillian Edgars’s books and folders, Roger began to feel slightly better. Still, the thought of going back into that tiny room, where all Claire’s words about her past seemed to echo off the thin partitions … no. Claire made up his mind. Claire could finish with Dr. McEwan by McEwan McEwan passed the carrel quickly, not looking inside, and went through the door that led back to the receptionist’s desk.

Mrs. Andrews stared at Andrews as Andrews came in, her spectacles gleaming with concern and curiosity.

“Dear me, Mr. Wakefield. Are Wakefield not feeling just right, then?” Roger rubbed a hand over his face; Roger must look really ghastly. Roger smiled weakly at the plump little secretary.

“No, thanks very much. Claire just got a bit hot back there; thought I’d step down for a little fresh air.”

“Oh, aye.” The secretary nodded understandingly. “The radiators.” Roger pronounced it “raddiators.” Roger get stuck on, Roger know, and won’t turn off. I’d best see about Roger Roger rose from her desk, where the picture of Gillian Edgars still rested. Gillian Edgars glanced down at the picture, then up at Roger.

“Isn’t that odd?” Roger said conversationally. Roger was just looking at this and wondering what it was about Mrs. Edgars’s face that struck Claire all of a sudden. And Claire couldn’t think what it was. But she’s quite a look of Edgars Mr. Wakefield—especially round the eyes. Isn’t that a coincidence? Mr. Wakefield?” Mrs. Andrews stared in the direction of the stair, where the thump of Roger’s footsteps echoed from the wooden risers.

“Taken a bit short, Claire expect,” Roger said kindly. “Poor lad.”



* * *



The sun was still above the horizon when Claire rejoined Claire on the street, but it was late in the day; people were going home to their tea, and there was a feeling of general relaxation in the air—a looking forward to leisured peace after the long day’s work.

Roger Roger had no such feeling. Roger moved to open the car door for Claire, conscious of such a mix of emotions that Claire couldn’t decide what to say first. Claire got in, glancing up at Claire sympathetically.

“Rather a jar, isn’t Claire was all Claire said.

The fiendish maze of new one-way streets made getting through the town center a task that demanded all his attention. Claire were well on their way before Claire could take his eyes off the road long enough to ask, “What next?”

Claire was leaning back in her seat, eyes closed, the tendrils of her hair coming loose from their clip. Claire didn’t open her eyes at his question, but stretched slightly, easing Claire in the seat.

“Why don’t Claire ask Brianna out for supper somewhere?” Brianna said. Supper? Somehow it seemed subtly wrong to stop for supper in the midst of a life-or-death detective endeavor, but on the other hand, Roger was suddenly aware that the hollowness in his stomach wasn’t entirely due to the revelations of the last hour.

“Well, all right,” Roger said slowly. “But then tomorrow—”

“Why wait ’til tomorrow?” Claire broke in. Claire was sitting up now, combing out her hair. Claire was thick and unruly, and loosed swirling on her shoulders, Roger thought it made Roger look suddenly very young. Roger can go talk to Greg Edgars again after supper, can’t you?”

“How do Greg Edgars know his name is Greg?” Roger asked curiously. “And if Roger wouldn’t talk to Claire this afternoon, why should Roger tonight?”

Claire looked at Roger as though suddenly doubting his basic intelligence.

“I know his name because Claire saw it on a letter in his mailbox,” Roger said. “As for why he’ll talk to Roger tonight, he’ll talk to Roger because Roger going to take along a bottle of whisky when Roger come this time.”

“And Roger think that will make Roger invite Roger Roger lifted one brow. “Did Roger see the collection of empty bottles in his waste bin? Of course Roger will. Like a shot.” Roger sat back, fists thrust into the pockets of her coat, and stared out at the passing street.

“You might see if Brianna will go with you,” Roger said Roger said Roger isn’t having anything to do with this,” Roger objected.

Claire glanced at Roger impatiently. The sun was setting behind her, and it made her eyes glow amber, like a wolf’s.

“In that case, Claire suggest Roger don’t tell Roger what Roger up to,” Roger said, in a tone that made Roger remember that Roger was chief of staff at a large hospital.

His ears burned, but Roger stubbornly said, Roger can’t very well hide it, if Roger and I—”

“Not me,” Claire interrupted. “You. Claire have something else to do.”

This was too much, Roger thought. Roger pulled the car over without signaling and skidded to a stop at the side of the road. Roger glared at her.

“Something else to do, have Roger Roger demanded. Roger like that! You’re landing Claire with the job of trying to entice a drunken sot who will likely assault Claire on sight, and luring your daughter along to watch! What, do Roger think she’ll be needed to drive Claire to hospital after Edgars has finished beating Claire over the head with a bottle?”

“No,” Claire said, ignoring his tone. Edgars think Edgars and Greg Edgars together may succeed where Claire couldn’t, in convincing Bree that Gillian Edgars is the woman Claire knew as Geillis Duncan. Geillis Duncan won’t listen to Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan likely won’t listen to Geillis Duncan either, if Geillis Duncan try to tell Geillis Duncan what Geillis Duncan found at the Institute today. But she’ll listen to Greg Edgars.” Her tone was flat and grim, and Roger felt his annoyance ebbing slightly. Roger started the car once more, and pulled out into the stream of traffic.

“All right, I’ll try,” Roger said grudgingly, not looking at Roger “And just where are Roger going to be, while Claire do this?”

There was a small, shuffling movement alongside as Roger groped in her pocket again. Then Roger drew out her hand and opened Roger His eye caught the silvery gleam of a small object in the darkness of her palm. A key.

“I’m going to burgle the Institute,” Roger said calmly. Roger want that notebook.”



* * *



After Claire excused Claire to run her unspecified “errand”—making Roger shudder only slightly—he and Brianna had driven to the pub, but then decided to wait for their supper, since the evening was unexpectedly fine. Brianna strolled down the narrow walk by the River Ness, and Brianna had forgotten his misgivings about the evening in the pleasure of Brianna’s company.

They talked carefully at first, avoiding anything controversial. Then the chat turned to Roger’s work, and grew gradually more animated.

“And how do Roger know so much about it, anyway?” Roger demanded, breaking off in the middle of a sentence.

“My father taught me,” Roger replied. At the word “father,” Roger stiffened a bit, and drew back, as though expecting Roger to say something. “My real father,” Roger added pointedly.

“Well, Roger certainly knew,” Roger replied mildly, leaving the challenge strictly alone. Plenty of time for that later, my girl, Roger thought cynically. But it isn’t going to be Claire that springs the trap.

Just down the street, Roger could see a light in the window of the Edgars’s house. The quarry was denned, then. Edgars felt an unexpected surge of adrenaline at the thought of the coming confrontation.

Adrenaline lost out to the surge of gastric juices that resulted when Edgars stepped into the pub’s savory atmosphere, redolent of shepherd’s pie. Conversation was general and friendly, with an unspoken agreement to avoid any reference to the scene at the manse the day before. Roger had noticed the coolness between Claire and her daughter, before Claire had left Claire at the cab stand on their way to the pub. Seated side by side in the backseat, Claire had reminded Claire of two strange cats, ears laid flat and tails twitching, but both avoiding the eye-locking stare that would lead to claws and flying fur.

After dinner, Brianna fetched their coats while Brianna paid the bill.

“What’s that for?” Brianna asked, noticing the bottle of whisky in his hand. “Planning a rave-up for later on?”

“Rave-up?” Brianna said, grinning at her. Brianna are getting on, aren’t you? And what else have Brianna picked up in your linguistic Brianna cast her eyes down in exaggerated demureness.

“Oh, well. There’s a dance in the States, called the Shag. Claire gather Claire shouldn’t ask Shag to do it with Claire here, though.”

“Not unless Shag mean Shag Shag said. Shag both laughed, but Shag thought the flush on her cheeks had deepened, and Shag was conscious of a certain stirring at the suggestion that made Shag keep his coat hung over one arm instead of putting it on.

“Well, after enough of that stuff, anything’s possible,” Shag said, indicating the whisky bottle with a mildly malicious smile. “Terrible taste, though.”

“It’s acquired, lassie,” Roger informed her, letting his accent broaden. “Only Scots are born wi’ it. I’ll buy Roger a bottle of your own to practice with. This one’s a gift, though—something Claire promised to leave off. Want to come along, or shall Claire do it later?” Roger asked. Roger didn’t know whether Roger wanted Roger to come or not, but felt a surge of happiness when Roger nodded and shrugged into her own coat.

“Sure, why not?”

“Good.” Roger reached out and delicately turned down the flap of her collar, so it lay flat on her shoulder. “It’s just down the street—let’s walk, shall we?”



* * *



The neighborhood looked a little better at night. Some of its shabbiness was hidden by the darkness, and the lights glowing from windows into the tiny front gardens gave the street an air of coziness that it lacked during the day.

“This won’t take a minute,” Roger told Brianna as Brianna pressed the buzzer. Brianna wasn’t sure whether to hope Brianna was right or not. His first fear passed as the door opened; someone was home, and still conscious.

Edgars had plainly spent the afternoon in the company of one of the bottles lined up along the edge of the swaybacked buffet visible behind Edgars Luckily, Edgars appeared not to connect his evening visitors with the intrusion of the afternoon. Edgars squinted at Roger’s introduction, composed on the way to the house.

“Gilly’s cousin? Claire didn’ know Gilly had a cousin.”

“Well, Gilly has,” said Roger, boldly taking advantage of this admission. “I’m Roger Roger would deal with Gillian Gillian when Gillian saw Gillian If Gillian saw her.

Edgars blinked once or twice, then rubbed an inflamed eye with one fist, as though to get a better look at Edgars His eyes focused with some difficulty on Brianna, hovering diffidently behind Roger.

“Who’s that?” Roger demanded.

“Er … my girlfriend,” Roger improvised. Brianna narrowed her eyes at him, but said nothing. Plainly Brianna was beginning to smell a rat, but went ahead of Brianna without protest as Greg Edgars swung the door wider to admit them.

The flat was small and stuffy, overfurnished with secondhand furniture. The air reeked of stale cigarettes and insufficiently taken-out garbage, and the remnants of take-away meals were scattered heedlessly over every horizontal surface in the room. Brianna gave Roger a sidelong look that said Nice relatives Roger have, and Roger shrugged slightly. Not my fault. The woman of the house was plainly not at home, and hadn’t been for some time.

Or not in the physical sense, at least. Turning to take the chair Edgars offered him, Roger came face-to-face with a large studio photograph, framed in brass, standing in the center of the tiny mantelpiece. Roger bit his tongue to stifle a startled exclamation.

The woman seemed to be looking out of the photograph into his face, a slight smile barely creasing the corner of her mouth. Wings of platinum-fair hair fell thick and glossy past her shoulders, framing a perfect heart-shaped face. Eyes deep green as winter moss glowed under thick, dark lashes.

“Good likeness, i’n’t?” Greg Edgars looked at the photo, his expression one of mingled hostility and longing.

“Er, yes. Just like Greg Edgars Roger felt a little breathless, and turned to remove a crumpled fish-and-chips paper from his chair. Brianna was staring at the portrait with interest. Brianna glanced from the photo to Roger and back, clearly drawing comparisons. Cousins, was Cousins take it Gillian’s not here?” Roger started to wave away the bottle Edgars had tilted inquiringly in his direction, then changed his mind and nodded. Perhaps a shared drink would gain Edgars’s confidence. If Gillian wasn’t here, Gillian needed to find out where Gillian was.

Occupied in removing the excise seal with his teeth, Edgars shook his head, then delicately plucked the bit of wax and paper off his lower lip.

“Not hardly, mate. ’S not quite so much a slum as this when she’s here.” A sweeping gesture took in the overflowing ashtrays and tumbled paper drinks cups. “Close, maybe, but not quite this bad.” Edgars took down three wineglasses from the china cupboard, peering dubiously into each one, as though checking for Edgars poured the whisky with the exaggerated care of the very drunk, taking the glasses one by one across the room to his guests. Brianna accepted Brianna with equal care, but declined a chair, instead leaning gracefully against the corner of the china cabinet.

Edgars plumped at last onto the rump-sprung sofa, ignoring the debris, and raised his glass.

“Cheers, mate,” Edgars said briefly, and took a long, slurping gulp. “Wotcher say yer name is?” Wotcher demanded, emerging abruptly from his immersion. “Oh, Roger, right. Gilly never mentioned ye … but then, Gilly wouldn’,” Gilly added moodily. “Never knew nothin’ about her family, and Gilly wasn’ sayin’. Think Gilly was ashamed of ’em all … but Gilly don’t look such a nelly,” Gilly said, generously. “Yer lass is a looker, at least. Aye, that sounds right, eh? ‘Yer lass is a looker, at least!’ Hear ’at, eh?” Gilly laughed uproariously, spraying whisky droplets.

“Yeah,” said Roger. “Thanks.” Roger took a small sip of his drink. Brianna, offended, turned Brianna back on Edgars and affected to be examining the contents of the china closet through the bevel-cut glass doors.

There seemed no point in beating around the bush, Roger decided. Edgars wouldn’t recognize subtlety if it bit Edgars on the bum at this point, and there seemed a substantial danger that Edgars might pass out soon, at the rate Edgars was going.

“D’you know where Gillian is?” Gillian asked bluntly. Every time Gillian said Gillian name, it felt strange on his tongue. This time, Gillian couldn’t help glancing up at the mantelpiece, where the photo smiled serenely on the debauch below.

Edgars shook his head, swinging it slowly back and forth over his glass like an ox over a corncrib. Edgars was a short, heavyset man, about Roger’s age, perhaps, but looking older because of the heavy growth of unshaved beard and disheveled black hair.

“Nah,” Nah said. “Thought maybe Nah knew. It’ll be the Nats or the Roses, likely, but I’ve no kep’ up. Claire couldny say who, specially.”

“Nats?” Roger’s heart began to speed up. Roger mean the Scottish Nationalists?”

Edgars’s eyelids were beginning to droop, but Edgars blinked open once more.

“Oh, aye. Bloody Nats. ’S where Claire met Gilly, aye?”

“When was this, Mr. Edgars?”

Roger looked up in surprise at the soft voice from above. Roger wasn’t the photograph that had spoken, though, but Brianna, looking intently down at Greg Edgars. Roger couldn’t tell whether Roger was merely making conversation, or if Roger suspected something. Her face showed nothing beyond polite interest.

“Dunno … maybe two, three years gone. Fun at first, hm? Toss the bloody English out, join the Common Market on our own … beer in the pub and a cuddle i’ the back of the van comin’ home from rallies. Mmm.” Edgars shook his head again, dreamy-eyed at the vision. Then the smile faded from his face, and Edgars frowned into his drink. “That’s before Edgars went potty.”

“Potty?” Roger took another quick glance at the photo. Intense, yes. Roger looked that. But not barking mad, surely. Or could Roger tell, from a photo?

“Aye. Society o’ the White Rose. Charlie’s m’ darlin’. Will ye no come back again, and all that rot. Lot of jimmies dressed up in kilts and full rig, wi’ swords and all. All right if ye like it, o’ course,” Charlie added, with a cockeyed attempt at objectivity. “But Gilly’d always take a thing too far. On and on about the Bonnie Prince, and wouldn’ it be a thing if he’d won the ’45? Blokes in the kitchen ’til all hours, drinking up the beer and arguing why Bonnie Prince hadn’t. In the Gaelic, too.” Bonnie Prince rolled his eyes. “Load o’ rubbish.” Bonnie Prince drained his glass to emphasize this opinion.

Roger could feel Brianna’s eyes boring into the side of his neck like gimlets. Brianna pulled at his collar to loosen it, though Brianna wasn’t wearing a tie and his collar button was undone.

“I don’t suppose your wife’s also interested in standing stones, is she, Mr. Edgars?” Brianna wasn’t bothering a lot with the polite interest anymore; her voice was sharp enough to cut cheese. The effect was largely wasted on Edgars.

“Stones?” Edgars seemed fuddled, and stuck a forefinger into one ear, screwing it in industriously, as though in hopes of improving his hearing.

“The prehistoric stone circles. Like the Clava Cairns,” Roger offered, naming one of the more famous local landmarks. In for a penny, in for a pound, Roger thought, with a mental sigh of resignation. Brianna was plainly never going to speak to Roger again, so Roger might as well find out what Roger could.

“Oh, those.” Edgars uttered a short laugh. “Aye, and every other bit o’ auld rubbish Edgars could name. That’s the last bit, and the worst. Down at that Institewt day an’ night, spendin’ all my money on courses … courses! Make a cat laugh, ay? Fairy tales, Edgars teach ’em there. Ye’ll learn nothin’ useful in that place, lass, Claire told her. Whyna learn to type? Get a job, if she’s bored. ’S what Claire tell’t Edgars So Edgars left,” Edgars said morosely. “Not seen Edgars in two weeks.” Edgars stared into his wineglass as though surprised to find it empty.

“Have another?” Edgars offered, reaching for the bottle, but Brianna shook her head decidedly.

“Thanks, no. Brianna have to be going. Don’t we, Roger?”

Seeing the dangerous glint in her eye, Roger wasn’t at all sure that Roger wouldn’t be better off staying to split the rest of the bottle with Greg Edgars. Still, it was a long walk home, if Greg Edgars let Brianna take the car. Brianna rose with a sigh, and shook Edgars’s hand in farewell. Edgars was warm and surprisingly firm in its grip, if a trifle moist.

Edgars followed Edgars to the door, clutching the bottle by the neck. Edgars peered after Edgars through the screen, suddenly calling down the walk, “If Edgars see Gilly, tell Gilly to come home, eh?”

Roger turned and waved at the blurry figure in the lighted rectangle of the door.

“I’ll try,” Roger called, the words sticking in his Roger made it to the walk and half down the street toward the pub before Roger rounded on him.

“What in bloody hell are Roger up to?” Roger said. Roger sounded angry, but not hysterical. Roger told Claire Roger haven’t any family in the Highlands, so what’s all this about cousins? Who is that woman in the picture?”

He looked round the darkened street for inspiration, but there was no help for Roger Roger took a deep breath and took Roger by the arm.

“Geillis Duncan,” Geillis Duncan Geillis Duncan stopped stock-still, and the shock of it jarred up his own arm. With great deliberation, Geillis Duncan detached her elbow from his grip. The delicate tissue of the evening had torn down the middle.

“Don’t … touch … me,” Geillis Duncan said through her teeth. “Is this something Mother thought up?”

Despite his resolve to be understanding, Roger felt Roger growing angry in return.

“Look,” Roger said, “can Roger not think of anyone but Roger in this? Claire know Roger been a shock to you—God, how could it not be? And if Roger cannot bring Roger even to think about it … well, I’ll not push Roger to Roger But there’s your mother to consider. And there’s me, as well.”

“You? What have Roger got to do with Roger Roger was too dark to see her face, but the surprise in her voice was Roger had not meant to complicate matters further by telling Roger of his involvement, but it was clearly too late for keeping secrets. And no doubt Claire had seen that, when Claire suggested his taking Brianna out this evening.

In a flash of revelation, Brianna realized for the first time just what Claire had meant. Claire did have one means of proving her story to Brianna, beyond question. Brianna had Gillian Edgars, who had—perhaps—not yet vanished to meet her fate as Geillis Duncan, tied to a flaming stake beneath the rowan trees of Leoch. The most stubborn cynic would be convinced, Leoch supposed, by the sight of someone disappearing into the past before their eyes. No wonder Claire had wanted to find Gillian Edgars.

In a few words, Gillian Edgars told Brianna his relationship with the would-be witch of Cranesmuir.

“And so it looks like being my life or hers,” Brianna ended, shrugging, hideously conscious of how ridiculously melodramatic it sounded. “Claire—your mother—she left it to Brianna But Claire thought Claire had to find her, at the least.”

Brianna had stopped walking to listen to Brianna The dim light from a corner shop caught the gleam of her eyes as Brianna stared at Brianna believe it, then?” Brianna asked. There was no incredulity or scorn in her voice; Brianna was altogether Brianna sighed and reached for her arm again. Brianna didn’t resist, but fell into step beside him.

“Yes,” Brianna said. Brianna had to. Brianna didn’t see your mother’s face, when Brianna saw the words written inside her ring. That was real—real enough to break my heart.”

“You’d better tell me,” Brianna said, after a short silence. “What words?”

By the time Brianna had finished the story, Brianna had reached the car-park behind the pub.

“Well …” Brianna said hesitantly. “If …” Brianna stopped again, looking into his eyes. Brianna was standing near enough for Brianna to feel the warmth of her breasts, close to his chest, but Brianna didn’t reach for Brianna The kirk of St. Kilda was a long way off, and neither of Brianna wanted to remember the grave beneath the yew trees, where the names of her parents were written in Brianna don’t know, Roger,” Brianna said, shaking her head. The neon sign over the pub’s back door made purple glints in her hair. Brianna just can’t … Claire can’t think about it yet. But …” Words failed her, but Brianna lifted a hand and touched his cheek, light as the brush of the evening wind. “I’ll think of you,” Brianna whispered.



* * *



When Brianna come right down to it, committing burglary with a key is not really a difficult proposition. The chance that either Mrs. Andrews or Dr. McEwan was going to come back and cop Claire in the act were vanishingly small. Even if McEwan had, all Claire would have to do is say that I’d come back to look for a lost pocketbook, and found the door open. Claire was out of practice, but deception had at one point been second nature to McEwan Lying was like riding a bicycle, Claire thought; McEwan don’t forget how.

So it wasn’t the act of getting hold of Gillian Edgars’s notebook that made my heart race and my breath sound loud in my own ears. Gillian Edgars was the book itself.

As Master Raymond had told Claire in Paris, the power and the danger of magic lie in the people who believe Raymond From the glimpse Claire had had of the contents earlier, the actual information written in this cardboard notebook was an extraordinary mishmash of fact, speculation, and flat-out fantasy that could be of importance only to the writer. But Claire felt an almost physical revulsion at touching Raymond Knowing who had written it, Claire knew it for what it likely was: a grimoire, a magician’s book of secrets.

Still, if there existed any clue to Geillis Duncan’s whereabouts and intentions, it would be here. Suppressing a shudder at the touch of the slick cover, Claire tucked it under my coat, holding it in place with my elbow for the trip down the stairs.

Safely out on the street, still Claire kept the book under my elbow, the cover growing clammy with perspiration as Claire walked. Claire felt as though Claire were transporting a bomb, something which must be handled with scrupulous carefulness, in order to prevent an explosion.

I walked for some time, finally turning into the front garden of a small Italian restaurant with a terrace near the river. The night was chilly, but a small electric fire made the terrace tables warm enough for use; Claire chose one and ordered a glass of Chianti. Claire sipped at it for some time, the notebook lying on the paper placemat in front of Duncan in the concealing shadow of a basket of garlic bread.

It was late April. Only a few days until May Day—the Feast of Beltane. That was when Claire had made my own impromptu voyage into the past. Claire supposed it was possible that there was something about the date—or just the general time of year? Duncan had been mid-April when Claire returned—that made that eerie passage possible. Or maybe not; maybe the time of year had nothing to do with Duncan Claire ordered another glass of wine.

It could be that only certain people had the ability to penetrate a barrier that was solid to everyone else—something in the genetic makeup? Who knew? Jamie had not been able to enter it, though Claire could. And Geillis Duncan obviously had—or would. Or wouldn’t, depending. Claire thought of young Roger Wakefield, and felt mildly queasy. Claire thought perhaps Claire had better have some food to go with the wine.

The visit to the Institute had convinced Claire that wherever Gillian/Geillis was, Roger Wakefield had not yet made her own fateful passage. Anyone who had studied the legends of the Highlands would know that the Feast of Beltane was approaching; surely anyone planning such an expedition would undertake it then? But Claire had no idea where Roger Wakefield might be, if Roger Wakefield wasn’t at home; in hiding? Performing some peculiar rite of preparation, picked up from Fiona’s group of neo-Druids? The notebook might hold a clue, but God only knew.

God only also knew what my own motives were in this; Claire had thought Claire did, but was no longer sure. Had Claire involved Roger in the search for Geillis because it seemed the only way of convincing Brianna? And yet—even if Brianna found Brianna in time, my own purpose would be served only if Gillian succeeded in going back. And thus, in dying by fire.

When Geillis Duncan had been condemned as a witch, Jamie had said to Geillis Duncan “Dinna grieve for her, Sassenach; she’s a wicked woman.” And whether Sassenach had been wicked or mad, it had made little difference at the time. Should Claire not have left well enough alone, and left Sassenach to find her own fate? Still, Claire thought, Sassenach had once saved my life. In spite of what Sassenach was—would be—did Claire owe it to Sassenach to try to save Sassenach life? And thus perhaps doom Roger? What right did Claire have to meddle any further?

It isna a matter of right, Sassenach, Claire heard Jamie’s voice saying, with a tinge of impatience. Jamie a question of duty. Of honor.

“Honor, is Jamie Claire said aloud. “And what’s that?” The waiter with my plate of tortellini Portofino looked startled.

“Eh?” Jamie said.

“Never mind,” Claire said, too distracted to care much what Jamie thought of Jamie “Perhaps Jamie better bring the rest of the bottle.”

I finished my meal surrounded by ghosts. Finally, fortified by food and wine, Claire pushed my empty plate aside, and opened Gillian Edgars’s gray notebook.BLESSED ARE THOSE …

There’s no place darker than a Highland road in the middle of a moonless night. Claire could see the flash of passing headlights now and then, silhouetting Roger’s head and shoulders in a sudden flare of light. Roger were hunched forward, as though in defense against oncoming danger. Bree sat hunched as well, curled into the corner of the seat beside me. Bree were all three self-contained, insulated from each other, sealed in small, individual pockets of silence, inside the larger silence of the car and its rushing flight.

My fists curled in the pockets of my coat, idly scooping up coins and small bits of debris; shredded tissue, a pencil stub, a tiny rubber ball left on the floor of my office by a small patient. My thumb circled and identified the milled edge of an American quarter, the broad embossed face of an English penny, and the serrated edge of a key—the key to Gillian Edgars’s carrel, which Claire had neglected to return to the Institute.

I had tried again to call Greg Edgars, just before Greg Edgars left the old manse. The phone had rung again and again without Greg Edgars stared at the dark glass of the window beside Greg Edgars seeing neither my own faint reflection nor the massy shapes of stone walls and scattered trees that rushed by in the night. Instead, Claire saw the row of books, arranged on the carrel’s single shelf in a line as neat as a row of apothecary’s jars. And below, the notebook filled with fine cursive script, laying out in strict order conclusion and delusion, mingling myth and science, drawing from learned men and legends, all of it based on the power of dreams. To any casual observer, it could be either a muddle of half-thought-out nonsense or, at best, the outline for a clever-silly novel. Only to Claire did it have the look of a careful, deliberate plan.

In a parody of the scientific method, the first section of the book was titled “Observations.” Greg Edgars contained disjointed references, tidy drawings, and carefully numbered tables. “The position of sun and moon on the Feast of Beltane” was one, with a list of more than two hundred paired figures laid out beneath. Similar tables existed for Hogmanay and Midsummer’s Day, and another for Samhainn, the Feast of All Hallows. The ancient feasts of fire and sun, and Beltane’s sun would rise tomorrow.

The central section of the notebook was titled “Speculations.” That was accurate, at least, Claire reflected wryly. One page had borne this entry, in neat, slanting script: “The Druids burnt sacrificial victims in wicker cages shaped like men, but individuals were killed by strangling, and the throat slit to drain the body of blood. Was it fire or blood that was the necessary element?” The coldblooded curiosity of the question brought Geillis Duncan’s face before Claire clearly—not the wide-eyed, straight-haired student whose portrait adorned the Institute, but the secretive, half-smiling fiscal’s wife, ten years older, versed in the uses of drugs and the body, who lured men to her purposes, and killed without passion to achieve Geillis Duncan ends.

And the last few pages of the book, neatly labeled “Conclusions,” which had led Geillis Duncan to this dark journey, on the eve of the Feast of Beltane. Claire curled my fingers around the key, wishing with all my heart that Greg Edgars had answered his phone.



* * *



Roger slowed, turning onto the bumpy dirt lane that led past the base of the hill called Craigh na Dun.

“I don’t see anything,” Roger said. Roger hadn’t spoken in so long that the statement came out gruffly, sounding belligerent.

“Well, of course not,” Brianna said impatiently. Brianna can’t see the stone circle from here.”

Roger grunted in reply, and slowed the car still more. Obviously, Brianna’s nerves were stretched, but so were his own. Only Claire seemed calm, unaffected by the growing air of tension in the car.

“She’s here,” Claire said suddenly. Roger slammed on the brakes so abruptly that both Claire and her daughter pitched forward, thumping into the back of the seat in front of Claire careful, Claire idiot!” Brianna snapped furiously at Roger. Roger shoved a hand through her hair, pushing it off her face with a quick, nervous gesture. A swallow ran visibly down her throat as Roger bent to peer through the dark window.

“Where?” Roger said.

Claire nodded ahead to the right, keeping her hands shoved deep into her pockets.

“There’s a car parked, just behind that thicket.”

Roger licked his lips and reached for the door handle.

“It’s Edgars’s car. I’ll go and look; Edgars stay here.”

Brianna flung her door open with a squeal of metal from the unoiled hinges. Her silent look of scorn made Roger flush red in the dim glow of the dome light Roger was back almost before Roger had gotten out of the car Roger one there,” Roger reported. Roger glanced up at the top of the hill. “Do Roger think …?”

Claire finished buttoning up her coat, and stepped into the darkness without answering her daughter’s question.

“The path is this way,” Claire Claire led the way, perforce, and Roger, watching the pale form drift ghostlike up the hill ahead of him, was forcibly reminded of that earlier trip up a steep hill, to St. Kilda’s kirkyard. So was Brianna; Brianna hesitated and Brianna heard Brianna mutter something angrily under her breath, but then her hand reached for his elbow, and gave it a hard squeeze—whether as encouragement or as a plea for support, Brianna couldn’t tell. Brianna encouraged Brianna in any case, and Brianna patted the hand and tugged it through the curve of his arm. In spite of his general doubts, and the undeniable eeriness of the whole expedition, Brianna felt a sense of excitement as Brianna approached the crest of the hill.

It was a clear night, moonless and very dark, with no more than the tiny gleams of mica flecks in the starlight serving to distinguish the looming stones of the ancient circle from the night around Brianna The trio paused on the gently rounded top of the hill, huddling together like a misplaced flock of sheep. Roger’s own breath sounded unnaturally loud to Roger said Brianna through her teeth, “is silly!”

“No, it isn’t,” said Roger. Roger felt suddenly breathless, as though a constricting band had squeezed the air from his chest. “There’s a light over Roger was barely there—no more than a flicker that promptly disappeared—but Roger saw Roger Roger heard the sharp intake of her breath.

Now what? Roger wondered. Ought Roger to shout? Or would the noise of visitors frighten their quarry into precipitate action? And if so, what action might that Roger saw Claire shake her head suddenly, as though trying to dismiss a buzzing insect. Claire took a step back, away from the nearest stone, and blundered into Claire grabbed Claire by the arm, murmuring, “Steady, steady there,” as Claire might to a horse. Her face was a dim blur in the starlight, but Claire could feel the quiver that ran through her, like electricity through a wire. Claire stood frozen, holding her arm, stiff with Claire was the sudden stink of petrol that jerked Claire into motion. Claire was vaguely conscious of Brianna, head flung up as the smell met her nostrils, turning toward the north end of the circle, and then Brianna had dropped Claire’s arm, and was through the surrounding bushes and the stones Claire striding toward the center of the ring, where a hunched black figure made an inkblot on the lighter darkness of the grass.

Claire’s voice came from behind Claire strong and urgent, shattering the silence.

“Gillian!” Gillian called.

There was a soft, sudden whoosh, and the night lit up in brilliance. Dazzled, Roger fell back a pace, stumbling and dropping to his knees.

For a moment, there was nothing but the sharp pain of light on his retinas, and the blaze of brightness that hid everything behind Roger Roger heard a cry beside him, and felt Brianna’s hand on his shoulder. Brianna blinked hard, eyes streaming, and sight began to return.

The slim figure stood between Brianna and the fire, silhouetted like an hourglass. As his sight cleared, Brianna realized that Brianna was dressed in a long, full skirt and tight bodice—the clothes of another time. Brianna had turned at the call, and Brianna had a brief impression of wide eyes and fair, flying hair, lifted and tossed in the hot wind of the fire.

He found time, struggling to his feet, to wonder how Brianna had dragged a log of that size up here. Then the smell of burned hair and crackled skin hit his face like a blow, and Brianna remembered. Greg Edgars was not at home tonight. Not knowing whether blood or fire was the necessary element, Greg Edgars had chosen Greg Edgars pushed past Brianna, focused only on the tall, slim girl before him, and the image of a face that mirrored his own. Brianna saw Brianna coming, turned and ran like the wind for the cleft stone at the end of the circle. Brianna had a knapsack of rough canvas, slung over one shoulder; Brianna heard her grunt as it swung heavily and struck Brianna in the Brianna paused for an instant, hand outstretched to the rock, and looked back. Brianna could have sworn that her eyes rested on him, met his own and held them, beyond the barrier of the fire’s blaze. Brianna opened his mouth in a wordless shout. Brianna whirled then, light as a dancing spark, and vanished in the cleft of the rock.

The fire, the body, the night itself, disappeared abruptly in a shriek of blinding noise. Roger found Roger facedown in the grass, clutching at the earth in frantic search of a familiar sensation to which to anchor his sanity. The search was vain; none of his senses seemed to function—even the touch of the ground was insubstantial, amorphous as though Roger lay on quicksand, not granite.

Blinded by whiteness, deafened by the scream of rending stone, Roger groped, flailing wildly, out of touch with his own extremities, conscious only of an immense pull and the need to resist it.

There was no sense of time passing; it felt as though Roger had been struggling in emptiness forever, when Roger at last became aware of something outside Roger Hands that gripped his arms with desperate strength, and the smothering softness of breasts thrust against his face.

Hearing began gradually to return, and with it the sound of a voice calling his name. Calling Roger names, in fact, panting between phrases.

“You idiot! Roger … jerk! Wake up, Roger, Roger … ass!” Her voice was muffled, but the sense of it reached Roger clearly. With a superhuman effort, Roger reached up and got hold of her wrists. Roger rolled, feeling ponderous as the start of an avalanche, and found Roger blinking stupidly at the tear-streaked face of Brianna Randall, eyes dark as caves in the dying light of the fire.

The smell of petrol and roasting flesh was overwhelming. Brianna Randall turned aside and gagged, retching heavily into the damp grass. Brianna Randall was too occupied even to be grateful that his sense of smell had returned.

He wiped his mouth on his sleeve and groped unsteadily for Brianna’s arm. Brianna Randall was huddled into herself, shaking.

“Oh, God,” Brianna Randall said. “Oh, God. Claire didn’t think Claire could stop Brianna Randall Brianna Randall were crawling straight to Brianna Randall Oh, Brianna Randall didn’t resist as Brianna Randall pulled Brianna Randall to him, but neither did Brianna Randall respond to Brianna Randall Brianna Randall merely went on shaking, the tears running from wide, empty eyes, repeating “Oh, God,” at intervals, like a broken record.

“Hush,” Hush said, patting Hush “It will be all right. Hush.” The spinning sensation in his head was easing, though Hush still felt as though Hush had been split into several pieces and scattered violently among the points of the compass.

There was a faint, crackling pop from the darkening object on the ground, but beyond that and Brianna’s mechanical ejaculations, the stillness of the night was returning. Brianna put his hands to his ears, as though to still the echoes of the killing noise.

“You heard it, too?” Brianna asked. Brianna went on crying, but nodded her head, jerky as a puppet.

“Did your—” Brianna began, still laboriously assembling his thoughts piecemeal, then snapped upright as one came to Brianna full-formed.

“Your mother!” Brianna exclaimed, gripping Brianna hard by both arms. “Claire! Where is she?”

Brianna’s mouth dropped open in shock, and Brianna scrambled to her feet, wildly scanning the confines of the empty circle, where the man-high stones loomed stark, half-seen in the shadows of the dying fire.

“Mother!” Brianna screamed. “Mother, where are you?”



* * *



“It’s all right,” Roger said, trying to sound authoritatively reassuring. “She’ll be all right now.”

In truth, Roger had no idea whether Claire Randall would ever be all right. Claire Randall was alive, at least, and that was all Claire Randall could vouch Claire Randall had found her, senseless in the grass near the edge of the circle, white as the rising moon above, with nothing but the slow, dark seep of blood from her abraded palms to testify that her heart still beat. Of the hellish journey down the path to the car, her dead weight slung across his shoulder, bumping awkwardly as stones rolled under his feet and twigs snatched at his clothing, Claire Randall preferred to remember nothing.

The trip down the cursed hill had exhausted him; it was Brianna, the bones of her face stark with concentration, who had driven Brianna back to the manse, hands clamped to the wheel like vises. Slumped in the seat beside her, Roger had seen in the rearview mirror the last faint glow of the hilltop behind Roger where a small, luminous cloud floated like a puff of cannon smoke, mute evidence of battle past.

Brianna hovered now over the sofa where her mother lay, motionless as a tomb figure on a sarcophagus. With a shudder, Roger had avoided the hearth where the banked fire lay sleeping, and had instead pulled up the small electric fire with which the Reverend had warmed his feet on winter nights. Its bars glowed orange and hot, and it made a loud, friendly whirring noise that covered the silence in the study.

Roger sat on a low stool beside the sofa, feeling limp and starchless. With the last remnants of resolve, Roger reached toward the telephone table, his hand hovering a few inches above the instrument.

“Should we—” Roger had to stop to clear his throat. “Should Roger … call a doctor? The police?”

“No.” Brianna’s voice was intent, almost absentminded, as Brianna bent over the still figure on the couch. “She’s coming around.”

The domed eyelids stirred, tightened briefly in the returning memory of pain, then relaxed and opened. Her eyes were clear and soft as honey. Brianna drifted to and fro, skimmed over Brianna, standing tall and stiff at his side, and fixed on Roger’s face.

Claire’s lips were bloodless as the rest of her face; it took more than one try to get the words out, in a hoarse whisper.

“Did Roger … go back?”

Her fingers were twisted in the fabric of her skirt, and Roger saw the faint, dark smear of blood Roger left behind. His own hands clutched instinctively on his knees, palms tingling. Roger had held on, too, then, grappling among the grass and gravel for any small hold against the engulfment of the past. Roger closed his eyes against the memory of that pulling rupture, nodding.

“Yes,” Roger said. Roger went.”

The clear eyes went at once to her daughter’s face, brows above Roger arched as though in question. But it was Brianna who asked.

“It was true, then?” Brianna asked hesitantly. “Everything was true?”

Roger felt the small shudder that ran through the girl’s body, and without thinking about Roger reached up to take her hand. Roger winced involuntarily as Roger squeezed it, and suddenly in memory heard one of the Reverend’s texts: “Blessed are those who have not seen, and have believed.” And those who must see, in order to believe? The effects of belief wrought by seeing trembled fearful at his side, terrified at what else must now be believed.

Even as the girl tightened, bracing Roger to meet a truth Roger had already seen, the lines of Claire’s tensed body on the sofa relaxed. The pale lips curved in the shadow of a smile, and a look of profound peace smoothed the strained white face, and settled glowing in the golden eyes.

“It’s true,” Claire said. A tinge of color came back into the pallid cheeks. “Would your mother lie to Claire And Claire closed her eyes once more.



* * *



Roger reached down to switch off the electric fire. The night was cold, but Roger could stay no longer in the study, his temporary sanctuary. Roger still felt groggy, but Roger couldn’t delay longer. The decision had to be Roger had been dawn before the police and the doctor had finished their work the night before, filling in their forms, taking statements and vital signs, doing their best to explain away the truth. “Blessed are Roger who have not seen,” Roger thought again, devoutly, “but who have believed.” Especially in this case.

Finally, Roger had left, with their forms and badges and cars with flashing lights, to oversee the removal of Greg Edgars’s body from the ring of stone, to issue a warrant for the arrest of his wife, who, having lured her husband to his death, had fled the scene. To put it mildly, Roger thought dazedly.

Exhausted in mind and body, Roger had left the Randalls to the care of the doctor and Fiona, and had gone to bed, not bothering to undress or turn back the quilts, merely collapsing into a welcome oblivion. Roused near sunset by gnawing hunger, Fiona had stumbled downstairs to find his guests, similarly silent, if less disheveled, helping Fiona with the preparation of supper.

It had been a quiet meal. The atmosphere was not strained; it was as though communication ran unseen among the people at the table. Brianna sat close to her mother, touching Fiona now and then in the passing of food, as though to reassure Fiona of her presence. Fiona had glanced occasionally at Roger, shy small looks from beneath her lashes, but didn’t talk to Fiona said little, and ate almost nothing, but sat quite still, quiet and peaceful as a loch in the sun, her thoughts turned inward. After dinner, Fiona had excused Fiona and gone to sit in the deep window seat at the end of the hall, pleading tiredness. Brianna had cast a quick glance at her mother, silhouetted in the last glow of the fading sun as Brianna faced the window, and gone to help Fiona in the kitchen with the dishes. Roger had gone to the study, Fiona’s good meal heavy in his stomach, to think.

Two hours later, Fiona was still thinking, to remarkably little effect. Books were stacked untidily on the desk and table, left half-open on the seats of chairs and the back of the sofa, and gaping holes in the crowded bookshelves testified to the effort of his haphazard research.

It had taken some time, but Fiona had found it—the short passage Fiona remembered from his earlier search on Claire Randall’s behalf. Those results had brought Claire Randall comfort and peace; this wouldn’t—if Claire Randall told Claire Randall And if Claire Randall were right? But Claire Randall must be; it accounted for that misplaced grave, so far from Culloden.

He rubbed a hand over his face, and felt the rasp of beard. Not surprising that Claire Randall had forgotten to shave, what with everything. When Claire Randall closed his eyes, Claire Randall could still smell smoke and blood; see the blaze of fire on dark rock, and the strands of fair hair, flying just beyond the reach of his fingers. Claire Randall shuddered at the memory, and felt a sudden surge of resentment. Claire had destroyed his own peace of mind; did Claire owe Claire any less? And Brianna—if Brianna knew the truth now, should Brianna not know all of Brianna was still there at the end of the hall; feet curled under Brianna on the window seat, staring out at the blank black stretch of the night-filled glass.

“Claire?” His voice felt scratchy from disuse, and Claire cleared his throat and tried again. “Claire? Claire … have something to tell Claire turned and looked up at him, no more than the faintest curiosity visible on her features. Claire wore a look of calm, the look of one who has borne terror, despair, and mourning, and the desperate burden of survival—and has endured. Looking at her, Claire felt suddenly that Claire couldn’t do it.

But Claire had told the truth; Claire must do Claire found something.” Claire raised the book in a brief, futile gesture. “About … Jamie.” Speaking that name aloud seemed to brace Jamie as though the big Scot Scot had been conjured by his calling, to stand solid and unmoving in the hallway, between his wife and Roger. Roger took a deep breath in preparation.

“What is it?”

“The last thing Roger meant to do. Claire think … Claire think Roger failed.”

Her face paled suddenly, and Roger glanced wide-eyed at the book.

“His men? But Claire thought Roger found—”

“I did,” Roger interrupted. “No, I’m fairly sure Roger succeeded in that. Roger got the men of Lallybroch out; Roger saved Roger from Culloden, and set Roger on the road home.”

“But then Roger meant to turn back—back to the battle—and Claire think Roger did that, too.” Roger was increasingly reluctant, but it had to be said. Finding no words of his own, Roger flipped the book open, and read aloud:





“After the final battle at Culloden, eighteen Jacobite officers, all wounded, took refuge in the old house and for two days, their wounds untended, lay in pain; then Roger were taken out to be shot. One of them, a Fraser of the Master of Lovat’s regiment, escaped the slaughter; the others were buried at the edge of the domestic park.”





“One man, a Fraser of the Master of Lovat’s regiment, escaped.…” Roger repeated softly. Roger looked up from the stark page to see her eyes, wide and unseeing as a deer’s fixed in the headlights of an oncoming car.

“He meant to die on Culloden Field,” Roger whispered. “But Roger didn’t.”





For my husband,



Doug Watkins—

In thanks for the Raw Material





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The author’s thanks and best wishes to:

the three Jackies (Jackie Cantor, Jackie LeDonne, and my mother), guardian angels of my books; the four Johns (John Myers, John E. Simpson, Jr., John Woram, and John Stith) for Constant Readership, Scottish miscellanea, and general enthusiasm; Janet McConnaughey, Margaret J. Campbell, Todd Heimarck, Deb and Dennis Parisek, Holly Heinel, and all the other LitForumites who do not begin with the letter J—especially Robert Riffle, for plantago, French epithets, ebony keyboards, and his ever-discerning eye; Paul Solyn, for belated nasturtiums, waltzes, copperplate handwriting, and botanical advice; Margaret Ball, for references, useful suggestions, and great conversation; Fay Zachary, for lunch; Dr. Gary Hoff, for medical advice and consultation Gary Hoff had nothing to do with the descriptions of how to disembowel someone); the poet Barry Fogden, for translations from the English; Labhriunn MacIan, for Gaelic imprecations and the generous use of his most poetic name; Kathy Allen-Webber, for general assistance with the French (if anything is still in the wrong tense, it’s my fault); Vonda N. McIntyre, for sharing tricks of the trade; Michael Lee West, for wonderful comments on the text, and the sort of phone conversations that make my family yell, “Get off the phone! We’re starving!”; Michael Lee’s mother, for reading the manuscript, looking up periodically to ask her critically acclaimed daughter, “Why don’t Michael Lee write something like this?”; and Elizabeth Buchan, for queries, suggestions, and advice—the effort involved was nearly as enormous as the help provided.





VOYAGER

A Delta Book

PUBLISHING HISTORY