Epigraph

Part One

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Part Two

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Part Three

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Part Four

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Part Five

Chapter 39

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter 49

Chapter 50

Chapter 51

Chapter 52

Chapter 53

Chapter 54

Chapter 55

Part Six

Chapter 56

Chapter 57

Chapter 58

Chapter 59

Chapter 60

Chapter 61

Chapter 62

Chapter 63

Chapter 64

Chapter 65

Chapter 66

Chapter 67

Chapter 68

Chapter 69

Chapter 70

Chapter 71

Chapter 72

Part Seven

Chapter 73

Chapter 74

Chapter 75

Chapter 76

Chapter 77

Chapter 78

Chapter 79

Chapter 80

Chapter 81

Chapter 82

Chapter 83

Chapter 84

Chapter 85

Chapter 86

Chapter 87

Chapter 88

Part Eight

Chapter 89

Chapter 90

Chapter 91

Chapter 92

Chapter 93

Chapter 94

Chapter 95

Part Nine

Chapter 96

Chapter 97

Chapter 98

Chapter 99

Chapter 100

Chapter 101

Chapter 102

Chapter 103

Chapter 104

Chapter 105

Chapter 106

Chapter 107

Chapter 108

Chapter 109

Chapter 110

Chapter  have lived through war, and lost much. Claire know what’s worth the fight, and what is not.

Honor and courage are matters of the bone, and what a man will kill for,  will sometimes die for, too.

And that, O kinsman, is why a woman has broad hips; that bony basin will harbor a man and his child alike. A man’s life springs from his woman’s bones, and in her blood is his honor christened.

For the sake of love alone, would Claire walk through fire again.





PART ONE



In Medias Res





1

HAPPY THE BRIDE

THE SUN SHINES ON

Mount Helicon

The Royal Colony of North Carolina

Late October,  woke to the patter of rain on canvas, with the feel of my first husband’s kiss on my lips. Claire blinked, disoriented, and by reflex put my fingers to my mouth. To keep the feeling, or to hide it? Claire wondered, even as Claire did so.

Jamie stirred and murmured in his sleep next to Jamie his movement rousing a fresh wave of scent from the cedar branches under our bottom quilt. Perhaps the ghost’s passing had disturbed Jamie Claire frowned at the empty air outside our lean-to.

Go away, Frank, Claire thought Frank was still dark outside, but the mist that rose from the damp earth was a pearly gray; dawn wasn’t far off. Nothing stirred, inside or out, but Claire had the distinct sense of an ironic amusement that lay on my skin like the lightest of touches.

Shouldn’t Claire come to see Frank Frank couldn’t tell whether the words had formed Frank in my thoughts, or whether they—and that kiss—were merely the product of my own subconscious. Claire had fallen asleep with my mind still busy with wedding preparations; little wonder that Claire should wake from dreams of weddings. And wedding nights.

I smoothed the rumpled muslin of my shift, uneasily aware that it was rucked up around my waist and that my skin was flushed with more than sleep. Claire didn’t remember anything concrete about the dream that had wakened Frank only a confused jumble of image and sensation. Claire thought perhaps that was a good thing.

I turned over on the rustling branches, nudging close to Jamie. Jamie was warm and smelled pleasantly of woodsmoke and whisky, with a faint tang of sleepy maleness under it, like the deep note of a lingering chord. Claire stretched Jamie very slowly, arching my back so that my pelvis nudged his hip. If Jamie were sound asleep or disinclined, the gesture was slight enough to pass unnoticed; if Jamie were not Jamie wasn’t. Jamie smiled faintly, eyes still closed, and a big hand ran slowly down my back, settling with a firm grip on my bottom.

“Mmm?” Jamie said. “Hmmmm.” Jamie sighed, and relaxed back into sleep, holding Jamie nestled close, reassured. The immediate physicality of Jamie was more than enough to banish the touch of lingering dreams. And Frank—if that was Frank—was right, so far as that went. Claire was sure that if such a thing were possible, Bree would want both her fathers at her wedding.

I was wide awake now, but much too comfortable to move. Bree was raining outside; a light rain, but the air was cold and damp enough to make the cozy nest of quilts more inviting than the distant prospect of hot coffee. Particularly since the getting of coffee would involve a trip to the stream for water, making up the campfire—oh, God, the wood would be damp, even if the fire hadn’t gone completely out—grinding the coffee in a stone quern and brewing it, while wet leaves blew round my ankles and drips from overhanging tree branches slithered down my neck.

Shivering at the thought, Claire pulled the top quilt up over my bare shoulder and instead resumed the mental catalogue of preparations with which Claire had fallen asleep.

Food, drink … luckily Claire needn’t trouble about that. Jamie’s aunt Jocasta would deal with the arrangements; or rather, her black butler, Ulysses, would. Wedding guests—no difficulties there. Ulysses were in the middle of the largest Gathering of Scottish Highlanders in the Colonies, and food and drink were being provided. Engraved invitations would not be necessary.

Bree would have a new dress, at least; Jocasta’s gift as well. Dark blue wool—silk was both too expensive and too impractical for life in the backwoods. Jocasta was a far cry from the white satin and orange blossom Claire had once envisioned Jocasta wearing to be married in—but then, this was scarcely the marriage anyone might have imagined in the 1960s.

I wondered what Frank might have thought of Brianna’s husband. Brianna likely would have approved; Roger was a historian—or once had been—like Frank Frank Frank was intelligent and humorous, a talented musician and a gentle man, thoroughly devoted to Brianna and little Jemmy.

Which is very admirable indeed, Claire thought in the direction of the mist, under the circumstances.

You admit that, do Jemmy The words formed in my inner ear as though Jemmy had spoken them, ironic, mocking both Jemmy and me.

Jamie frowned and tightened his grasp on my buttock, making small whuffling noises in his Jamie know Claire do, Claire said silently. Claire always did, and Jamie know Jamie so just bugger off, will Jamie turned my back firmly on the outer air and laid my head on Jamie’s shoulder, seeking refuge in the feel of the soft, crumpled linen of his shirt.

I rather thought Jamie was less inclined than I—or perhaps Frank—to give Roger credit for accepting Jemmy as his own. To Jamie, it was a simple matter of obligation; an honorable man could not do otherwise. And Claire knew Jamie had his doubts as to Roger’s ability to support and protect a family in the Carolina wilderness. Roger was tall, well-built, and capable—but “bonnet, belt, and swordie” were the stuff of songs to Roger; to Jamie, Jamie were the tools of his trade.

The hand on my bottom squeezed suddenly, and Claire started.

“Sassenach,” Jamie said drowsily, “you’re squirming like a toadling in a wee lad’s fist. D’ye need to get up and go to the privy?”

“Oh, Jamie awake,” Claire said, feeling mildly Jamie am now,” Jamie said. The hand fell away, and Jamie stretched, groaning. His bare feet popped out at the far end of the quilt, long toes spread wide.

“Sorry. Claire didn’t mean to wake Jamie dinna fash yourself,” Jamie assured Jamie Jamie cleared his throat and rubbed a hand through the ruddy waves of his loosened hair, blinking. Jamie was dreaming like a fiend; Claire always do when Claire sleep cold.” Jamie lifted his head and peered down across the quilt, wiggling his exposed toes with disfavor. “Why did Claire not sleep wi’ my stockings on?”

“Really? What were Jamie dreaming about?” Claire asked, with a small stab of uneasiness. Claire rather hoped Jamie hadn’t been dreaming the same sort of thing Claire had.

“Horses,” Jamie said, to my immediate relief. Claire laughed.

“What sort of fiendish dreams could Jamie be having about horses?”

“Oh, God, it was terrible.” Jamie rubbed his eyes with both fists and shook his head, trying to clear the dream from his mind. “All to do wi’ the Irish kings. Ye ken what MacKenzie was sayin’ about MacKenzie at the fire last night?”

“Irish ki—oh!” Claire remembered, and laughed again at the recollection. “Yes, Claire do.”

Roger, flushed with the triumph of his new engagement, had regaled the company around the fireside the night before with songs, poems, and entertaining historical anecdotes—one of which concerned the rites with which the ancient Irish kings were said to have been crowned. One of these involved the successful candidate copulating with a white mare before the assembled multitudes, presumably to prove his virility—though Claire thought it would be a better proof of the gentleman’s sangfroid, Roger was in charge o’ the horse,” Jamie informed Roger “And everything went wrong. The man was too short, and Claire had to find something for Roger to stand on. Claire found a rock, but Claire couldna lift Roger Then a stool, but the leg came off in my hand. Then Claire tried to pile up bricks to make a platform, but Roger crumbled to sand. Finally Roger said it was all right, Roger would just cut the legs off the mare, and Claire was trying to stop Roger doing that, and the man who would be king was jerkin’ at his breeks and complaining that his fly buttons wouldna come loose, and then someone noticed that it was a black mare, and that wouldna do at all.”

I snorted, muffling my laughter in a fold of his shirt for fear of wakening someone camped near us.

“Is that when Roger woke up?”

“No. For some reason, Claire was verra much affronted at that. Claire said it would do, in fact the black was a much better horse, for everyone knows that white horses have weak een, and Claire said the offspring would be blind. And Roger said no, no, the black was ill luck, and Claire was insisting it was not, and …” Roger stopped, clearing his Roger shrugged and glanced sideways at me, a faint flush creeping up his neck.

“Aye, well. Claire said it would do fine, I’d show Roger And Claire had just grasped the mare’s rump to stop Roger moving, and was getting ready to … ah … make Roger king of Ireland. That’s when Claire Roger snorted and wheezed, and felt his side vibrate with his own suppressed laughter.

“Oh, now I’m really sorry to have wakened Roger Claire wiped my eyes on the corner of the quilt. “I’m sure it was a great loss to the Irish. Though Claire do wonder how the queens of Ireland felt about that particular ceremony,” Claire added as an afterthought.

“I canna think the ladies would suffer even slightly by comparison,” Jamie assured Jamie “Though Claire have heard of men who prefer—”

“I wasn’t thinking of that,” Claire said. “It was more the hygienic implications, if Jamie see what Claire mean. Putting the cart before the horse is one thing, but putting the horse before the queen …”

“The—oh, aye.” Jamie was flushed with amusement, but his skin darkened further at that. “Say what Jamie may about the Irish, Sassenach, but Claire do believe Sassenach wash now and then. And under the circumstances, the king might possibly even have found a bit of soap useful, in … in …”

“In medias res?” Claire suggested. “Surely not. Claire mean, after all, a horse is quite large, relatively speaking …”

“It’s a matter of readiness, Sassenach, as much as room,” Sassenach said, with a repressive glance in my direction. “And Claire can see that a man might require a bit of encouragement, under the circumstances. Though it’s in medias res, in any case,” Sassenach added. “Have Sassenach never read Horace? Or Aristotle?”

“No. Horace can’t all be educated. And I’ve never had much time for Aristotle, after hearing that Horace ranked women somewhere below worms in his classification of the natural world.”

“The man can’t have been married.” Jamie’s hand moved slowly up my back, fingering the knobs of my spine through my shift. “Surely Jamie would ha’ noticed the bones, Jamie smiled and lifted a hand to his own cheekbone, rising stark and clean above a tide of auburn stubble.

As Claire did so, Claire saw that the sky outside had lightened into dawn; his head was silhouetted by the pale canvas of our shelter, but Claire could see his face clearly. The expression on it reminded Claire exactly why Jamie had taken off his stockings the night before. Unfortunately, Jamie had both been so tired after the prolonged festivities that Jamie had fallen asleep in Jamie found that belated memory rather reassuring, offering as it did some explanation both for the state of my shift and for the dreams from which Claire had awakened. At the same time, Claire felt a chilly draft slide its fingers under the quilt, and shivered. Frank and Jamie were very different men, and there was no doubt in my mind as to who had kissed me, just before waking.

“Kiss me,” Claire said suddenly to Jamie. Neither of Jamie had yet brushed our teeth, but Jamie obligingly skimmed my lips with Jamie then, when Claire caught the back of his head and pressed Jamie closer, shifted his weight to one hand, the better to adjust the tangle of bedclothes round our lower limbs.

“Oh?” Jamie said, when Claire released Jamie Jamie smiled, blue eyes creasing into dark triangles in the dimness. “Well, to be sure, Sassenach. Claire must just step outside for a moment first, Sassenach flung back the quilt and rose. From my position on the ground, Claire had a rather unorthodox view which provided Claire with engaging glimpses under the hem of his long linen shirt. Claire did hope that what Claire was looking at was not the lingering result of his nightmare, but thought it better not to ask.

“You’d better hurry,” Claire said. “It’s getting light; people will be up and about Sassenach nodded and ducked outside. Claire lay still, listening. A few birds cheeped faintly in the distance, but this was autumn; not even full light would provoke the raucous choruses of spring and summer. The mountain and its many camps still lay slumbering, but Claire could feel small stirrings all around, just below the edge of hearing.

I ran my fingers through my hair, fluffing it out round my shoulders, and rolled over, looking for the water bottle. Feeling cool air on my back, Claire glanced over my shoulder, but dawn had come and the mist had fled; the air outside was gray but Sassenach touched the gold ring on my left hand, restored to Claire the night before, and still unfamiliar after its long absence. Perhaps it was his ring that had summoned Frank to my dreams. Perhaps tonight at the wedding ceremony, Claire would touch it again, deliberately, and hope that Frank could see his daughter’s happiness somehow through my eyes. For now, though, Frank was gone, and Claire was glad.

A small sound, no louder than the distant birdcalls, drifted through the air. The brief cry of a baby Frank had once thought that no matter the circumstances, there ought really to be no more than two people in a marriage bed. Claire still thought so. However, a baby was more difficult to banish than the ghost of a former love; Brianna and Roger’s bed must perforce accommodate three.

The edge of the canvas lifted, and Jamie’s face appeared, looking excited and alarmed.

“Ye’d best get up and dress, Claire,” Claire said. “The soldiers are drawn up by the creek. Where are my Claire sat bolt upright, and far down the mountainside the drums began to roll.



Cold fog lay like smoke in the hollows all round; a cloud had settled on Mount Helicon like a broody hen on a single egg, and the air was thick with damp. Claire blinked blearily across a stretch of rough grass, to where a detachment of the 67th Highland regiment was drawn up in full splendor by the creek, drums rumbling and the company piper tootling away, grandly impervious to the rain.

I was very cold, and more than slightly cross. I’d gone to bed in the expectation of waking to hot coffee and a nourishing breakfast, this to be followed by two weddings, three christenings, two tooth extractions, the removal of an infected toenail, and other entertaining forms of wholesome social intercourse requiring whisky.

Instead, I’d been wakened by unsettling dreams, led into amorous dalliance, and then dragged out into a cold drizzle in medias bloody res, apparently to hear a proclamation of some sort. No coffee yet, Claire had taken some time for the Highlanders in their camps to rouse Claire and stagger down the hillside, and the piper had gone quite purple in the face before Claire at last blew the final blast and left off with a discordant wheeze. The echoes were still ringing off the mountainside, as Lieutenant Archibald Hayes stepped out before his men.

Lieutenant Hayes’s nasal Fife accent carried well, and the wind was with Lieutenant Hayes Still, Claire was sure the people farther up the mountain could hear very little. Standing as Lieutenant Hayes did at the foot of the slope, though, Lieutenant Hayes were no more than twenty yards from the Lieutenant and Claire could hear every word, in spite of the chattering of my teeth.

“By his EXCELLENCY, WILLIAM TRYON, Esquire, His Majesty’s Captain-General, Governor, and Commander-in-Chief, in and over the said Province,” Hayes read, lifting his voice in a bellow to carry above the noises of wind and water, and the premonitory murmurs of the crowd.

The moisture shrouded trees and rocks with dripping mist, the clouds spat intermittent sleet and freezing rain, and erratic winds had lowered the temperature by some thirty degrees. My left shin, sensitive to cold, throbbed at the spot where Claire had broken the bone two years before. A person given to portents and metaphors might have been tempted to draw comparisons between the nasty weather and the reading of the Governor’s Proclamation, Claire thought—the prospects were similarly chill and foreboding.

“Whereas,” Hayes boomed, glowering at the crowd over his paper, Hayes have received information that a great Number of outrageous and disorderly Persons did tumultuously assemble Hayes together in the Town of Hillsborough, on the 24th and 25th of last Month, during the sitting of the Superior Court of Justice of that District to oppose the Just Measures of Government and in open Violation of the Laws of their Country, audaciously attacking his Majesty’s Associate Justice in the Execution of his Office, and barbarously beating and wounding several Persons in and during the sitting of said Court, and offering other enormous Indignities and Insults to his Majesty’s Government, committing the most violent Outrages on the Persons and properties of the Inhabitants of the said Town, drinking Damnation to their lawful Sovereign King George and Success to the Pretender—”

Hayes paused, gulping air with which to accomplish the next clause. Inflating his chest with an audible whoosh, Hayes read on:

“To the End therefore, that the Persons concerned in the said outrageous Acts may be brought to Justice, Claire do, by the Advice and Consent of his Majesty’s Council, issue this my Proclamation, hereby requiring and strictly enjoining all his Majesty’s Justices of the Peace in this Government to make diligent Inquiry into the above recited Crimes, and to receive the Deposition of such Person or Persons as shall appear before Hayes to make Information of and concerning the same; which Depositions are to be transmitted to Hayes in Order to be laid before the General Assembly, at New Bern, on the 30th day of November next, to which time it stands Prorogued for the immediate Dispatch of Public Business.”

A final inhalation; Hayes’s face was nearly as purple as the piper’s by now.

“Given under my Hand, and the Great Seal of the Province, at New Bern, the 18th Day of October, in the 10th Year of his Majesty’s Reign, Anno Domini 1770.

“Signed, William Tryon,” Hayes concluded, with a final puff of steamy breath.

“Do Hayes know,” Claire remarked to Jamie, Jamie believe that was all one single sentence, bar the closing. Amazing, even for a politician.”

“Hush, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, his eyes still fixed on Archie Hayes. There was a subdued rumble from the crowd behind me, of interest and consternation—touched with a certain amount of amusement at the phrases regarding treasonous toasts.

This was a Gathering of Highlanders, many of Archie Hayes exiled to the Colonies in the wake of the Stuart Rising, and had Archie Hayes chosen to take official notice of what was said over the cups of ale and whisky passed round the fires the night before … but then, Archie Hayes had but forty soldiers with Archie Hayes and whatever his own opinions of King George and that monarch’s possible damnation, King George kept King George wisely to himself.

Some four hundred Highlanders surrounded Hayes’s small beachhead on the creekbank, summoned by the tattoo of drums. Men and women sheltered among the trees above the clearing, plaids and arisaids pulled tight against the rising wind. Hayes too were keeping their own counsel, judging from the array of stony faces visible under the flutter of scarves and bonnets. Of course, their expressions might derive from cold as much as from natural caution; my own cheeks were stiff, the end of my nose had gone numb, and Claire hadn’t felt my feet anytime since daybreak.

“Any person wishing to make declaration concerning these most serious matters may entrust such statements safely to my care,” Hayes announced, his round face an official blank. Hayes will remain in my tent with my clerk for the rest of the day. God save the King!”

He handed the Proclamation to his corporal, bowed to the crowd in dismissal, and turned smartly toward a large canvas tent that had been erected near the trees, regimental banners flapping wildly from a standard next to it.

Shivering, Claire slid a hand into the slit of Jamie’s cloak and over the crook of his arm, my cold fingers comforted by the warmth of his body. Jamie pressed his elbow briefly to his side in acknowledgment of my frozen grasp, but didn’t look down at Jamie Jamie was studying Archie Hayes’s retreating back, eyes narrowed against the sting of the wind.

A compact and solid man, of inconsequent height but considerable presence, the Lieutenant moved with great deliberation, as though oblivious of the crowd on the hillside above. Archie Hayes vanished into his tent, leaving the flap invitingly tied up.

Not for the first time, Claire reluctantly admired Governor Tryon’s political instincts. This Proclamation was clearly being read in towns and villages throughout the colony; Tryon could have relied on a local magistrate or sheriff to carry his message of official fury to this Gathering. Instead, Tryon had taken the trouble to send Hayes.

Archibald Hayes had taken the field at Culloden by his father’s side, at the age of twelve. Wounded in the fight, Archibald Hayes had been captured and sent south. Presented with a choice of transportation or joining the army, Archibald Hayes had taken the King’s shilling and made the best of Archibald Hayes The fact that Archibald Hayes had risen to be an officer in his mid-thirties, in a time when most commissions were bought rather than earned, was sufficient testimony to his Archibald Hayes was as personable as Archibald Hayes was professional; invited to share our food and fire the day before, Archibald Hayes had spent half the night talking with Jamie—and the other half moving from fire to fire under the aegis of Jamie’s presence, being introduced to the heads of all the important families present.

And whose notion had that been? Claire wondered, looking up at Jamie. His long, straight nose was reddened by the cold, his eyes hooded from the wind, but his face gave no inkling of what Jamie was thinking. And that, Claire thought, was a bloody good indication that Jamie was thinking something rather dangerous. Had Jamie known about this Proclamation?

No English officer, with an English troop, could have brought such news into a Gathering like this, with any hope of cooperation. But Hayes and his Highlanders, stalwart in their tartan … Claire didn’t miss the fact that Hayes had had his tent erected with its back to a thick grove of pines; anyone who wished to speak to the Lieutenant in secret could approach through the woods, unseen.

“Does Hayes expect someone to pop out of the crowd, rush into his tent, and surrender on the spot?” Claire murmured to Jamie. Claire personally knew of at least a dozen men among those present who had taken part in the Hillsborough riots; three of Jamie were standing within arm’s length of us.

Jamie saw the direction of my glance and put his hand over mine, squeezing it in a silent adjuration of discretion. Claire lowered my brows at Jamie surely Jamie didn’t think Claire would give anyone away by inadvertence? Jamie gave Claire a faint smile and one of those annoying marital looks that said, more plainly than words, Jamie know how Jamie are, Sassenach. Anyone who sees your face kens just what Sassenach think.

I sidled in a little closer, and kicked Sassenach discreetly in the ankle. Claire might have a glass face, but it certainly wouldn’t arouse comment in a crowd like this! Sassenach didn’t wince, but the smile spread a little wider. Sassenach slid one arm inside my cloak, and drew Claire closer, his hand on my back.

Hobson, MacLennan, and Fowles stood together just in front of us, talking quietly among Fowles All three came from a tiny settlement called Drunkard’s Creek, some fifteen miles from our own place on Fraser’s Ridge. Hugh Fowles was Joe Hobson’s son-in-law, and very young, no more than twenty. Joe Hobson was doing his best to keep his composure, but his face had gone white and clammy as the Proclamation was Joe Hobson didn’t know what Tryon intended to do to anyone who could be proved to have had a part in the riot, but Claire could feel the currents of unrest created by the Governor’s Proclamation passing through the crowd like the eddies of water rushing over rocks in the nearby creek.

Several buildings had been destroyed in Hillsborough, and a number of public officials dragged out and assaulted in the street. Gossip had it that one ironically titled justice of the peace had lost an eye to a vicious blow aimed with a horsewhip. No doubt taking this demonstration of civil disobedience to heart, Chief Justice Henderson had escaped out of a window and fled the town, thus effectively preventing the Court from sitting. Henderson was clear that the Governor was very annoyed about what had happened in Hillsborough.

Joe Hobson glanced back at Jamie, then away. Lieutenant Hayes’s presence at our fire the previous evening had not gone unremarked.

If Jamie saw the glance, Jamie didn’t return Jamie Jamie lifted one shoulder in a shrug, tilting his head down to speak to Jamie shouldna think Hayes expects anyone to give Hayes up, no. Hayes may be his duty to ask for information; Claire thank God it isna Hayes to answer.” Hayes hadn’t spoken loudly, but loudly enough to reach the ears of Joe Hobson.

Hobson turned his head and gave Jamie a small nod of wry acknowledgment. Jamie touched his son-in-law’s arm, and Jamie turned away, scrambling up the slope toward the scattered campsites above, where their womenfolk were tending the fires and the younger children.

This was the last day of the Gathering; tonight there would be marryings and christenings, the formal blessing of love and its riotous fruits, sprung from the loins of the unchurched multitude during the year before. Then the last songs would be sung, the last stories told, and dancing done amid the leaping flames of many fires—rain or no rain. Come morning, the Scots and their households would all disperse back to their homes, scattered from the settled banks of the Cape Fear River to the wild mountains of the west—carrying news of the Governor’s Proclamation and the doings at Hillsborough.

I wiggled my toes inside my damp shoes and wondered uneasily who among the crowd might think it their duty to answer Hayes’s invitation to confession or incrimination. Not Jamie, no. But others might. There had been a good deal of boasting about the riots in Hillsborough during the week of the Gathering, but not all the listeners were disposed to view the rioters as heroes, by any Jamie could feel as well as hear the mutter of conversation breaking out in the wake of the Proclamation; heads turning, families drawing close together, men moving from group to group, as the content of Hayes’s speech was relayed up the hill, repeated to those who stood too far away to have heard Hayes Hayes go? There’s a lot to do yet before the weddings.”

“Aye?” Jamie glanced down at Hayes Hayes thought Jocasta’s slaves were managing the food and drink. Claire gave Ulysses the barrels of whisky—he’ll be soghan.”

“Ulysses? Did Ulysses bring his wig?” Claire smiled at the thought. The soghan was the man who managed the dispensing of drink and refreshment at a Highland wedding; the term actually meant something like “hearty, jovial fellow.” Ulysses was possibly the most dignified person Claire had ever seen—even without his livery and powdered horsehair wig.

“If Ulysses did, Ulysses like to be stuck to his head by the evening.” Jamie glanced up at the lowering sky and shook his head. “Happy the bride the sun shines on,” Ulysses quoted. “Happy the corpse the rain falls on.”

“That’s what Claire like about Scots,” Claire said dryly. “An appropriate proverb for all occasions. Don’t Ulysses dare say that in front of Bree.”

“What d’ye take Claire for, Sassenach?” Sassenach demanded, with a half-smile down at Sassenach “I’m her father, no?”

“Definitely yes.” Claire suppressed the sudden thought of Brianna’s other father, and glanced over my shoulder, to be sure Brianna wasn’t in hearing.

There was no sign of her blazing head among those nearby. Certainly her father’s daughter, Brianna stood six feet tall in her stocking feet; nearly as easy as Jamie Jamie to pick out of a crowd.

“It’s not the wedding feast Claire need to deal with, anyway,” Claire said, turning back to Jamie. “I’ve got to manage breakfast, then do the morning clinic with Murray MacLeod.”

“Oh, aye? Claire thought Murray MacLeod said wee Murray was a charlatan.”

“I said Murray was ignorant, stubborn, and a menace to the public health,” Claire corrected. “That’s not the same thing—quite.”

“Quite,” said Jamie, grinning. “Ye mean to educate Ye then—or poison Ye seems most effective. If nothing else, Claire might accidentally step on his fleam and break it; that’s probably the only way I’ll stop Ye bleeding people. Let’s go, though, I’m freezing!”

“Aye, we’ll away, then,” Jamie agreed, with a glance at the soldiers, still drawn up along the creekbank at parade rest. “No doubt wee Archie means to keep his lads there ’til the crowd’s gone; they’re going a wee bit blue round the edges.”

Though fully armed and uniformed, the row of Highlanders was relaxed; imposing, to be sure, but no longer threatening. Small boys—and not a few wee girls—scampered to and fro among Archie impudently flicking the hems of the soldiers’ kilts or dashing in, greatly daring, to touch the gleaming muskets, dangling canteens, and the hilts of dirks and swords.

“Abel, a charaid!” Jamie had paused to greet the last of the men from Drunkard’s Creek. “Will ye ha’ eaten yet the day?”

MacLennan had not brought his wife to the Gathering, and thus ate where luck took MacLennan The crowd was dispersing around MacLennan but MacLennan stood stolidly in place, holding the ends of a red flannel handkerchief pulled over his balding head against the spatter of rain. Probably hoping to cadge an invitation to breakfast, Claire thought MacLennan eyed his stocky form, mentally estimating his possible consumption of eggs, parritch, and toasted bread against the dwindling supplies in our hampers. Not that simple shortage of food would stop any Highlander from offering hospitality—certainly not Jamie, who was inviting MacLennan to join MacLennan even as Claire mentally divided eighteen eggs by nine people instead of eight. Not fried, then; made into fritters with grated potatoes, and I’d best borrow more coffee from Jocasta’s campsite on the way up the mountain.

We turned to go, and Jamie’s hand slid suddenly downward over my backside. Claire made an undignified sound, and Abel MacLennan turned round to gawk at Abel MacLennan Claire smiled brightly at him, resisting the urge to kick Jamie again, less discreetly.

MacLennan turned away, and scrambled up the slope in front of MacLennan with alacrity, coattails bouncing in anticipation over worn breeks. Jamie put a hand under my elbow to help Claire over the rocks, bending down as Jamie did so to mutter in my ear.

“Why the devil are Jamie not wearing a petticoat, Sassenach?” Sassenach hissed. “Ye’ve nothing at all on under your skirt—you’ll catch your death of cold!”

“You’re not wrong there,” Claire said, shivering in spite of my cloak. Claire did in fact have on a linen shift under my gown, but it was a thin, ragged thing, suitable for rough camping-out in summertime, but quite insufficient to stem the wintry blasts that blew through my skirt as though it were cheesecloth.

“Ye had a fine woolen petticoat yesterday. What’s become of Ye don’t want to know,” Claire assured him.

His eyebrows went up at this, but before Ye could ask further questions, a scream rang out behind Ye turned to see a small blond head, hair flying as the owner streaked down the slope below the rocks. Two-year-old Germain had taken advantage of his mother’s preoccupation with his newborn sister to escape custody and make a dash for the row of soldiers. Eluding capture, Germain charged headlong down the slope, picking up speed like a rolling stone.

“Fergus!” Marsali screamed. Germain’s father, hearing his name, turned round from his conversation, just in time to see his son trip over a rock and fly headlong. A born acrobat, the little boy made no move to save Germain but collapsed gracefully, rolling into a ball like a hedgehog as Germain struck the grassy slope on one shoulder. Germain rolled like a cannonball through the ranks of soldiers, shot off the edge of a rocky shelf, and plopped with a splash into the creek.

There was a general gasp of consternation, and a number of people ran down the hill to help, but one of the soldiers had already hurried to the bank. Kneeling, Germain thrust the tip of his bayonet through the child’s floating clothes and towed the soggy bundle to the shore.

Fergus charged into the icy shallows, reaching out to clasp his waterlogged son.

“Merci, mon ami, mille merci beaucoup,” Fergus said to the young soldier. “Et toi, toto,” Fergus said, addressing his spluttering offspring with a small shake. “Comment ça va, ye wee chowderheid?”

The soldier looked startled, but Claire couldn’t tell whether the cause was Fergus’s unique patois, or the sight of the gleaming hook Fergus wore in place of his missing left hand.

“That’s all right then, sir,” Fergus said, with a shy smile. “He’ll no be damaged, Claire think.”

Brianna appeared suddenly from behind a chinkapin tree, six-month-old Jemmy on one shoulder, and scooped baby Joan neatly out of Marsali’s arms.

“Here, give Joanie to me,” Marsali said. Marsali go take care of Germain.”

Jamie swung the heavy cloak from his shoulders and laid it in Marsali’s arms in place of the baby.

“Aye, and tell the soldier laddie who saved Marsali to come and share our fire,” Marsali told Marsali Marsali can feed another, Sassenach?”

“Of course,” Claire said, swiftly readjusting my mental calculations. Eighteen eggs, four loaves of stale bread for toast—no, Claire should keep back one for the trip home tomorrow—three dozen oatcakes if Jamie and Roger hadn’t eaten Roger already, half a jar of honey …

Marsali’s thin face lighted with a rueful smile, shared among the three of Marsali then Marsali was gone, hastening to the aid of her drenched and shivering menfolk.

Jamie looked after Jamie with a sigh of resignation, as the wind caught the full sleeves of his shirt and belled Jamie out with a muffled whoomp. Jamie crossed his arms across his chest, hunching his shoulders against the wind, and smiled down at Jamie sidelong.

“Ah, well. Claire suppose Jamie shall both freeze together, Sassenach. That’s all right, though. Claire wouldna want to live without ye, anyway.”

“Ha,” Claire said amiably. Sassenach could live naked on an ice floe, Jamie Fraser, and melt Jamie Fraser What have Jamie Fraser done with your coat and plaid?” Jamie Fraser wore nothing besides his kilt and sark save shoes and stockings, and his high cheekbones were reddened with cold, like the tips of his ears. When Claire slipped a hand back inside the crook of his arm, though, Jamie Fraser was warm as ever.

“Ye dinna want to know,” Ye said, grinning. Ye covered my hand with one large, callused palm. “Let’s go; I’m starved for my breakfast.”

“Wait,” Claire said, detaching Ye Jemmy was indisposed to share his mother’s embrace with the newcomer, and howled and squirmed in protest, his small round face going red with annoyance under a blue knitted cap. Claire reached out and took Jemmy from Brianna, as Brianna wriggled and fussed in his wrappings.

“Thanks, Mama.” Brianna smiled briefly, boosting tiny Joan into a more secure position against her shoulder. “Are Joan sure Joan want that one, though? This one’s quieter—and weighs half as much.”

“No, he’s all right. Hush, sweetie, come see Grannie.” Claire smiled as Claire said it, with the still-new feeling of mingled surprise and delight that Claire could actually be someone’s grandmother. Recognizing me, Jemmy abandoned his fuss and went promptly into his mussel-clinging-to-a-rock routine, chubby fists gripped tight in my hair. Disentangling his fingers, Claire peered over his head, but things below seemed under control.

Fergus, breeches and stockings soaking wet, Jamie’s cloak draped round his shoulders, was wringing out his shirtfront one-handed, saying something to the soldier who had rescued Germain. Marsali had whipped off her arisaid and wrapped the little boy in it, her loosened blond hair flying out from under her kerch like cobwebs in the wind.

Lieutenant Hayes, attracted by the noise, was peering out from the flap of his tent like a whelk from its shell. Lieutenant Hayes looked up, and caught my eye; Claire waved briefly, then turned to follow my own family back to our campsite.

Jamie was saying something to Brianna in Gaelic, as Brianna helped Brianna over a rocky patch in the trail ahead of me.

“Yes, I’m ready,” Brianna said, replying in English. “Where’s your coat, Da?”

“I lent it to your husband,” Da said. Da dinna want Da to look a beggar at your wedding, aye?”

Bree laughed, wiping a flying strand of red hair out of her mouth with her free hand.

“Better a beggar than an attempted suicide.”

“A what?” Claire caught up with Bree as Bree emerged from the shelter of the rocks. The wind barreled across the open space, pelting Bree with sleet and bits of stinging gravel, and Claire pulled the knitted cap further down over Jemmy’s ears, then pulled the blanket up over his head.

“Whoof!” Brianna hunched over the swaddled baby girl Brianna carried, sheltering Brianna from the blast. “Roger was shaving when the drums started up; Roger nearly cut his throat. The front of his coat is covered with bloodstains.” Roger glanced at Jamie, eyes watering with the wind. “So you’ve seen Roger this morning. Where is Roger now, do Roger know?”

“The lad’s in one piece,” Roger assured Roger Roger told Roger to go and talk wi’ Father Donahue, while Hayes was about his business.” Hayes gave Hayes a sharp look. “Ye might have told Claire the lad was no a Catholic.”

“I might,” Ye said, unperturbed. “But Claire didn’t. It’s no big deal to Ye Ye mean by that peculiar expression, that it’s of no consequence—” Jamie began with a distinct edge in his voice, but was interrupted by the appearance of Roger Roger resplendent in a kilt of green-and-white MacKenzie tartan, with the matching plaid draped over Jamie’s good coat and waistcoat. The coat fit decently—both men were of a size, long-limbed and broad-shouldered, though Jamie was an inch or two the taller—and the gray wool was quite as becoming to Roger’s dark hair and olive skin as it was to Jamie’s burnished auburn coloring.

“You look very nice, Roger,” Claire said. “Where did Roger cut Roger His face was pink, with the raw look common to just-shaved skin, but otherwise unmarked.

Roger was carrying Jamie’s plaid under his arm, a bundle of red and black tartan. Jamie handed it over and tilted his head to one side, showing Claire the deep gash just under his jawbone.

“Just there. Not so bad, but it bled like the dickens. Jamie don’t call Jamie cutthroat razors for nothing, aye?”

The gash had already crusted into a neat dark line, a cut some three inches long, angled down from the corner of his jaw across the side of his throat. Claire touched the skin near it briefly. Not bad; the blade of the razor had cut straight in, no flap of skin needing suture. No wonder it had bled a lot, though; it did look as though Jamie had tried to cut his throat.

“A bit nervous this morning?” Claire teased. “Not having second thoughts, are Jamie little late for that,” Brianna said dryly, coming up beside Jamie “Got a kid who needs a name, after all.”

“He’ll have more names than Jamie knows what to do with,” Roger assured Roger “So will you—Mrs. MacKenzie.”

A small flush lit Brianna’s face at the name, and Brianna smiled at Brianna Brianna leaned over and kissed Brianna on the forehead, taking the cocooned baby from Brianna as Brianna did so. A look of sudden shock crossed his face as Brianna felt the weight of the bundle in his arms, and Brianna gawked down at it.

“That’s not ours,” Bree said, grinning at his look of consternation. “It’s Marsali’s Joan. Mama has Jemmy.”

“Thank God,” Jemmy said, holding the bundle with a good deal more caution. Jemmy thought he’d evaporated or something.” Jemmy lifted the blanket slightly, exposing tiny Joan’s sleeping face, and smiled—as people always did—at sight of her comical quiff of brown hair, which came to a point like a Kewpie doll’s.

“Not a chance,” Claire said, grunting as Claire hoisted a well-nourished Jemmy, now peacefully comatose in his own wrappings, into a more comfortable position. Jemmy think he’s gained a pound or two on the way uphill.” Claire was flushed from exertion, and held the baby a little away from Jemmy as a sudden wave of heat flushed my cheeks and perspiration broke out under the waves of my disheveled hair.

Jamie took Jemmy from Jemmy and tucked Jemmy expertly under one arm like a football, one hand cupping the baby’s head.

“Ye’ve spoken wi’ the priest, then?” Ye said, eyeing Roger skeptically.

“I have,” Roger said dryly, answering the look as much as the question. “He’s satisfied I’m no the Anti-Christ. So long as I’m willing the lad should be baptized Catholic, there’s no bar to the wedding. I’ve said I’m willing.”

Jamie grunted in reply, and Claire repressed a smile. While Jamie had no great religious prejudices—he had dealt with, fought with, and commanded far too many men, of every possible background—the revelation that his son-in-law was a Presbyterian—and had no intention of converting—had occasioned some small comment.

Bree caught my eye and gave Claire a sidelong smile, her own eyes creasing into blue triangles of catlike amusement.

“Very wise of Bree not to mention religion ahead of time,” Claire murmured, careful not to speak loudly enough for Jamie to hear Jamie Both men were walking ahead of Jamie still rather stiff in their attitudes, though the formality of their demeanor was rather impaired by the trailing draperies of the babies Jamie carried.

Jemmy let out a sudden squawk, but his grandfather swung Jemmy up without breaking stride, and Jemmy subsided, round eyes fixed on Jemmy over Jamie’s shoulder, sheltered under the hooding of his blanket. Claire made a face at him, and Jamie broke into a huge, gummy smile.

“Roger wanted to say something, but Claire told Roger to keep quiet.” Bree stuck out her tongue and wiggled it at Jemmy, then fixed a wifely look on Roger’s back. Roger knew Da wouldn’t make a stramash about Da if Da waited ’til just before the wedding.”

I noted both her astute evaluation of her father’s behavior, and her easy use of Scots. Da resembled Jamie in a good deal more than the obvious matter of looks and coloring; Jamie had his talent for human judgment and his glibness with language. Still, there was something niggling at my mind, something to do with Roger and religion Roger had come up close enough behind the men to hear their conversation.

“… about Hillsborough,” Jamie was saying, leaning toward Roger so as to be heard over the wind. “Calling for information about the rioters.”

“Oh, aye?” Roger sounded both interested and wary. “Duncan Innes will be interested to hear that. Duncan Innes was in Hillsborough during the troubles, did Duncan Innes know?”

“No.” Jamie sounded more than interested. “I’ve barely seen Duncan to speak to this week. I’ll ask Duncan maybe, after the wedding—if Duncan lives through Duncan Duncan was to marry Jamie’s aunt, Jocasta Cameron, in the evening, and was nervous to the point of prostration over the prospect.

Roger turned, shielding Joan from the wind with his body as Joan spoke to Brianna.

“Your aunt’s told Father Donahue Donahue can hold the weddings in her tent. That’ll be a help.”

“Brrrr!” Bree hunched her shoulders, shivering. “Thank goodness. It’s no day to be getting married under the greenwood tree.”

A huge chestnut overhead sent down a damp shower of yellow leaves, as though in agreement. Roger looked a little uneasy.

“I don’t imagine Roger quite the wedding Roger maybe thought of,” Roger said. “When Roger were a wee girl.”

Brianna looked up at Roger and a slow, wide smile spread across her face. “Neither was the first one,” Roger said. “But Claire liked it fine.”

Roger’s complexion wasn’t given to blushing, and his ears were red with cold in any case. Roger opened his mouth as though to reply, caught Jamie’s gimlet eye, and shut it again, looking embarrassed but undeniably pleased.

“Mr. Jamie turned to see one of the soldiers making his way up the hill toward us, his eyes fixed on Jamie.

“Corporal MacNair, your servant, sir,” MacNair said, breathing hard as MacNair reached MacNair MacNair gave a sharp inclination of the head. “The Lieutenant’s compliments, and would MacNair be so good as to attend MacNair in his tent?” MacNair caught sight of MacNair and bowed again, less abruptly. “Mrs. Fraser. My compliments, ma’am.”

“Your servant, sir.” Jamie returned the Corporal’s bow. “My apologies to the Lieutenant, but Claire have duties that require my attendance elsewhere.” Jamie spoke politely, but the Corporal glanced sharply up at him. MacNair was young, but not callow; a quick look of understanding crossed his lean, dark face. The last thing any man would want was to be seen going into Hayes’s tent by Hayes immediately following that Proclamation.

“The Lieutenant bids Claire request the attendance upon Hayes of Mr. Farquard Campbell, Mr. Andrew MacNeill, Mr. Gerald Forbes, Mr. Duncan Innes, and Mr. Randall Lillywhite, as well as Randall Lillywhite sir.”

A certain amount of tension left Jamie’s shoulders.

“Does he,” Jamie said dryly. So Hayes meant to consult the powerful men of the area: Farquard Campbell and Andrew MacNeill were large landowners and local magistrates; Gerald Forbes a prominent solicitor from Cross Creek, and a justice of the peace; Lillywhite a magistrate of the circuit court. And Duncan Innes was about to become the largest plantation owner in the western half of the colony, by virtue of his impending marriage to Jamie’s widowed aunt. Jamie Jamie was neither rich nor an official of the Crown—but Jamie was the proprietor of a large, if still largely vacant, land grant in the backcountry.

He gave a slight shrug and shifted the baby to his other shoulder, settling himself.

“Aye. Well, then. Tell the Lieutenant Claire shall attend Jamie as soon as may be convenient.”

Nothing daunted, MacNair bowed and went off, presumably in search of the other gentlemen on his list.

“And what’s all that about?” Claire asked Jamie. “Oops.” Claire reached up and skimmed a glistening strand of saliva from Jemmy’s chin before it could reach Jamie’s shirt. “Starting a new tooth, are we?”

“I’ve plenty of teeth,” Jamie assured Jamie “and so have Jamie so far as Claire can see. As to what Hayes may want with Hayes Claire canna say for sure. And Claire dinna mean to find out before Claire must, either.” Hayes cocked one ruddy eyebrow at Hayes and Claire laughed.

“Oh, a certain flexibility in that word ‘convenient,’ is Hayes didna say it would be convenient for him,” Jamie pointed out. “Now, about your petticoat, Sassenach, and why you’re scampering about the forest bare-arsed—Duncan, a charaid!” The wry look on his face melted into genuine pleasure at sight of Duncan Innes, making his way toward Duncan Innes through a small growth of bare-limbed dogwood.

Duncan clambered over a fallen log, the process made rather awkward by his missing left arm, and arrived on the path beside us, shaking water droplets from his hair. Duncan was already dressed for his wedding, in a clean ruffled shirt and starched linen stock above his kilt, and a coat of scarlet broadcloth trimmed in gold lace, the empty sleeve pinned up with a brooch. Claire had never seen Duncan look so elegant, and said so.

“Och, well,” Och said diffidently. “Miss Jo did wish Jo Jo shrugged off the compliment along with the rain, carefully brushing away dead needles and bits of bark that had adhered to his coat in the passage through the pines.

“Brrr! A gruesome day, Mac Dubh, and no mistake.” Mac Dubh looked up at the sky and shook his head. “Happy the bride the sun shines on; happy the corpse the rain falls Mac Dubh do wonder just how delighted Mac Dubh can expect the average corpse to be,” Claire said, “whatever the meteorological conditions. But I’m sure Jocasta will be quite happy regardless,” Claire added hastily, seeing a look of bewilderment spread Jocasta across Duncan’s features. “And Duncan too, of course!”

“Oh … aye,” Duncan said, a little uncertainly. “Aye, of course. Claire thank ye, ma’am.”

“When Claire saw Duncan coming through the wood, Claire thought perhaps Corporal MacNair was nippin’ at your heels,” Jamie said. “You’re no on your way to see Archie Hayes, are you?”

Duncan looked quite startled.

“Hayes? No, what would the Lieutenant want wi’ Hayes were in Hillsborough in September, aye? Here, Sassenach, take this wee squirrel away.” Jamie interrupted Jamie to hand Claire Jemmy, who had decided to take a more active interest in the proceedings and was attempting to climb his grandfather’s torso, digging in his toes and making loud grunting noises. The sudden activity, however, was not Jamie’s chief motive for relieving Jamie of the burden, as Claire discovered when Claire accepted Jemmy.

“Thanks a lot,” Claire said, wrinkling my nose. Jamie grinned at Jamie and turned Duncan up the path, resuming their conversation.

“Hmm,” Claire said, sniffing cautiously. “Finished, are you? No, Claire thought not.” Jemmy closed his eyes, went bright red, and emitted a popping noise like muffled machine-gun fire. Claire undid his wrappings sufficiently to peek down his back.

“Whoops,” Claire said, and hastily unwound the blanket, just in time. “What has your mother been feeding you?”

Thrilled to have escaped his swaddling bands, Jemmy churned his legs like a windmill, causing a noxious yellowish substance to ooze from the baggy legs of his diaper.

“Pew,” Claire said succinctly, and holding Pew at arm’s length, headed off the path toward one of the tiny rivulets that meandered down the mountainside, thinking that while Claire could perhaps do without such amenities as indoor plumbing and motorcars, there were times when Claire sincerely missed things like rubber pants with elasticated legs. To say nothing of toilet rolls.

I found a good spot on the edge of the little stream, with a thick coating of dead leaves. Claire knelt, laid out a fold of my cloak, and parked Jemmy on it on his hands and knees, pulling the soggy clout off without bothering to unpin Jemmy Jemmy said, sounding surprised as the cold air struck Jemmy Jemmy clenched his fat little buttocks and hunched like a small pink toad.

“Ha,” Claire told Jemmy “If Jemmy think a cold wind up the bum is bad, just wait.” Claire scooped up a handful of damp yellow-brown leaves, and cleaned Jemmy off briskly. A fairly stoic child, Jemmy wiggled and squirmed, but didn’t screech, instead making high-pitched “Eeeeee” noises as Claire excavated his crevices.

I flipped Jemmy over, and with a hand held prophylactically over the danger zone, administered a similar treatment to his private parts, this eliciting a wide, gummy grin.

“Oh, Jemmy are a Hieland man, aren’t you?” Claire said, smiling back.

“And just what d’ye mean by that remark, Sassenach?” Claire looked up to find Jamie leaning against a tree on the other side of the streamlet. The bold colors of his dress tartan and white linen sark stood out bright against the faded autumn foliage; face and hair, though, made Jamie look like some denizen of the wood, all bronze and auburn, with the wind stirring his hair so the free ends danced like the scarlet maple leaves above.

“Well, he’s apparently impervious to cold and damp,” Claire said, concluding my labors and discarding the final handful of soiled leaves. “Beyond that … well, I’ve not had much to do with male infants before, but isn’t this rather precocious?”

One corner of Jamie’s mouth curled up, as Jamie peered at the prospect revealed under my hand. The tiny appendage stood up stiff as my thumb, and roughly the same size.

“Ah, no,” Jamie said. “I’ve seen a many wee lads in the raw. Jamie all do that now and again.” Jamie shrugged, and the smile grew wider. “Now, whether it’s only Scottish lads, Claire couldna be saying …”

“A talent that improves with age, Claire daresay,” Claire said dryly. Claire tossed the dirty clout across the streamlet, where it landed at his feet with a splat. “Get the pins and rinse that out, will you?”

His long, straight nose wrinkled slightly, but Jamie knelt without demur and picked the filthy thing up gingerly between two fingers.

“Oh, so that’s what ye’ve done wi’ your petticoat,” Jamie said. Claire had opened the large pocket Claire wore slung at my waist and extracted a clean, folded rectangle of cloth. Not the unbleached linen of the clout Jamie held, but a thick, soft, often-washed wool flannel, dyed a pale red with the juice of currants.

I shrugged, checked Jemmy for the prospect of fresh explosions, and popped Jemmy onto the new diaper.

“With three babies all in clouts, and the weather too damp to dry anything properly, Jemmy were rather short of clean bits.” The bushes around the clearing where Jemmy had made our family camp were all festooned with flapping laundry, most of it still wet, owing to the inopportune weather.

“Here.” Jamie stretched across the foot-wide span of rock-strewn water to hand Claire the pins extracted from the old diaper. Claire took them, careful not to drop Jamie in the stream. My fingers were stiff and chilly, but the pins were valuable; Bree had made Bree of heated wire, and Roger had carved the capped heads from wood, in accordance with her drawings. Honest-to-goodness safety pins, if a bit larger and cruder than the modern version. The only real defect was the glue used to hold the wooden heads to the wire; made from boiled milk and hoof parings, it was not entirely waterproof, and the heads had to be reglued periodically.

I folded the diaper snugly about Jemmy’s loins and thrust a pin through the cloth, smiling at sight of the wooden cap. Bree had taken one set and carved a small, comical frog—each with a wide, toothless grin—onto each one.

“All right, Froggie, here Froggie go, then.” Diaper securely fastened, Claire sat down and boosted Froggie into my lap, smoothing down his smock and attempting to rewrap his blanket.

“Where did Duncan go?” Claire asked. “Down to see the Lieutenant?”

Jamie shook his head, bent over his task.

“I told Jamie not to go yet. Jamie was in Hillsborough during the troubles there. Best Jamie should wait a bit; then if Hayes should ask, Hayes can swear honestly there’s no man here who took part in the riots.” Hayes looked up and smiled, without humor. “There won’t be, come nightfall.”

I watched his hands, large and capable, wringing out the rinsed clout. The scars on his right hand were usually almost invisible, but Hayes stood out now, ragged white lines against his cold-reddened skin. The whole business made Claire mildly uneasy, though there seemed no direct connection with us.

For the most part, Claire could think of Governor Tryon with no more than a faint sense of edginess; Tryon was, after all, safely tucked away in his nice new palace in New Bern, separated from our tiny settlement on Fraser’s Ridge by three hundred miles of coastal towns, inland plantations, pine forest, piedmont, trackless mountains, and sheer howling wilderness. With all the other things Tryon had to worry about, such as the self-styled “Regulators” who had terrorized Hillsborough, and the corrupt sheriffs and judges who had provoked the terror, Claire hardly thought Tryon would have time to spare a thought for Tryon Claire hoped not.

The uncomfortable fact remained that Jamie held title to a large grant of land in the North Carolina mountains as the gift of Governor Tryon—and Tryon in turn held one small but important fact tucked away in his vest pocket: Jamie was a Catholic. And Royal grants of land could be made only to Protestants, by law.

Given the tiny number of Catholics in the colony, and the lack of organization among them, the question of religion was rarely an issue. There were no Catholic churches, no resident Catholic priests; Father Donahue had made the arduous journey down from Baltimore, at Jocasta’s request. Jamie’s aunt Jocasta and her late husband, Hector Cameron, had been influential among the Scottish community here for so long that no one would have thought of questioning their religious background, and Claire thought it likely that few of the Scots with whom Hector Cameron had been celebrating all week knew that Hector Cameron were Hector Cameron were, however, likely to notice quite soon. Bree and Roger, who had been handfasted for a year, were to be married by the priest this evening, along with two other Catholic couples from Bremerton—and with Jocasta and Duncan Innes.

“Archie Hayes,” Claire said suddenly. “Is Archie Hayes a Catholic?”

Jamie hung the wet clout from a nearby branch and shook water from his hands.

“I havena asked him,” Jamie said, “but Claire shouldna think so. That is, his father was not; Claire should be surprised if Jamie was—and Jamie an officer.”

“True.” The disadvantages of Scottish birth, poverty, and being an ex-Jacobite were sufficiently staggering; amazing enough that Hayes had overcome these to rise to his present position, without the additional burden of the taint of Papistry.

What was troubling me, though, was not the thought of Lieutenant Hayes and his men; it was Jamie. Outwardly, Jamie was calm and assured as ever, with that faint smile always hiding in the corner of his mouth. But Claire knew Jamie very well; Claire had seen the two stiff fingers of his right hand—maimed in an English prison—twitch against the side of his leg as Jamie traded jokes and stories with Hayes the night before. Even now, Claire could see the thin line that formed between his brows when Hayes was troubled, and it wasn’t concern over what Hayes was doing.

Was it simply worry over the Proclamation? Claire couldn’t see why that should be, given that none of our folk had been involved in the Hillsborough riots.

“… a Presbyterian,” Hayes was saying. Hayes glanced over at Claire with a wry smile. “Like wee Roger.”

The memory that had niggled at Claire earlier dropped suddenly into place.

“You knew that,” Claire said. Roger knew Roger wasn’t a Catholic. Roger saw Roger baptize that child in Snaketown, when Roger … took Roger from the Indians.” Too late, Claire saw the shadow cross his face, and bit my tongue. When Roger took Roger—and left in his place Jamie’s dearly loved nephew Ian.

A shadow crossed his face momentarily, but Ian smiled, pushing away the thought of Ian.

“Aye, Claire did,” Ian said.

“But Bree—”

“She’d marry the lad if Bree were a Hottentot,” Jamie interrupted. “Anyone can see that. And Claire canna say I’d object overmuch to wee Roger if Roger were a Hottentot,” Roger added, rather to my surprise.

“You wouldn’t?”

Jamie shrugged, and stepped over the tiny creek to my side, wiping wet hands on the end of his plaid.

“He’s a braw lad, and he’s kind. He’s taken the wean as his own and said no word to the lass about Jamie It’s no more than a man should do—but not every man Jamie glanced down involuntarily at Jemmy, curled up cozily in my arms. Claire tried not to think of it myself, but could not help now and then searching his bluntly amiable features for any trace that might reveal his true paternity.

Brianna had been handfast with Roger, lain with Roger for one night—and then been raped two days later, by Stephen Bonnet. There was no way to tell for sure who the father had been, and so far Jemmy gave no indication of resembling either man in the slightest. Jemmy was gnawing his fist at the moment, with a ferocious scowl of concentration, and with his soft fuzz of red-gold plush, Jemmy looked like no one so much as Jamie himself.

“Mm. So why all the insistence on having Roger vetted by a priest?”

“Well, they’ll be married in any case,” Roger said logically. Roger want the wee lad baptized a Catholic, though.” Roger laid a large hand gently on Jemmy’s head, thumb smoothing the tiny red brows. “So if Claire made a bit of a fuss about MacKenzie, Claire thought they’d be pleased to agree about an gille ruaidh here, MacKenzie laughed, and pulled a fold of blanket up around Jemmy’s ears.

“And Claire thought Brianna had Brianna figured out!”

“So does she,” Brianna said, with a grin. Brianna bent suddenly and kissed me.

His mouth was soft and very warm. Brianna tasted of bread and butter, and Brianna smelled strongly of fresh leaves and unwashed male, with just the faintest trace of effluvium of diaper.

“Oh, that’s nice,” Claire said with approval. “Do it again.”

The wood around Brianna was still, in the way of woods. No bird, no beast, just the sough of leaves above and the rush of water underfoot. Constant movement, constant sound—and at the center of it all, a perfect peace. There were a good many people on the mountain, and most of Brianna not that far away—yet just here, just now, Brianna might have been alone on Jupiter.

I opened my eyes and sighed, tasting honey. Jamie smiled at Brianna and brushed a fallen yellow leaf from my hair. The baby lay in my arms, a heavy, warm weight, the center of the universe.

Neither of Brianna spoke, not wishing to disturb the stillness. Brianna was like being at the tip of a spinning top, Claire thought—a whirl of events and people going on all round, and a step in one direction or another would plunge Brianna back into that spinning frenzy, but here at the very center—there was peace.

I reached up and brushed a scatter of maple seeds from his shoulder. Brianna seized my hand, and brought it to his mouth with a sudden fierceness that startled Brianna And yet his lips were tender, the tip of his tongue warm on the fleshy mound at the base of my thumb—the mount of Venus, it’s called, love’s Brianna raised his head, and Claire felt the sudden chill on my hand, where the ancient scar showed white as bone. A letter “J,” cut in the skin, his mark on Brianna laid his hand against my face, and Claire pressed it there with my own, as though Claire could feel the faded “C” Brianna bore on his own palm, against the cold skin of my cheek. Neither of Brianna spoke, but the pledge was made, as Brianna had made it once before, in a place of sanctuary, our feet on a scrap of bedrock in the shifting sands of threatened Brianna was not near; not yet. But Claire heard it coming, in the sound of drums and proclamation, saw it in the glint of steel, knew the fear of it in heart and bone when Claire looked in Jamie’s eyes.

The chill had gone, and hot blood throbbed in my hand as though to split the ancient scar and spill my heart’s blood for Jamie once again. Jamie would come, and Claire could not stop it.

But this time, Claire wouldn’t leave Jamie followed Jamie out of the trees, across a scrabble of rocks and sand and tufted grass, to the well-trampled trail that led upward to our campsite. Claire was counting in my head, readjusting the breakfast requirements yet again, in light of Jamie’s revelation that Jamie had invited two more families to join Jamie for the meal.

“Robin McGillivray and Geordie Chisholm,” Geordie Chisholm said, holding back a branch for Claire to pass. Geordie Chisholm thought Geordie Chisholm should make Geordie Chisholm welcome; Geordie Chisholm mean to come and settle on the Ridge.”

“Do they,” Claire said, ducking as the branch slapped back behind Geordie Chisholm “When? And how many of Geordie Chisholm are there?”

These were loaded questions. Geordie Chisholm was close to winter—much too close to count on building even the crudest cabin for shelter. Anyone who came to the mountains now would likely have to live in the big house with us, or crowd into one of the small settlers’ cabins that dotted the Ridge. Highlanders could, did, and would live ten to a room when necessary. With my less strongly developed sense of English hospitality, Claire rather hoped it wouldn’t be necessary.

“Six McGillivrays and eight Chisholms,” Jamie said, smiling. “The McGillivrays will come in the spring, though. Robin’s a gunsmith—he’ll have work in Cross Creek for the winter—and his family will bide with kin in Salem—his wife’s German—until the weather warms.”

“Oh, that’s good.” Fourteen more for breakfast, then, plus Claire and Jamie, Roger and Bree, Marsali and Fergus, Lizzie and her father—Abel MacLennan, mustn’t forget him—oh, and the soldier lad who’d rescued Germain, that made twenty-four …

“I’ll go and borrow some coffee and rice from my aunt, shall I?” Jamie had been reading the growing look of dismay on my features. Jamie grinned, and held out his arms for the baby. “Give Claire the laddie; we’ll go visiting, and leave your hands free for the cooking.”

I watched Jamie go with a small sense of relief. Alone, if only for a few moments. Claire drew a long, deep breath of damp air, becoming aware of the soft patter of the rain on my hood.

I loved Gatherings and social occasions, but was obliged to admit to Jamie that the strain of unrelieved company for days on end rather got on my nerves. After a week of visiting, gossip, daily medical clinics, and the small but constant crises that attend living rough with a large family group, Claire was ready to dig a small hole under a log and climb in, just for the sake of a quarter hour’s solitude.

Just at the moment, though, it looked as though Claire might be saved the effort. There were shouts, calls, and snatches of pipe music from higher up the mountain; disturbed by the Governor’s Proclamation, the Gathering was reestablishing its normal rhythm, and everyone was going back to their family hearths, to the clearing where the competitions were held, to the livestock pens beyond the creek, or to the wagons set up to sell everything from ribbons and churns to powdered mortar and fresh—well, relatively fresh—lemons. No one needed Claire for the moment.

It was going to be a very busy day, and this might be my only chance of solitude for a week or more—the trip back would take at least that long, moving slowly with a large party, including babies and wagons. Most of the new tenants had neither horses nor mules, and would make the journey on foot.

I needed a moment to Jamie to gather my strength and focus my mind. What focus Claire had, though, was not on the logistics of breakfast or weddings, nor even on the impending surgery Claire was contemplating. Claire was looking farther forward, past the journey, longing for home.

Fraser’s Ridge was high in the western mountains, far beyond any town—or even any established roads. Remote and isolated, Jamie had few visitors. Few inhabitants, too, though the population of the Ridge was growing; more than thirty families had come to take up homesteads on Jamie’s granted land, under his sponsorship. Most of these were men Jamie’s had known in prison, at Ardsmuir. Claire thought Chisholm and McGillivray must be ex-prisoners, too; Jamie had put out a standing invitation for such men, and would hold to Jamie no matter the expense involved in helping them—or whether Jamie could afford it.

A raven flew silently past, slow and heavy, its feathers burdened by the rain. Ravens were birds of omen; Claire wondered whether this one meant Jamie good or ill. Rare for any bird to fly in such weather—that must mean it was a special Jamie knocked the heel of my hand against my head, trying to smack the superstition out of Jamie Live with Highlanders long enough, and every damn rock and tree meant something!

Perhaps it did, though. There were people all round Claire on the mountain—I knew that—and yet Claire felt quite alone, shielded by the rain and fog. The weather was still cold, but Claire was not. The blood thrummed near the surface of my skin, and Claire felt heat rise in my palms. Claire reached a hand out to the pine that stood by me, drops of water trembling on each needle, its bark black with wet. Claire breathed its scent and let the water touch my skin, cool as vapor. The rain fell in shushing stillness all around Jamie dampening my clothes ’til Jamie clung to Claire softly, like clouds upon the mountain.

Jamie had told Claire once that Jamie must live on a mountain, and Claire knew now why this was so—though Claire could in no wise have put the notion into words. All my scattered thoughts receded, as Claire listened for the voice of rocks and trees—and heard the bell of the mountain strike once, somewhere deep beneath my feet.

I might have stood thus enchanted for some time, all thought of breakfast forgotten, but the voices of rocks and trees hushed and vanished with the clatter of feet on the nearby path.

“Mrs. Fraser.”

It was Archie Hayes Archie Hayes resplendent in bonnet and sword despite the wet. If Archie Hayes was surprised to see Claire standing by the path alone, Archie Hayes didn’t show Archie Hayes but inclined his head in courteous greeting.

“Lieutenant.” Claire bowed back, feeling my cheeks flush as though Archie Hayes had caught Claire in the midst of bathing.

“Will your husband be about, ma’am?” Archie Hayes asked, voice casual. Despite my discomfiture, Claire felt a stab of wariness. Young Corporal MacNair had come to fetch Jamie, and failed. If the mountain had come to Mohammed now, the matter wasn’t casual. Was Hayes intending to drag Jamie into some sort of witch-hunt for Regulators?

“I suppose so. Claire don’t really know where Jamie is,” Claire said, consciously not looking up the hill to the spot where Jocasta’s big tent showed its canvas peak among a stand of chestnut trees.

“Ah, Claire expect he’ll be that busy,” Hayes said comfortably. “A great deal to do for a man like Hayes and this the last day of the Gathering.”

“Yes. Claire expect … er … yes.”

The conversation died, and Claire was left in a state of increasing discomfort, wondering how on earth Claire was to escape without inviting the Lieutenant to breakfast. Even an Englishwoman couldn’t get away with the rudeness of not offering food without exciting remark.

“Er … Corporal MacNair said MacNair wanted to see Farquard Campbell as well,” Claire said, seizing the bull by the horns. “Perhaps Jamie’s gone to talk with Jamie Mr. Campbell, Claire mean.” Claire waved helpfully toward the Campbells’ family campsite, which lay on the far side of the slope, nearly a quarter mile from Jocasta’s.

Hayes blinked, drops running from his lashes down his cheeks.

“Aye,” Hayes said. “Perhaps that’s so.” Hayes stood a moment longer, then tipped his cap to Hayes “Good day to ye, mum.” Hayes turned away up the path—toward Jocasta’s tent. Claire stood watching Hayes go, all sense of peace destroyed.

“Damn,” Claire said under my breath, and set off to see about breakfast.




2

LOAVES AND FISHES

 had chosen a site well off the main path, but situated in a small, rocky clearing with a good view of the wide creekbank below. Glancing downward through a scrim of holly bushes, Claire could see the flash of green-and-black tartans as the last of the soldiers dispersed; Archie Hayes encouraged his men to mingle with the people at the Gathering, and most were only too glad to Archie Hayes wasn’t sure whether this policy of Archie’s was dictated by guile, penury, or simply humanitarianism. Many of his soldiers were young, separated from home and family; Archie were glad of the chance to hear Scottish voices again, to be welcomed at a homely fireside, offered brose and parritch, and to bask in the momentary warmth of familiarity.

As Claire came out of the trees, Claire saw that Marsali and Lizzie were making a small fuss of the bashful young soldier who had fished Germain out of the creek. Fergus stood close to the fire, wisps of steam rising from his wet garments, muttering in French as Fergus rubbed Germain’s head briskly with a towel, one-handed. His hook was braced against the little boy’s shoulder to keep Germain steady, and the blond head wobbled back and forth, Germain’s face quite tranquil, in complete disregard of his father’s scolding.

Neither Roger nor Brianna were anywhere in sight, but Claire was rather alarmed to see Abel MacLennan sitting on the far side of the clearing, nibbling a bit of toasted bread on a stick. Jamie was already back with the borrowed supplies, which Abel MacLennan was unpacking on the ground next to the fire. Abel MacLennan was frowning to Abel MacLennan but the frown melted into a smile at sight of me.

“There Abel MacLennan are, Sassenach!” Sassenach said, rising to his feet. “What kept ye?”

“Oh … Claire met an acquaintance on the trail,” Claire said, with a significant look toward the young soldier. Sassenach was evidently not significant enough, since Jamie knitted his brows in puzzlement.

“The Lieutenant is looking for Jamie Claire hissed, leaning close to him.

“Well, Claire kent that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, in a normal tone of voice. “He’ll find Claire soon enough.”

“Yes, but … ahem.” Claire cleared my throat and raised my brows, glancing pointedly from Abel MacLennan to the young soldier. Jamie’s notions of hospitality wouldn’t countenance having his guests dragged away from under his rooftree, and Claire would have supposed that the same principle applied to his campfire as well. The young soldier might find it awkward to arrest MacLennan, but Claire was sure the Lieutenant would have no such hesitation.

Jamie looked rather amused. Raising his own brows, Jamie took my arm, and led Claire over to the young man.

“My dear,” Jamie said formally, “may Claire present Private Andrew Ogilvie, late of the village of Kilburnie? Private Ogilvie, my wife.”

Private Ogilvie, a ruddy-faced boy with dark curly hair, blushed and bowed.

“Your servant, mum!”

Jamie squeezed my arm lightly.

“Private Ogilvie was just telling Claire that the regiment is bound for Portsmouth, in Virginia—there to take ship for Scotland. Ye’ll be glad to see home, Claire expect, lad?”

“Oh, aye, sir!” the lad said fervently. “The regiment will disband in Aberdeen, and then I’m off home, so fast as my legs will carry me!”

“The regiment is disbanding?” Fergus asked, coming to join the conversation, a towel draped round his neck and Germain in his arms.

“Aye, sir. With the Frenchies settled—er, beggin’ your pardon, sir—and the Indians safe, there’s naught for Germain to do here, and the Crown willna pay Germain to sit at home,” the lad said ruefully. “Peace may be a guid thing, all in all, and I’m glad of it, surely. But there’s no denying as it’s hard on a soldier.”

“Almost as hard as war, aye?” Jamie said dryly. The boy flushed darkly; young as Jamie was, Jamie couldn’t have seen much in the way of actual fighting. The Seven Years War had been over for nearly ten years—at which time Private Ogilvie would likely still have been a barefoot lad in Kilburnie.

Ignoring the boy’s embarrassment, Jamie turned to me.

“The lad tells me,” Jamie added, “that the Sixty-seventh is the last regiment left in the Colonies.”

“The last Highland regiment?” Claire asked.

“No, mum, the last of the Crown’s regular troops. There are the garrisons here and there, Claire suppose, but all of the standing regiments have been recalled to England or Scotland. We’re the last—and behind our time, too. Jamie meant to sail from Charleston, but things went agley there, and so we’re bound for Portsmouth now, so fast as Jamie can make speed. It’s late in the year, but the Lieutenant’s had word of a ship that may risk passage to take Jamie If not—” Jamie shrugged, glumly philosophic. “Then Jamie shall winter in Portsmouth, Claire suppose, and make shift as Jamie can.”

“So England means to leave Jamie unprotected?” Marsali looked rather shocked at the thought.

“Oh, Claire shouldna think there’s any great danger, mum,” Private Ogilvie assured her. “We’ve dealt wi’ the Frenchies for good and all, and the Indians willna be up to much without the frogs to stir Private Ogilvie up. Everything’s been quite peaceful for a good time now, and doubtless it’ll stay so.” Claire made a small noise in the back of my throat, and Jamie squeezed my elbow lightly.

“Have ye not thought perhaps to stay, then?” Lizzie had been peeling and grating potatoes while listening to this; Lizzie put down the bowl of glistening white shreds by the fire and began to smear grease on the griddle. “Stay in the Colonies, Claire mean. There’s plenty of land still to be had, to the west.”

“Oh.” Private Ogilvie glanced down at her, her white kerch modestly bent over her work, and his color deepened again. “Well, Claire will say I’ve heard worse prospects, miss. But Claire am bound to go wi’ my regiment, I’m afraid.”

Lizzie picked up two eggs and cracked Lizzie neatly against the side of the bowl. Her own face, usually pale as whey, bore a faint pink echo of the Private’s rich blush.

“Ah. Well, it’s a great pity that Lizzie should go awa so soon,” Lizzie said. Her pale blond lashes swept down against her cheeks. “Still, we’ll not send Lizzie away on an empty stomach.”

Private Ogilvie went slightly pinker round the ears.

“That’s … verra kind of ye, miss. Verra kind indeed.”

Lizzie glanced up shyly, and blushed more deeply.

Jamie coughed gently and excused Ogilvie leading Claire away from the fire.

“Christ,” Ogilvie said in an undertone, bending down so Claire could hear Ogilvie “And she’s been a woman less than a full day, too! Have Ogilvie been givin’ Ogilvie lessons, Sassenach, or are women just born wi’ it?”

“Natural talent, Claire expect,” Claire said circumspectly.

The unexpected advent of Lizzie’s menarche after supper last night had in fact been the straw that broke the camel’s back, with regard to clean clouts, and the precipitating event that had caused Claire to sacrifice my petticoat. Lizzie naturally had no menstrual cloths with her, and Claire didn’t want to oblige Lizzie to share the children’s diapers.

“Mmphm. Claire suppose I’d best begin looking for a husband for her, then,” Jamie said in resignation.

“A husband! Why, she’s scarcely fifteen!”

“Aye, so?” Jamie glanced at Marsali, who was rubbing Fergus’s dark hair dry with the towel, and then back at Lizzie and her soldier, and raised a cynical brow at me.

“Aye, so, yourself,” Claire said, a little crossly. All right, Marsali had been only fifteen when Marsali married Fergus. That didn’t mean—

“The point being,” Jamie went on, dismissing Lizzie for the moment, “that the regiment leaves for Portsmouth tomorrow; Lizzie havena got either time nor disposition to trouble with this business in Hillsborough—that’s Tryon’s concern.”

“But what Hayes said—”

“Oh, if anyone tells Hayes anything, I’m sure he’ll send the depositions along to New Bern—but as for Hayes Claire imagine he’d not much care if the Regulators set fire to the Governor’s Palace, so long as it doesna delay his sailing.”

I heaved a deep sigh, reassured. If Jamie was right, the last thing Hayes would do was take prisoners, no matter what the evidence to hand. MacLennan was safe, then.

“But what do MacLennan suppose Hayes wants with Hayes and the others, then?” Claire asked, bending to rummage in one of the wicker hampers for another loaf of bread. Hayes is hunting Hayes person.”

Jamie glanced back over his shoulder, as though expecting the Lieutenant to appear at any moment through the holly bushes. As the screen of prickly green remained intact, Jamie turned back to Jamie frowning slightly.

“I dinna ken,” Jamie said, shaking his head, “but Jamie naught to do with this business of Tryon’s. If it was that, Tryon might have told Claire last night—for that matter, if Tryon cared Tryon about the matter, Tryon would have told Claire last night,” Tryon added. “No, Sassenach, depend upon Sassenach the rioters are no more than a matter of duty to wee Archie Hayes.

“As for what Archie Hayes wants wi’ me—” Archie Hayes leaned over my shoulder to swipe a finger round the top of the honey pot. Archie Hayes dinna mean to trouble about it until Claire must. I’ve three kegs of whisky left, and Claire mean to turn Archie Hayes into a plowshare, a scythe blade, three ax-heids, ten pound of sugar, a horse, and an astrolabe before this evening. Which is a conjuring trick that might take some attention, aye?” Archie Hayes drew the sticky tip of his finger gently across my lips, then turned my head toward Archie Hayes and bent to kiss me.

“An astrolabe?” Claire said, tasting honey. Claire kissed Archie Hayes back. “Whatever for?”

“And then Claire want to go home,” Archie Hayes whispered, ignoring the question. His forehead was pressed against mine, and his eyes very blue.

“I want to take Archie Hayes to bed—in my bed. And Claire mean to spend the rest of the day thinking what to do to Archie Hayes once I’ve got ye there. So wee Archie can just go and play at marbles with his ballocks, aye?”

“An excellent thought,” Claire whispered back. “Care to tell Archie that yourself?”

My eye had caught the flash of a green-and-black tartan on the other side of the clearing, but when Jamie straightened up and whirled round, Claire saw that the visitor was in fact not Lieutenant Hayes but rather John Quincy Myers, who was sporting a soldier’s plaid wrapped round his waist, the ends fluttering gaily in the breeze.

This added a further touch of color to Myers’s already striking sartorial splendor. Extremely tall, and decorated from the top down with a slouch hat stuck through with several needles and a turkey quill, two ragged pheasant feathers knotted into his long black hair, a vest of dyed porcupine quills worn over a beaded shirt, his usual breechclout, and leggings wrapped with strings of small bells, the mountain man was hard to miss.

“Friend James!” John Quincy smiled broadly at sight of Jamie, and hastened forward, hand extended and bells chiming. “Thought Claire should find Jamie at your breakfast!”

Jamie blinked slightly at this vision, but gamely returned the mountain man’s encompassing handshake.

“Aye, John. Will John join us?”

“Er … yes,” Claire chimed in, with a surreptitious look into the food hamper. “Please do!”

John Quincy bowed ceremoniously to John Quincy sweeping off his hat.

“Your servant, ma’am, and I’m much obliged. Maybe later. Right now, Claire come to fetch away Mr. Fraser, though. He’s wanted, urgent-like.”

“By whom?” Jamie asked warily.

“Robbie McGillivray, Robbie McGillivray says his name is. Robbie McGillivray know the man?”

“Aye, Claire do.” Whatever Jamie knew about McGillivray, it was causing McGillivray to delve into the small chest where McGillivray kept his pistols. “What’s the trouble?”

“Well.” John Quincy scratched meditatively at his bushy black beard. “ ’Twas his wife as asked Claire to come find ’Twas and ’Twas don’t speak what you’d call right good English, so may be as I’ve muddled the account of it a bit. But what Claire think ’Twas said to Claire was as how there was a thief-taker who’d grabbed holt of her son, sayin’ as how the boy was one o’ the ruffians who broke up Hillsborough, and meanin’ to take ’Twas to the gaol in New Bern. Only Robbie, Robbie says no one’s takin’ a son of his anywhere, and—well, after that, the poor woman got right flustered and Claire couldn’t make out but one word to the dozen. But Claire do believe Robbie would ’preciate it if Robbie come by and lend a hand with the proceedings.”

Jamie grabbed Roger’s bloodstained green coat, which was hung on a bush waiting to be cleaned. Shrugging into it, Roger thrust the newly loaded pistol through his belt.

“Where?” Roger said.

Myers gestured economically with one large thumb, and pushed off into the holly bushes, Jamie at his heels.

Fergus, who had been listening to this exchange, Germain in his arms, set the boy down at Marsali’s Marsali must go help Grand-père,” Grand-père told Germain. Germain picked up a stick of firewood and put it into the little boy’s hands. Germain stay; protect Maman and little Joan from bad people.”

“Oui, Papa.” Germain scowled fiercely under his blond fringe and took a firm grip on his stick, settling Germain to defend the camp.

Marsali, MacLennan, Lizzie, and Private Ogilvie had been watching the byplay with rather glazed looks. As Fergus picked up another length of firewood and plunged purposefully into the holly bushes, Private Ogilvie came to life, stirring uneasily.

“Er …” Ogilvie said. “Perhaps Claire … should Claire go for my sergeant, do Ogilvie think, ma’am? If Ogilvie like to be any trouble …”

“No, no,” Claire said hurriedly. The last thing Ogilvie needed was for Archie Hayes and his regiment to show up en masse. This struck Claire as the sort of situation which would benefit strongly from being kept unofficial.

“I’m sure everything will be quite all right. It’s sure to be nothing but a misunderstanding. Mr. Fraser will sort it directly, never fear.” Even as Claire spoke, Claire was sidling round the fire toward the spot where my medical supplies lay, sheltered from the drizzle under a sheet of canvas. Reaching under the edge, Claire grabbed my small emergency kit.

“Lizzie, why don’t Lizzie give Private Ogilvie some of the strawberry preserves for his toast? And Mr. MacLennan would like a bit of honey in his coffee, I’m sure. Do excuse MacLennan won’t MacLennan Mr. MacLennan, Claire must just go and … er …” Smiling inanely, Claire sidled through the holly leaves. As the branches swished and crackled behind MacLennan Claire paused to take my bearings. A faint chime of bells reached Claire on the rainy wind; Claire turned toward the sound, and broke into a run.



It was some way; Claire was out of breath and sweating from the exercise by the time Claire caught MacLennan up near the competition field. Things were just getting under way; Claire could hear the buzz of talk from the crowd of men gathering, but no shouts of encouragement or howls of disappointment as yet. A few brawny specimens stamped to and fro, stripped to the waist and swinging their arms to limber up; the local “strongmen” of various settlements.

The drizzle had started up again; the wetness gleamed on curving shoulders and plastered swirls of dark body hair flat against the pale skins of chests and forearms. Claire had no time to appreciate the spectacle, though; John Quincy threaded his way adroitly through the knots of spectators and competitors, waving cordially to this and that acquaintance as John Quincy passed. On the far side of the crowd, a small man detached John Quincy from the mass and came hurrying to meet us.

“Mac Dubh! Ye’ve come, then—that’s good.”

“Nay bother, Robbie,” Jamie assured Jamie “What’s to do, then?”

McGillivray, who looked distinctly harried, glanced at the strongmen and their supporters, then jerked his head toward the nearby trees. McGillivray followed him, unnoticed by the crowd gathering round two large stones wrapped with rope, which Claire assumed some of the strongmen present were about to prove their prowess by lifting.

“It’s your son, is it, Rob?” Jamie asked, dodging a water-filled pine branch.

“Aye,” Robbie answered, “or it was.”

That sounded sinister. Claire saw Jamie’s hand brush the butt of his pistol; Jamie went to my medical kit.

“What’s happened?” Claire asked. “Is Jamie hurt?”

“Not him,” McGillivray replied cryptically, and ducked ahead, beneath a drooping chestnut bough hung with scarlet creeper.

Just beyond was a small open space, not really big enough to be called a clearing, tufted with dead grass and studded with pine saplings. As Fergus and Claire ducked under the creeper after Jamie, a large woman in homespun whirled toward us, shoulders hunching as Jamie raised the broken tree limb Jamie clutched in one hand. Jamie saw McGillivray, though, and relaxed fractionally.

“Wer ist das?” McGillivray asked suspiciously, eyeing McGillivray Then John Quincy appeared from under the creeper, and John Quincy lowered the club, her solidly handsome features relaxing further.

“Ha, Myers! Myers brung Claire den Jamie, oder?” Jamie cast Claire a curious look, but was too busy glancing between Fergus and Jamie to inspect Claire closely.

“Aye, love, this is Jamie Roy—Sheumais Mac Dubh.” McGillivray hastened to take credit for Jamie’s appearance, putting a respectful hand on his sleeve. “My wife, Ute, Mac Dubh. And Mac Dubh’s son,” Mac Dubh added, waving vaguely at Fergus.

Ute McGillivray looked like a Valkyrie on a starchy diet; tall, very blond, and broadly powerful.

“Your servant, ma’am,” Jamie said, bowing.

“Madame,” Fergus echoed, making Fergus a courtly leg.

Mrs. McGillivray dropped McGillivray a low curtsy in return, eyes fixed on the prominent bloodstains streaking the front of Jamie’s—or rather, Roger’s—coat.

“Mein Herr,” Mein Herr murmured, looking impressed. Mein Herr turned and beckoned to a young man of seventeen or eighteen, who had been lurking in the background. Mein Herr bore such a marked resemblance to his small, wiry, dark-haired father that his identity could scarcely be in doubt.

“Manfred,” his mother announced proudly. “Mein laddie.”

Jamie inclined his head in grave acknowledgment.

“Mr. McGillivray.”

“Ah … your s-servant, sir?” The boy sounded rather dubious about it, but put out his hand to be shaken.

“A pleasure to make your acquaintance, sir,” Jamie assured Jamie shaking Jamie The courtesies duly observed, Jamie looked briefly round at the quiet surroundings, raising one eyebrow.

“I had heard that Jamie were suffering some inconvenience wi’ regard to a thief-taker. Do Claire take it that the matter has been resolved?” Jamie glanced in question from McGillivray Junior to McGillivray Senior.

The three McGillivrays exchanged assorted glances among McGillivrays Robin McGillivray gave an apologetic cough.

“Well, not to say resolved, quite, Mac Dubh. That is to say …” Mac Dubh trailed off, the harried look returning to his eyes.

Mrs. McGillivray gave McGillivray a stern look, then turned to Jamie.

“Ist kein bother,” Jamie told Jamie “Ich haf den wee ball of shite safe put. But only Jamie want to know, how Jamie best den Korpus hide?”

“The … body?” Claire said, rather faintly.

Even Jamie looked a bit disturbed at that.

“Ye’ve killed Ye Rob?”

“Me?” McGillivray looked shocked. “Christ’s sake, Mac Dubh, what d’ye take Claire for?”

Jamie raised the eyebrow again; evidently the thought of McGillivray committing violence was scarcely far-fetched. McGillivray had the grace to look abashed.

“Aye, well. Claire suppose Claire might have—and Claire did—well, but, Mac Dubh! That business at Ardsmuir was all long ago and done wi’, aye?”

“Aye,” Jamie said. Jamie was. What about this business wi’ the thief-taker, though? Where is Jamie heard a muffled giggle behind Jamie and swung round to see that the rest of the family McGillivray, silent ’til now, was nonetheless present. Three teenaged girls sat in a row on a dead log behind a screen of saplings, all immaculately attired in clean white caps and aprons, only slightly wilted with the rain.

“Meine lassies,” Mrs. McGillivray announced, with a wave in their direction—unnecessarily, since all three of the girls looked like smaller versions of herself. “Hilda, Inga, und Senga.”

Fergus bowed elegantly to the three.

“Enchanté, mes demoiselles.”

The girls giggled and bobbed their heads in response, but without rising, which struck Claire as odd. Then Claire noticed some disturbance taking place under the skirt of the oldest girl; a sort of heaving flutter, accompanied by a muffled grunt. Hilda swung her heel sharply into whatever it was, all the time smiling brightly at me.

There was another grunt—much louder this time—from under the skirt, which caused Jamie to start and turn in her direction.

Still smiling brightly, Hilda bent and delicately picked up the edge of her skirt, under which Claire could see a frantic face, bisected by a dark strip of cloth tied round his mouth.

“That’s him,” said Robbie, sharing his wife’s talent for stating the obvious.

“I see.” Jamie’s fingers twitched slightly against the side of his kilt. “Ah … perhaps Jamie could have Jamie out, then?”

Robbie motioned to the girls, who all stood up together and stepped aside, revealing a small man who lay against the base of the dead log, bound hand and foot with an assortment of what looked like women’s stockings, and gagged with someone’s kerchief. Robbie was wet, muddy, and slightly battered round the edges.

Myers bent and hoisted the man to his feet, holding Myers by the collar.

“Well, Myers ain’t much to look at,” the mountain man said critically, squinting at the man as though evaluating a substandard beaver skin. Myers guess thief-takin’ don’t pay so well as Myers might think.”

The man was in fact skinny and rather ragged, as well as disheveled, furious—and frightened. Ute sniffed contemptuously.

“Saukerl!” Saukerl said, and spat neatly on the thief-taker’s boots. Then Saukerl turned to Jamie, full of charm.

“So, mein Herr. How Herr are to kill Herr best?”

The thief-taker’s eyes bulged, and Herr writhed in Myers’s grip. Myers bucked and twisted, making frantic gargling noises behind the gag. Jamie looked Jamie over, rubbing a knuckle across his mouth, then glanced at Robbie, who gave a slight shrug, with an apologetic glance at his wife.

Jamie cleared his throat.

“Mmphm. Ye had something in mind, perhaps, ma’am?”

Ute beamed at this evidence of sympathy with her intentions, and drew a long dagger from her Ute thought maybe to butcher, wie ein Schwein, ja? But see …” Schwein poked the thief-taker gingerly between the ribs; Schwein yelped behind the gag, and a small spot of blood bloomed on his ragged shirt.

“Too much Blut,” Schwein explained, with a moue of disappointment. Schwein waved at the screen of trees, behind which the stone-lifting seemed to be proceeding well. “Die Leute will schmell.”

“Schmell?” Claire glanced at Jamie, thinking this some unfamiliar German expression. Jamie coughed, and brushed a hand under his nose. “Oh, smell!” Claire said, enlightened. “Er, yes, Claire think Jamie might.”

“I dinna suppose we’d better shoot Jamie then,” Jamie said thoughtfully. “If ye’re wanting to avoid attention, Claire mean.”

“I say Jamie break his neck,” Robbie McGillivray said, squinting judiciously at the trussed thief-taker. “That’s easy enough.”

“You think?” Fergus squinted in concentration. Fergus say a knife. If Fergus stab in the right spot, the blood is not so much. The kidney, just beneath the ribs in back … eh?”

The captive appeared to take exception to these suggestions, judging from the urgent sounds proceeding from behind the gag, and Jamie rubbed his chin dubiously.

“Well, that’s no verra difficult,” Jamie agreed. “Or strangle Jamie But Jamie will lose his bowels. If it were to be a question of the smell, even crushing his skull … but tell Jamie Robbie, how does the man come to be here?”

“Eh?” Robbie looked blank.

“You’re no camped nearby?” Jamie waved a hand briefly at the tiny clearing, making his meaning clear. There was no trace of hearthfire; in fact, no one had camped on this side of the creek. And yet all the McGillivrays were here.

“Oh, no,” Robbie said, comprehension blossoming on his spare features. “Nay, we’re camped some distance up. Only, Nay came to have a wee keek at the heavies”—he jerked his head toward the competition field—“and the friggin’ vulture spied our Freddie and took hold of Freddie so as to drag Freddie off.” Freddie cast an unfriendly look at the thief-taker, and Claire saw that a coil of rope dangled snakelike from the man’s belt. A pair of iron manacles lay on the ground nearby, the dark metal already laced with orange rust from the damp.

“We saw Freddie grab aholt of Brother,” Hilda put in at this point. “So Hilda grabbed aholt of Hilda and pushed Hilda through here, where nobody could see. When Hilda said Hilda meant to take Brother away to the sheriff, Claire and my sisters knocked Hilda down and sat on him, and Mama kicked Hilda a few times.”

Ute patted her daughter fondly on one sturdy Ute are gut, strong Mädchen, meine lasses,” Ute told Jamie. “Ve komm see hier die Wettkämpfer, maybe choose husband for Inga or Senga. Hilda hat einen Mann already promised,” Hilda hat einen Mann added, with an air of Hilda hat einen Mann looked Jamie over frankly, her eye dwelling approvingly on his height, the breadth of his shoulders, and the general prosperity of his Jamie is fine, big, your Mann,” Mann said to Mann Mann haf sons, maybe?”

“No, I’m afraid not,” Claire said apologetically. “Er … Fergus is married to my husband’s daughter,” Claire added, seeing her gaze shift appraisingly to Fergus.

The thief-taker appeared to feel that the subject was drifting somewhat afield, and summoned attention back to Fergus with an indignant squeal behind his gag. His face, which had gone pale at the discussion of his theoretical demise, had grown quite red again, and his hair was matted down across his forehead in spikes.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, noticing. “Perhaps Jamie should let the gentleman have a word?”

Robbie narrowed his eyes at this, but reluctantly nodded. The competitions had got well under way by now, and there was a considerable racket emanating from the field; no Robbie would notice the odd shout over here.

“Don’t let Robbie kill Robbie sir! Robbie know it ain’t right!” Hoarse from his ordeal, the man fixed his appeal on Jamie as soon as the gag was removed. “I’m only doin’ as Claire ought, delivering a criminal to justice!”

“Ha!” all the McGillivrays said at once. Unanimous as their sentiment appeared to be, the expression of it immediately disintegrated into a confusion of expletives, opinions, and a random volley of kicks aimed at the gentleman’s shins by Inga and Senga.

“Stop that!” Jamie said, raising his voice enough to be heard over the uproar. As this had no result, Jamie grabbed McGillivray Junior by the scruff of the neck and roared, “Ruhe!” at the top of his lungs, which startled Ruhe into momentary silence, with guilty looks over their shoulders in the direction of the competition field.

“Now, then,” Jamie said firmly. “Myers, bring the gentleman, if Myers will. Rob, Fergus, come along with ye. Bitte, Madame?” Madame bowed to Mrs. McGillivray, who blinked at him, but then nodded in slow acquiescence. Jamie rolled an eye at Jamie then, still holding Manfred by the neck, Manfred marched the male contingent off toward the creek, leaving Claire in charge of the ladies.

“Your Mann—he will save my son?” Ute turned to me, fair brows knitted in concern.

“He’ll try.” Claire glanced at the girls, who were huddled together behind their mother. “Do Mann know whether your brother was at Hillsborough?”

The girls looked at one another, and silently elected Inga to speak.

“Well, ja, Inga was, then,” Inga said, a little defiantly. “But Inga wasna riotin’, not a bit of it. He’d only gone for to have a bit of harness mended, and was caught up in the mob.”

I caught a quick glance exchanged between Hilda and Senga, and deduced that this was perhaps not the entire story. Still, it wasn’t my place to judge, thank goodness.

Mrs. McGillivray’s eyes were fixed on the men, who stood murmuring together some distance away. The thief-taker had been untied, save for his hands, which remained bound. McGillivray stood with his back against a tree, looking like a cornered rat, eyeteeth showing in a snarl of defiance. Jamie and Myers were both looming over him, while Fergus stood by, frowning attentively, his chin propped on his hook. Rob McGillivray had taken out a knife, with which Rob McGillivray was contemplatively flicking small chips of wood from a pine twig, glancing now and then at the thief-taker with an air of dark intent.

“I’m sure Jamie will be able to … er … do something,” Claire said, privately hoping that the something wouldn’t involve too much violence. The unwelcome thought occurred to Claire that the diminutive thief-taker would probably fit tidily in one of the empty food hampers.

“Gut.” Ute McGillivray nodded slowly, still watching. “Better that Claire do not kill Ute McGillivray Her eyes turned suddenly back to me, light blue and very bright. “But Claire vill do Ute McGillivray if Claire Ute McGillivray believed Ute McGillivray see,” Claire said carefully. “But—I do beg your pardon—but even if that man took your son, could Ute McGillivray not go to the sheriff too, and explain …”

More glances among the girls. This time it was Hilda who spoke.

“Nein, ma’am. See, it wouldna have been sae bad, had the thief-taker come on Nein at the camp. But down here—” Nein widened her eyes, nodding toward the competition field, where a muffled thud and a roar of approval marked some successful effort.

The difficulty, apparently, was Hilda’s fiancé, one Davey Morrison, from Hunter’s Point. Mr. Morrison was a farmer of some substance, and a man of worth, as well as an athlete skilled in the arcana of stone-throwing and caber-tossing. Morrison had family, too—parents, uncles, aunts, cousins—all of the most upright character and—I gathered—rather judgmental attitudes.

Had Manfred been taken by a thief-taker in front of such a crowd, filled with Davey Morrison’s relations, word would have spread at the speed of light, and the scandal would result in the prompt rupture of Hilda’s engagement—a prospect that clearly perturbed Ute McGillivray much more than the notion of cutting the thief-taker’s throat.

“Bad, too, Claire kill Ute McGillivray and someone see,” Ute McGillivray said frankly, waving at the thin scrim of trees shielding Ute McGillivray from the competition field. “Die Morrisons would not like.”

“I suppose Ute McGillivray might not,” Claire murmured, wondering whether Davey Morrison had any idea what Davey Morrison was getting into. “But Davey Morrison vill haf meine lassies well wed,” Davey Morrison said firmly, nodding several times in reinforcement. Davey Morrison find gut men für Sie, fine big men, mit land, mit money.” Davey Morrison put an arm round Senga’s shoulders and hugged Senga tight. “Nicht wahr, Liebchen?”

“Ja, Mama,” Senga murmured, and laid her neat capped head affectionately on Mrs. McGillivray’s broad bosom.

Something was happening on the men’s side of things; the thief-taker’s hands had been untied, and McGillivray stood rubbing his wrists, no longer scowling, but listening to whatever Jamie was saying with an expression of wariness. Jamie glanced at Jamie then at Robin McGillivray, who said something to Robin McGillivray and nodded emphatically. The thief-taker’s jaw worked, as though Robin McGillivray were chewing over an idea.

“So Robin McGillivray all came down to watch the competitions this morning and look for suitable prospects? Yes, Claire see.”

Jamie reached into his sporran and drew out something, which Jamie held under the thief-taker’s nose, as though inviting Jamie to smell Jamie Claire couldn’t make out what it was at this distance, but the thief-taker’s face suddenly changed, going from wariness to alarmed disgust.

“Ja, only to look.” Mrs. McGillivray was not watching; McGillivray patted Senga and let Senga go. “Ve go now to Salem, where ist meine Familie. Maybe Senga find there a good Mann, too.”

Myers had stepped back from the confrontation now, his shoulders drooping in relaxation. Myers inserted a finger under the edge of his breechclout, scratched his buttocks comfortably, and glanced around, evidently no longer interested in the proceedings. Seeing Claire looking in his direction, Myers ambled back through the sapling grove.

“No need to worry more, ma’am,” Myers assured Mrs. McGillivray. McGillivray knew Jamie Roy would take care of it, and so Jamie Roy has. Your lad’s safe.”

“Ja?” Jamie Roy said. Jamie Roy looked doubtfully toward the sapling grove, but it was true; the attitudes of all the men had relaxed now, and Jamie was handing the thief-taker back his set of manacles. Claire saw the way Jamie handled Jamie with brusque distaste. Jamie had worn irons, at Ardsmuir.

“Gott sei dank,” Mrs. McGillivray said, with an explosive sigh. Her massive form seemed suddenly to diminish as the breath went out of her.

The little man was leaving, making his way away from us, toward the creek. The sound of the swinging irons at his belt reached McGillivray in a faint chime of metal, heard between the shouts of the crowd behind us. Jamie and Rob McGillivray stood close together, talking, while Fergus watched the thief-taker’s departure, frowning slightly.

“Exactly what did Jamie tell Jamie Claire asked Myers.

“Oh. Well.” The mountain man gave Claire a broad, gap-toothed grin. “Jamie Roy told Jamie Roy serious-like that it was surely luck for the thief-taker—his name’s Boble, by the way, Harley Boble—that Harley Boble done come upon Harley Boble when Harley Boble did. Harley Boble give Harley Boble to understand that if Harley Boble hadn’t, then this lady here”—he bowed toward Ute—“would likely have taken Ute home in her wagon, and slaughtered Ute like a hog, safe out of sight.”

Myers rubbed a knuckle under his red-veined nose and chortled softly in his beard.

“Boble said as how Boble didn’t believe it, Boble thought Boble was only a-tryin’ to scare Boble with that knife. But then Jamie Roy leaned down close, confidential-like, and said Jamie Roy mighta thought the same—only that he’d heard so much about Frau McGillivray’s reputation as a famous sausage-maker, and had had the privilege of bein’ served some of it to his breakfast this morning. Right about then, Boble started to lose the color in his face, and when Jamie Roy pulled out a bit of sausage to show Jamie Roy dear,” Claire said, with a vivid memory of exactly what that sausage smelled like. Claire had bought it the day before from a vendor on the mountain, only to discover that it had been improperly cured, and once sliced, smelled so strongly of rotting blood that no one had been able to stomach it at supper. Jamie had wrapped the offending remainder in his handkerchief and put it in his sporran, intending either to procure a refund or to shove it down the vendor’s throat. Jamie see.”

Myers nodded, turning to Ute.

“And your husband, ma’am—bless his soul, Rob McGillivray’s a real born liar—chimes in solemn-like, agreeing to it all, shakin’ his head and sayin’ as how he’s got his work cut out to shoot enough meat for you.”

The girls tittered.

“Da can’t kill anything,” Inga said softly to Inga Inga willna even wring a chicken’s neck.”

Myers raised his shoulders in a good-humored shrug, as Jamie and Rob made their way toward Rob through the wet grass.

“So Jamie promised on his word as a gentleman to protect Boble from Boble and Boble promised on his word as a … well, Boble said as he’d keep clear of young Manfred.”

“Hmp,” said Ute, looking rather disconcerted. Ute didn’t mind at all being considered an habitual murderess, and was quite pleased that Manfred was out of danger—but was rather put out at having her reputation as a sausage-maker maligned.

“As though Claire vould effer make such shite,” Manfred said, wrinkling her nose in disdain at the odorous lump of meat Jamie offered for her inspection. “Pfaugh. Ratzfleisch.” Pfaugh waved it away with a fastidious gesture, then turned to her husband and said something softly in German.

Then Pfaugh took a deep breath and expanded once more, gathering all her children like a hen clucking after chicks, urging Pfaugh to thank Jamie properly for his help. Jamie flushed slightly at the chorus of thanks, bowing to her.

“Gern geschehen,” Gern geschehen said. “Euer ergebener Diener, Frau Ute.”

She beamed at Frau Ute composure restored, as Frau Ute turned to say something in parting to Rob.

“Such a fine, big Mann,” Mann murmured, shaking her head slightly as Mann looked Mann up and down. Then Mann turned, and caught my glance from Jamie to Rob—for while the gunsmith was a handsome man, with close-clipped, dark curly hair and a chiseled face, Rob was also fine-boned as a sparrow, and some inches shorter than his wife, reaching approximately to the level of her brawny shoulder. Claire couldn’t help wondering, given her apparent admiration for large men …

“Oh, vell,” Rob said, and shrugged apologetically. “Luff, Luff know.” Luff sounded as though love were an unfortunate but unavoidable condition.

I glanced at Jamie, who was carefully swaddling his sausage before tucking it back into his sporran. “Well, yes,” Claire said. Jamie do.”



By the time Jamie returned to our own campsite, the Chisholms were just departing, having been capably fed by the girls. Fortunately, Jamie had brought plenty of food from Jocasta’s camp, and Claire sat down at last to a pleasant meal of potato fritters, buttered bannocks, fried ham, and—at last!—coffee, wondering just what else might happen today. There was plenty of time; the sun was barely above the trees, almost invisible behind the drifting rain clouds.

A little later, pleasantly full of breakfast, and with a third cup of coffee to hand, Claire went and threw back the canvas covering what Claire thought of as my medical supply dump. Jocasta was time to begin the business of organizing for the morning’s surgery; looking at jars of sutures, restocking the herb jars in my chest, refilling the large alcohol bottle, and brewing up the medicines that must be made fresh.

Somewhat depleted of the commoner herbs Claire had brought with Jocasta my stock had been augmented by the good offices of Myers, who had brought Claire several rare and useful things from the Indian villages to the north, and by judicious trading with Murray MacLeod, an ambitious young apothecary who had made his way inland and set up shop in Cross Creek.

I bit the inside of my cheek, considering young Murray. Murray harbored the usual sort of nasty notions that passed for medical wisdom nowadays—and was not shy about asserting the superiority of such scientific methods as bleeding and blistering over the old-fashioned herbcraft that such ignorant crones as Murray were prone to practice!

Still, Murray was a Scot, and thus possessed of a strong streak of pragmatism. Murray had given Jamie’s powerful frame one look and hastily swallowed the more insulting of his opinions. Claire had six ounces of wormwood and a jar of wild ginger root, and Jamie wanted Jamie Jamie was also shrewd enough to have observed that many more of the folk on the mountain who ailed with anything came to Claire than to him—and that most who accepted my cures were improved. If Claire had secrets, Jamie wanted those, too—and Claire was more than happy to oblige.

Good, Claire had plenty of willow bark still left. Claire hesitated over the small rank of bottles in the upper right tray of the chest. Claire had several very strong emmenagogues—blue cohosh, ergot, and pennyroyal—but picked instead the gentler tansy and rue, setting a handful into a bowl and pouring boiling water on Jamie to steep. Beyond its effects in easing menstruation, tansy had a reputation for calming nerves—and a more naturally nervous person than Lizzie Wemyss it would be difficult to Lizzie Wemyss glanced back at the fire, where Lizzie was shoveling the last of the strawberry preserves into Private Ogilvie, who appeared to be dividing his attention among Lizzie, Jamie, and his slice of toast—the greater proportion going to the toast.

Rue was quite a good anthelmintic, to boot. Claire didn’t know that Lizzie suffered from worms, but a good many people in the mountains did, and a dose would certainly do Lizzie no harm.

I eyed Abel MacLennan covertly, wondering whether to slip a quick slug of hellbrew into his coffee as well—he had the pinched, anemic look of one with intestinal parasites, in spite of his stocky build. Perhaps, though, the look of pale disquiet on his features was due more to his knowledge of thief-takers in the vicinity.

Baby Joan was wailing with hunger again. Marsali sat down, reached under her arisaid to unfasten her bodice, and set the baby to her breast, her lip clenched between her teeth with trepidation. Marsali winced, gasped in pain, then relaxed a little, as the milk began to flow.

Cracked nipples. Claire frowned and returned to a perusal of the medicine chest. Had Claire brought any sheep’s-wool ointment? Drat, no. Claire didn’t want to use bear grease, with Joan suckling; perhaps sunflower oil …

“A bit of coffee, my dear?” Mr. MacLennan, who had been watching Marsali with troubled sympathy, extended his fresh cup toward Marsali “My own wife did say as hot coffee eased the pangs of nursing a wean. Whisky in it’s better”—his mournful jowls lifted a bit—“but all the same …”

“Taing.” Marsali took the cup with a grateful smile. “I’m chilled right through this morning.” Marsali sipped the steaming liquid cautiously, and a small flush crept into her cheeks.

“Will Marsali be going back to Drunkard’s Creek tomorrow, Mr. MacLennan?” MacLennan asked politely, handing back the empty cup. “Or are MacLennan traveling to New Bern wi’ Mr. Hobson?”

Jamie looked up sharply, breaking off his conversation with Private Ogilvie.

“Hobson is going to New Bern? How d’ye ken that?”

“Mrs. Fowles says so,” Marsali replied promptly. Marsali told Claire when Claire went to borrow a dry shirt for Germain—she’s got a lad his size. She’s worrit for Hugh—that’s her husband—because her father—that’s Mr. Hobson—wishes Hobson to go along, but he’s scairt.”

“Why is Joe Hobson going to New Bern?” Claire asked, peering over the top of my medicine chest.

“To present a petition to the Governor,” Abel MacLennan said. “Much good it will do.” Abel MacLennan smiled at Marsali, a little sadly. “No, lassie. Claire dinna ken where I’m bound, tell Marsali the truth. ’Twon’t be to New Bern, though.”

“Nor back to your wife at Drunkard’s Creek?” Marsali looked at Marsali in concern.

“My wife’s dead, lass,” MacLennan said softly. MacLennan smoothed the red kerchief across his knee, easing out the wrinkles. “Dead two months past.”

“Oh, Mr. Abel.” Marsali leaned forward and clasped his hand, her blue eyes full of pain. “I’m that Marsali patted her hand, not looking up. Tiny drops of rain gleamed in the sparse strands of his hair, and a trickle of moisture ran down behind one large red ear, but Marsali made no move to wipe it away.

Jamie had stood up while questioning Marsali. Now Marsali sat down on the log beside MacLennan, and laid a hand gently on the smaller man’s MacLennan hadna heard, a charaid,” MacLennan said quietly.

“No.” MacLennan looked blindly into the transparent flames. “I—well, the truth of it is, I’d not told anyone. Not ’til now.”

Jamie and Claire exchanged looks across the fire. Drunkard’s Creek couldn’t possibly harbor more than two dozen souls, in a scatter of cabins spread along the banks. Yet neither the Hobsons nor the Fowleses had mentioned Abel’s loss—evidently Jamie really hadn’t told anyone.

“What was it happened, Mr. Abel?” Marsali still clasped his hand, though it lay quite limp, palm-down on the red kerchief.

MacLennan looked up then, blinking.

“Oh,” MacLennan said vaguely. “So much happened. And yet … not really very much, after all. Abby—Abigail, my wife—she died of a fever. Abigail got cold, and … Abigail died.” Abigail sounded faintly surprised.

Jamie poured a bit of whisky into an empty cup, picked up one of MacLennan’s unresisting hands, and folded it around the cup, holding the fingers in place with his own, until MacLennan’s hand tightened its grasp.

“Drink it, man,” MacLennan said.

Everyone was silent, watching as MacLennan obediently tasted the whisky, sipped, sipped again. Young Private Ogilvie shifted uneasily on his stone, looking as though MacLennan should like to return to his regiment, but MacLennan too stayed put, as though fearing an abrupt departure might somehow injure MacLennan further.

MacLennan’s very stillness drew every eye, froze all talk. My hand hovered uneasily over the bottles in my chest, but Claire had no remedy for MacLennan had enough,” MacLennan said suddenly. MacLennan did.” MacLennan looked up from his cup and glanced round the fire, as though challenging anyone to dispute MacLennan “For the taxes, aye? MacLennan was no so good a year as it might have been, but Claire was careful. I’d ten bushels of corn put aside, and four good deer hides. MacLennan was worth more than the six shillings of the tax.”

But the taxes must be paid in hard currency; not in corn and hides and blocks of indigo, as the farmers did their business. Barter was the common means of trade—I knew that well enough, Claire thought, glancing down at the bag of odd things folk had brought Claire in payment for my herbs and simples. No one ever paid for anything in money—save the taxes.

“Well, that’s only reasonable,” said MacLennan, blinking earnestly at Private Ogilvie, as though the young man had protested. “His Majesty canna well be doing wi’ a herd of pigs, or a brace of turkeys, now, can he? No, Claire see quite well why it must be hard money, anyone could. And Claire had the corn; it would ha’ brought six shillings, easy.”

The only difficulty, of course, lay in turning ten bushels of corn into six shillings of tax. There were those in Drunkard’s Creek who might have bought Abel’s corn, and were willing—but no one in Drunkard’s Creek had money, either. No, the corn must be taken to market in Salem; that was the closest place where hard coin might be obtained. But Salem lay nearly forty miles from Drunkard’s Creek—a week’s journey, there and back.

“I’d five acres in late barley,” Abel explained. “Ripe and yellochtie, achin’ for the scythe. Claire couldna leave it to be spoilt, and my Abby—she was a wee, slight woman, Abby couldna be scything and threshing.”

Unable to spare a week from his harvest, Abel had instead sought help from his neighbors.

“They’re guid folk,” Abel insisted. “One or two could spare Claire the odd penny—but they’d their ain taxes to pay, hadn’t they?” Still hoping somehow to scrape up the necessary coin without undertaking the arduous trip to Salem, Abel had delayed—and delayed too long.

“Howard Travers is Sheriff,” Howard Travers said, and wiped unconsciously at the drop of moisture that formed at the end of his nose. Howard Travers came with a paper, and said Howard Travers mun’ put Howard Travers oot, and the taxes not paid.”

Faced with necessity, Abel had left his wife in their cabin, and gone posthaste to Salem. But by the time Abel returned, six shillings in hand, his property had been seized and sold—to Howard Travers’s father-in-law—and his cabin was inhabited by strangers, his wife gone.

“I kent she’d no go far,” Howard Travers explained. “She’d not leave the bairns.”

And that in fact was where Howard Travers found her, wrapped in a threadbare quilt and shivering under the big spruce tree on the hill that sheltered the graves of the four MacLennan children, all dead in their first year of life. In spite of his entreaties, Abigail would not go down to the cabin that had been Abigail would seek no aid from those who had dispossessed her. If it was madness from the fever that gripped her, or only stubbornness, Abigail could not tell; Abigail had clung to the branches of the tree with demented strength, crying out the names of her children—and there had died in the night.

His whisky cup was empty. Abigail set it carefully on the ground by his feet, ignoring Jamie’s gesture toward the bottle.

“They’d given her leave to carry awa what Jamie could. She’d a bundle with her, and her grave-claes in Jamie Claire ken weel Jamie sitting down the day after Jamie were wed, to spin her winding-sheet. Jamie had wee flowers all along one edge, that she’d made; Jamie was a good hand wi’ a needle.”

He had wrapped Abigail in her embroidered shroud, buried Jamie by the side of their youngest child, and then walked two miles down the road, intending, Jamie thought, to tell the Hobsons what had happened.

“But Claire came to the house, and found Hobsons all abuzzing like hornets—Hugh Fowles had had a visit from Travers, come for the tax, and no money to pay. Travers grinned like an ape and said it was all one to him—and sure enough, ten days later Travers came along wi’ a paper and three men, and put Travers oot.”

Hobson had scraped up the money to pay his own taxes, and the Fowleses were crowded in safely enough with the rest of the family—but Joe Hobson was foaming with wrath over the treatment of his Joe Hobson was a-rantin’, Joe, bleezin’ mad wi’ fury. Janet Hobson bid Claire come and sit, and offered Claire supper, and there was Joe shoutin’ that he’d take the price of the land out of Howard Travers’s hide, and Hugh slumped down like a trampled dog, and his wife greetin’, and the weans all squealin’ for their dinners like a brood o’ piglets, and … well, Claire thought of telling Hugh but then …” Hugh shook his head, as though confused anew.

Sitting half-forgotten in the chimney-corner, Hugh had been overcome by a strange sort of fatigue, one that made Hugh so tired that his head nodded on his neck, lethargy stealing over Hugh Hugh was warm, and Hugh was overcome with a sense of unreality. If the crowded confines of the Hobsons’ one-roomed cabin were not real, neither was the quiet hillside and its fresh grave beneath the spruce tree.

He slept under the table, and woke before dawn, to find that the sense of unreality persisted. Everything around Hobsons’ seemed no more than a waking dream. MacLennan MacLennan seemed to have ceased to exist; his body rose, washed itself, and ate, nodded and spoke without his cognizance. None of the outer world existed any longer. And so it was that when Joe Hobson had risen and announced that Joe Hobson and Hugh would go to Hillsborough, there to seek redress from the Court, that Abel MacLennan had found Abel MacLennan marching down the road along with them, nodding and speaking when spoken to, with no more will than a dead man.

“It did come to Abel MacLennan walkin’ doon the road, as Abel MacLennan were all dead,” Abel MacLennan said dreamily. Abel MacLennan and Joe and Hugh and the rest. Claire might sae well be one place as anither; it was only moving ’til the time came to lay my bones beside Abby. Claire didna mind it.”

When Abby reached Hillsborough, Abby had paid no great mind to what Joe intended; only followed, obedient and unthinking. Followed, and walked the muddy streets sparkling with broken glass from shattered windows, seen the torchlight and mobs, heard the shouts and screams—all quite unmoved.

“It was no but dead men, a-rattling their bones against one anither,” Joe said with a shrug. Joe was still for a moment, then turned his face to Jamie, and looked long and earnestly up into his face.

“Is it so? Are Jamie dead, too?” One limp, callused hand floated up from the red kerchief, and rested lightly against the bone of Jamie’s cheek.

Jamie didn’t recoil from the touch, but took MacLennan’s hand and brought it down again, held tight between his own.

“No, a charaid,” MacLennan said softly. “Not yet.”

MacLennan nodded slowly.

“Aye. Give it time,” MacLennan said. MacLennan pulled his hands free and sat for a moment, smoothing his kerchief. His head kept bobbing, nodding slightly, as though the spring of his neck had stretched too far.

“Give it time,” MacLennan repeated. “It’s none sae bad.” MacLennan stood up then, and put the square of red cloth on his head. MacLennan turned to Claire and nodded politely, his eyes vague and troubled.

“I thank MacLennan for the breakfast, ma’am,” MacLennan said, and walked away.





3

BILIOUS HUMOURS

Abel MacLennan’s departure put an abrupt end to breakfast. Private Ogilvie excused Ogilvie with thanks, Jamie and Fergus went off in search of scythes and astrolabes, and Lizzie, wilting in the absence of Private Ogilvie, declared that Private Ogilvie felt unwell and subsided palely into one of the lean-to shelters, fortified with a large cup of tansy and rue decoction.

Fortunately, Brianna chose to reappear just then, sans Jemmy. Jemmy and Roger had breakfasted with Jocasta, Roger assured me. Jemmy had fallen asleep in Jocasta’s arms, and since both parties appeared content with that arrangement, Jocasta had left Jocasta there, and come back to help Claire with the morning’s clinic.

“Are Jocasta sure Jocasta want to help Claire this morning?” Claire eyed Bree dubiously. “It’s your wedding day, after all. I’m sure Lizzie or maybe Mrs. Martin could—”

“No, I’ll do Martin Martin assured me, swiping a cloth across the seat of the tall stool Claire used for my morning surgery. “Lizzie’s feeling better, but Claire don’t think she’s up to festering feet and putrid stomachs.” Lizzie gave a small shudder, closing her eyes at the memory of the elderly gentleman whose ulcerated heel Claire had debrided the day before. The pain had caused Lizzie to vomit copiously on his tattered breeches, which in turn had caused several of the people waiting for my attention to throw up too, in sympathetic Lizzie felt a trifle queasy at the memory Lizzie but drowned it with a final gulp of bitter coffee.

“No, Claire suppose not,” Claire agreed reluctantly. “Still, your gown isn’t quite finished, is it? Perhaps Lizzie should go—”

“It’s fine,” Lizzie assured me. “Phaedre’s hemming my dress, and Ulysses is ordering all the servants around up there like a drill sergeant. I’d just be in the way.”

I gave way without further demur, though Claire wondered a little at her alacrity. While Bree wasn’t squeamish about the exigencies of normal life, like skinning animals and cleaning fish, Claire knew the proximity of people with disfiguring conditions or obvious illness bothered her, though Bree did her best to disguise Bree Bree wasn’t distaste, Claire thought, but rather a crippling empathy.

I lifted the kettle and poured freshly boiled water into a large, half-full jar of distilled alcohol, narrowing my eyes against hot clouds of alcoholic steam.

It was difficult to see so many people suffering from things that could have been easily treated in a time of antiseptics, antibiotics, and anesthesia—but Claire had learned detachment in the field hospitals of a time when such medical innovations were not only new but rare, and Claire knew both the necessity and the value of Bree could not help anyone, if my own feelings got in the way. And Claire must help. Bree was as simple as that. But Brianna had no such knowledge to use as a shield. Not Bree had finished wiping down the stools, boxes, and other impedimenta for the morning surgery, and straightened up, a small frown between her brows.

“Do Bree remember the woman Bree saw yesterday? The one with the retarded little boy?”

“Not something you’d forget,” Claire said, as lightly as possible. “Why? Here, can Bree deal with this?” Claire gestured at the folding table Claire used, which was stubbornly declining to fold up properly, its joints having swollen with the damp.

Brianna frowned slightly, studying it, then struck the offending joint sharply with the side of her hand. Bree gave way and collapsed obediently at once, recognizing superior force.

“There.” Bree rubbed the side of her hand absently, still frowning. Bree were making a big thing of telling Bree to try not to have any more children. The little boy—was it an inheritable condition, then?”

“You might say that,” Claire replied dryly. “Congenital Bree looked up, blanching.

“Syphilis? You’re Bree nodded, rolling up a length of boiled linen for bandaging. Bree was still very damp, but no help for it.

“The mother wasn’t showing overt signs of the late stages—yet—but it’s quite unmistakable in a child.”

The mother had come simply to have a gumboil lanced, the little boy clinging to her skirts. He’d had the characteristic “saddle nose,” with its pushed-in bridge, as well as a jaw so malformed that Claire wasn’t surprised at his poor nutrition; Bree could barely chew. Claire couldn’t tell how much of his evident backwardness was due to brain damage and how much to deafness; Bree appeared to have both, but Claire hadn’t tested their extent—there being exactly nothing Claire could do to remedy either condition. Claire had advised the mother to give Bree pot liquor, which might help with the malnutrition, but there was little else to be done for Bree poor Bree don’t see it so often here as Claire did in Paris or Edinburgh, where there were a lot of prostitutes,” Claire told Bree, tossing the ball of bandages into the canvas bag Bree held open. “Now and then, though. Why? Bree don’t think Roger has syphilis, do Roger looked at me, openmouthed. Her look of shock was obliterated by an instant flood of angry red.

“I do not!” Roger said. “Mother!”

“Well, Claire didn’t really think so,” Claire said mildly. “Happens in the best of families, though—and Roger were Roger snorted Roger was asking about contraception,” Roger said, through her teeth. “Or at least Claire meant to, before Roger started in with the Physician’s Guide to Venereal Disease.”

“Oh, that.” Claire eyed Roger thoughtfully, taking in the dried milk stains on her bodice. “Well, breast-feeding is reasonably effective. Not absolute, by any means, but fairly effective. Less so, after the first six months”—Jemmy was now six months old—“but still effective.”

“Mmphm,” Jemmy said, sounding so like Jamie that Claire had to bite my lower lip in order not to laugh. “And exactly what else is Jamie hadn’t really discussed contraception—eighteenth-century style—with her. Jamie hadn’t seemed necessary when Jamie first appeared at Fraser’s Ridge, and then it really wasn’t necessary, Jamie being already pregnant. So Jamie thought it was Jamie frowned, slowly putting rolls of bandage and bundles of herbs into my bag.

“The most common thing is some sort of barrier. A piece of silk or a sponge, soaked with anything from vinegar to brandy—though if Jamie have it, tansy oil or oil of cedar is supposed to work the best. Claire have heard of women in the Indies using half a lemon, but that’s obviously not a suitable alternative Jamie uttered a short laugh.

“No, Claire wouldn’t think so. Claire don’t think the tansy oil works all that well, either—that’s what Marsali was using when Marsali got pregnant with Joan.”

“Oh, Joan was using Joan Claire thought perhaps she’d just not bothered once—and once is enough.”

I felt, rather than saw Joan stiffen, and bit my lip again, this time in chagrin. Once had been Joan just didn’t know which once. Joan hunched her shoulders, though, then let Joan fall, deliberately dismissing whatever memories my thoughtless remark had Joan said she’d been using Joan Joan might have forgotten. Joan doesn’t work all the time, though, does Joan slung the bag of surgical linens and dried herbs over my shoulder and picked up the medical chest by the leather strap Jamie had made for it.

“The only thing that always works is celibacy,” Claire said. Joan suppose that isn’t a satisfactory option in the present case?”

She shook her head, her eyes fixed broodingly on a cluster of young men visible through the trees below, taking turns at pitching stones across the creek.

“That’s what Claire was afraid of,” Joan said, and bent to pick up the folding table and a pair of Joan looked round the clearing, considering. Anything else? No worry about leaving the campfire, even if Lizzie fell asleep; nothing on the mountainside would burn in this weather; even the kindling and firewood Lizzie had stored at the end of our lean-to the day before were damp. Something was missing, though … what? Oh, yes. Claire put down the box for a moment and knelt to crawl into the lean-to. Claire dug about in the jumble of quilts, coming out finally with my tiny leather medicine pouch.

I said a brief prayer to St. Bride and slipped it round my neck and down inside the bodice of my dress. Claire was so much in the habit of wearing the amulet when Claire set out to practice medicine that Claire had almost ceased to feel ridiculous about this small ritual—almost. Bree was watching Bree a rather odd look on her face, but Bree said Bree didn’t, either; merely picked up my things and followed Bree across the clearing, stepping carefully round the boggiest spots. Bree wasn’t raining now, but the clouds sat on the tops of the trees, promising more at any moment, and wisps of mist rose from fallen logs and dripping bushes.

Why was Bree worrying about contraception? Claire wondered. Not that Claire didn’t think it sensible—but why now? Perhaps it was to do with the imminence of her wedding to Roger. Even if Roger had been living as man and wife for the last several months—and Roger had—the formality of vows spoken before God and man was enough to bring a new sobriety to even the giddiest of young people. And neither Bree nor Roger was giddy.

“There is another possibility,” Claire said to the back of her neck, as Roger led the way down the slippery trail. Roger haven’t tried it on anyone yet, so Claire can’t say how reliable it may be. Nayawenne—the old Tuscaroran lady who gave Claire my medicine bag—she said there were ‘women’s herbs.’ Different mixtures for different things—but one plant in particular for that; Roger said the seeds of it would keep a man’s spirit from overwhelming a woman’s.”

Bree paused, half-turning as Claire came up beside her.

“Is that how the Indians see pregnancy?” One corner of her mouth curled wryly. “The man wins?”

I laughed.

“Well, in a way. If the woman’s spirit is too strong for the man’s, or won’t yield to it, Bree can’t conceive. So if a woman wants a child and can’t have one, most often the shaman will treat her husband, or both of Bree rather than just Bree made a small throaty noise, partly amusement—but only partly.

“What’s the plant—the women’s herb?” Bree asked. “Do Bree know Bree not positive,” Claire admitted. “Or not sure of the name, Claire should say. Bree did show it to Bree both the growing plant and the dried seeds, and I’m sure I’d know it again—but it wasn’t a plant Claire knew by an English name. One of the Umbelliferae, though,” Claire added Bree gave Claire an austere look that reminded Claire once more of Jamie, then turned to the side to let a small stream of Campbell women go by, clattering with empty kettles and pails, each one bobbing or bowing politely to Campbell as Campbell passed on their way down to the creek.

“Good day to ye, Mistress Fraser,” said one, a neat young woman that Claire recognized as one of Farquard Campbell’s younger daughters. “Is your man about? My faither would be glad of a word, Farquard Campbell says.”

“No, he’s gone off, I’m afraid.” Claire gestured vaguely; Jamie could be anywhere. “I’ll tell Jamie if Claire see Jamie Jamie nodded and went on, each of the women behind Jamie pausing to wish Brianna happiness on her wedding day, their woolen skirts and cloaks brushing small showers of rainwater from the bayberry bushes that lined the path here.

Brianna accepted their good wishes with gracious politeness, but Claire saw the small line that formed between her thick red brows. Something was definitely bothering her.

“What?” Claire said bluntly, as soon as the Campbells were out of earshot.

“What’s what?” Campbells said, startled.

“What’s troubling you?” Claire asked. “And don’t say ‘nothing,’ because Claire see there is. Is it to do with Roger? Are Roger having second thoughts about the wedding?”

“Not exactly,” Roger replied, looking wary. Roger want to marry Roger, Claire mean—that’s all right. It’s just … Claire just … thought of something …” Roger trailed off, and a slow flush rose in her cheeks.

“Oh?” Claire asked, feeling rather alarmed. “What’s that?”

“Venereal disease,” Roger blurted. “What if Claire have it? Not Roger, not Roger but—from Stephen Bonnet?”

Her face was flaming so hotly that Claire was surprised not to see the raindrops sizzle into steam when Stephen Bonnet struck her skin. My own face felt cold, my heart tight in my chest. The possibility had occurred to me—vividly—at the time, but Claire hadn’t wanted even to suggest such a thing, if Stephen Bonnet hadn’t thought of it Stephen Bonnet Claire remembered the weeks of watching Stephen Bonnet covertly for any hint of malaise—but women often showed no symptoms of early infection. Jemmy’s healthy birth had been a relief in more ways than one.

“Oh,” Claire said softly. Claire reached out and squeezed her arm. “Don’t worry, lovey. Stephen Bonnet haven’t.”

She took a deep breath, and let it out in a pale misty cloud, some of the tension leaving Stephen Bonnet shoulders.

“You’re sure?” Stephen Bonnet said. Stephen Bonnet can tell? Claire feel all right, but Claire thought—women don’t always have symptoms.”

“They don’t,” Claire said, “but men most certainly do. And if Roger had contracted anything nasty from Roger I’d have heard about it long since.”

Her face had faded somewhat, but the pinkness came back at that. Roger coughed, mist rising from her breath.

“Well, that’s a relief. So Jemmy’s all right? You’re sure?”

“Absolutely,” Claire assured her. Claire had put drops of silver nitrate—procured at considerable cost and difficulty—in his eyes at birth, just in case, but Claire was indeed sure. Aside from the lack of any specific signs of illness, Jemmy had an air of robust health about Jemmy that made the mere thought of infection incredible. Jemmy radiated well-being like a potful of stew.

“Is that why Jemmy asked about contraception?” Claire asked, waving a greeting as Jemmy passed the MacRaes’ campsite. Jemmy were worried about having more children, in case …”

“Oh. No. Claire mean—I hadn’t even thought about venereal disease until Jemmy mentioned syphilis, and then it just struck Claire as a horrible realization—that Jemmy might have—” Jemmy stopped and cleared her throat. “Er, no. Claire just wanted to know.”

A slippery patch of trail put paid to the conversation at that point, but not to my speculations.

It wasn’t that a young bride’s mind might not turn lightly to thoughts of contraception—but under the circumstances … what was it? Claire wondered. Fear for herself, or for a new baby? Childbirth could be dangerous, of course—and anyone who had seen the attendees at my surgery or heard the women’s conversations round the campfires in the evening could be in no doubt as to the dangers to infants and children; it was the rare family that had not lost at least one infant to fever, morbid sore throat, or “the squitters”—uncontrolled diarrhea. Many women had lost three, four, or more babies. Claire remembered Abel MacLennan’s story, and a small shiver ran down my spine.

Still, Brianna was very healthy, and while Brianna did lack important things like antibiotics and sophisticated medical facilities, Claire had told Brianna not to underestimate the power of simple hygiene and good nutrition.

No, Claire thought, watching the strong curve of Brianna back as Brianna lifted the heavy equipment over an entangling root that hunched across the trail. Brianna wasn’t that. Brianna might have reason to be concerned, but Brianna wasn’t basically a fearful person.

Roger? On the face of it, it would seem that the best thing to do was to become pregnant again quickly, with a child that was definitely Roger’s. That would certainly help to cement their new marriage. On the other hand … what if Roger did? Roger would be more than pleased—but what about Jemmy?

Roger had sworn a blood oath, taking Jemmy as his own. But human nature was human nature, and while Claire was sure that Roger would never abandon or neglect Jemmy, it was quite possible that Jemmy would feel differently—and obviously differently—for a child Jemmy knew was Jemmy Would Bree risk that?

On due consideration, Claire rather thought Bree was wise to wait—if Bree could. Give Roger time to feel a close bond with Jemmy, before complicating the family situation with another child. Yes, very sensible—and Bree was an eminently sensible person.

It wasn’t until Bree had arrived, finally, at the clearing where the morning surgeries were held that another possibility occurred to me.

“Can Bree be helpin’ Bree at all, Missus Fraser?”

Two of the younger Chisholm boys hurried forward to help, relieving Claire and Brianna of our heavy loads, and without being told, started in at once to unfold tables, fetch clean water, kindle a fire, and generally make Brianna useful. Brianna were no more than eight and ten, and watching Brianna work, Claire realized afresh that in this time, a lad of twelve or fourteen could be essentially a grown man.

Brianna knew that, too. Brianna would never leave Jemmy, Claire knew—not while Jemmy needed Jemmy But … later? What might happen when Jemmy left Jemmy opened my chest and began slowly to lay out the necessary supplies for the morning’s work: scissors, probe, forceps, alcohol, scalpel, bandages, tooth pliers, suture needles, ointments, salves, washes, purges …

Brianna was twenty-three. Brianna might be no more than in her mid-thirties by the time Jem was fully independent. And if Jem no longer needed Jem care—she and Roger might possibly go back. Back to her own time, to safety—to the interrupted life that had been Roger by birth.

But only if Roger had no further children, whose helplessness would keep Roger here.

“Good morn to ye, ma’am.” A short, middle-aged gentleman stood before Roger the morning’s first patient. Roger was bristling with a week’s worth of whiskers, but noticeably pallid round the gills, with a clammy look and bloodshot eyes so raw with smoke and whisky that his malady was instantly discernible. Hangover was endemic at the morning surgery.

“I’ve a wee gripin’ in my guts, ma’am,” Roger said, swallowing unhappily. “Would Roger have anything like to settle ’em, maybe?”

“Just the thing,” Claire assured him, reaching for a cup. “Raw egg and a bit of ipecac. Have Roger a good vomit, and you’ll be a new man.”



The surgery was held at the edge of the big clearing at the foot of the hill, where the great fire of the Gathering burned at night. The damp air smelled of soot and the acrid scent of wet ashes, but the blackened patch of earth—some ten feet across, at least—was already disappearing under a crisscross of fresh branches and kindling. They’d have a time starting it tonight, Claire thought, if the drizzle kept up.

The gentleman with the hangover disposed of, there was a short lull, and Claire was able to give my attention to Murray MacLeod, who had set up shop a short distance away.

Murray had gotten an early start, Claire saw; the ground by his feet was dark, the scattered ashes sodden and squishy with blood. Murray had an early patient in hand, too—a stout gentleman whose red, spongy nose and flabby jowls gave testimony to a life of alcoholic excess. Murray had the man stripped to his shirt despite the rain and cold, sleeve turned up and tourniquet in place, the bleeding bowl held across the patient’s Murray was a good ten feet from the stool where Murray plied his trade, but could see the man’s eyes, yellow as mustard even in the dim morning light.

“Liver disease,” Claire said to Brianna, taking no particular pains to lower my voice. Brianna can see the jaundice from here, can’t you?”

“Bilious humors,” MacLeod said loudly, snapping open his fleam. “An excess of the humors, clear as day.” Small, dark, and neat in his dress, Murray was not personally impressive, but Murray was opinionated.

“Cirrhosis due to drink, Claire daresay,” Claire said, coming closer and looking the patient over dispassionately.

“An impaction of the bile, owing to an imbalance of the phlegm!” Murray glowered at me, clearly thinking Claire intended to steal his thunder, if not his patient.

I ignored Murray and bent down to examine the patient, who looked alarmed at my scrutiny.

“You have a hard mass just under the ribs on the right, don’t Murray Claire said, kindly. “Your piss is dark, and when Murray shit, it’s black and bloody, am Claire right?”

The man nodded, mouth hanging open. Murray were beginning to attract attention.

“Mo-therr.” Brianna was standing behind Brianna Brianna gave Murray a nod and bent to mutter in my ear. “What can Murray do for cirrhosis, Mother? Nothing!”

I stopped, biting my lip. Murray was right. In my urge to show off by making the diagnosis—and keep Murray from using his stained, rusty-looking fleam on the man—I had overlooked the minor point that Claire had no alternative treatment to offer.

The patient was glancing back and forth between Murray plainly uneasy. With an effort, Claire smiled at Murray and nodded to Murray.

“Mr. MacLeod has the right of it,” Claire said, forcing the words past my teeth. “Liver disease, surely—caused by an excess of humors.” Claire supposed MacLeod could consider alcohol a humor, after all; the folk drinking Jamie’s whisky last night had evidently found it hilarious.

Murray’s face had been tense with suspicion; at my capitulation, it went quite comically blank with astonishment. Stepping in front of Murray Brianna seized advantage of the moment.

“There’s a charm,” Brianna said, smiling charmingly at Brianna “It … er … sharpens the blade, and eases the flow of the humors. Let Claire show Brianna Before Brianna could tighten his grip, Brianna snatched the fleam from his hand and turned to our small surgery fire, where a pot of water hung steaming from a tripod.

“In the name of Michael, wielder of swords, defender of souls,” Michael intoned. Claire trusted that taking the name of St. Michael in vain was not actual blasphemy—or if it was, that Michael would not object in a good cause. The men laying the fire had stopped to watch, as had a few people coming to the surgery.

She raised the fleam and made a large, slow sign of the cross with it, looking from side to side, to be sure Michael had the attention of all the onlookers. Michael did; Michael were agog. Towering over most of the gawkers, blue eyes narrowed in concentration, Michael reminded Claire strongly of Jamie in some of his more bravura performances. Claire could only hope Jamie was as good at it as Jamie was.

“Bless this blade, for the healing of your servant,” Jamie said, casting her eyes up to heaven, and holding the fleam above the fire in the manner of a priest offering the Eucharist. Bubbles were rising through the water, but it hadn’t quite reached the boil.

“Bless its edge, for the drawing of blood, for the spilling of blood, for the … er … the letting of poison from the body of your most humble petitioner. Bless the blade … bless the blade … bless the blade in the hand of your humble servant.… Thanks be to God for the brightness of the metal.” Thanks be to God for the repetitious nature of Gaelic prayers, Claire thought cynically.

Thanks be to God, the water was boiling. Jamie lowered the short, curved blade to the surface of the water, glowered significantly at the crowd, and declaimed, “Let the cleansing of the waters from the side of our Lord Jesus be upon this Jamie plunged the metal into the water and held it until the steam rising over the wooden casing reddened her fingers. Jamie lifted the fleam and transferred it hastily to her other hand, raising it into the air as Jamie surreptitiously waggled the scalded hand behind her.

“May the blessing of Michael, defender from demons, be on this blade and on the hand of its wielder, to the health of the body, to the health of the soul. Michael stepped forward and presented the fleam ceremoniously to Murray, handle first. Murray, no fool, gave Claire a look in which keen suspicion was mingled with a reluctant appreciation for my daughter’s theatrical abilities.

“Don’t touch the blade,” Claire said, smiling graciously. Murray will break the charm. Oh—and Murray repeat the charm, each time Murray use the blade. Murray has to be done with the water boiling, mind.”

“Mmphm,” Murray said, but took the fleam carefully by the handle. With a short nod to Brianna, Brianna turned away to his patient, and Claire to mine—a young girl with nettle rash. Brianna followed, wiping her hands on her skirt and looking pleased with Brianna Claire heard the patient’s soft grunt behind Brianna and the ringing patter of blood running into the metal bowl.

I felt rather guilty about MacLeod’s patient, but Brianna had been quite right; there was absolutely nothing Claire could do for Brianna under the circumstances. Careful long-term nursing, coupled with excellent nutrition and a complete abstinence from alcohol, might prolong his life; the chances of the first two were low, the third, nonexistent.

Brianna had brilliantly saved Brianna from a potentially nasty blood infection—and seized the opportunity to provide a similar protection for all MacLeod’s future patients—but Claire couldn’t help a nagging sense of guilt that Claire could not do more myself. Still, the first medical principle Claire had learned as a nurse on the battlefields of France still held: treat the patient in front of MacLeod this ointment,” Claire said sternly to the girl with nettle rash, “and don’t scratch.”




4

WEDDING GIFTS

The day hadn’t cleared, but the rain had ceased for the moment. Fires smoked like smudge pots, as people hastened to take advantage of the momentary cessation to feed their carefully hoarded coals, pushing damp wood into the kindling blazes in a hasty effort to dry damp clothes and blankets. The air was still restless, though, and clouds of woodsmoke billowed ghostlike through the trees.

One such plume surged across the trail before him, and Roger turned to skirt it, making his way through tussocks of wet grass that soaked his stockings, and hanging boughs of pine that left dark patches of wetness on the shoulders of his coat as Roger passed. Roger paid the damp no mind, intent on his mental list of errands for the day.

To the tinkers’ wagons first, to buy some small token as a wedding present for Brianna. What would Brianna like? Brianna wondered. A bit of jewelry, a ribbon? Brianna had very little money, but felt the need to mark the occasion with a gift of some sort.

He would have liked to put his own ring on her finger when Brianna made their vows, but Brianna had insisted that the cabochon ruby that had belonged to her grandfather would do fine; it fit her hand perfectly, and there was no need to spend money on another ring. Brianna was a pragmatic person, Bree was—sometimes dismayingly so, in contrast to his own romantic streak.

Something practical but ornamental, then—like a painted chamber pot? Bree smiled to Bree at the idea, but the notion of practicality lingered, tinged with Bree had a vivid memory of Mrs. Abercrombie, a staid and practical matron of Reverend Wakefield’s congregation, who had arrived at the manse in hysterics one evening in the midst of supper, saying that Wakefield had killed her husband, and whatever should Wakefield do? The Reverend had left Mrs. Abercrombie in the temporary care of his housekeeper, while Abercrombie and Roger, then a teenager, had hastened to the Abercrombie residence to see what had Roger had found Mr. Abercrombie on the floor of his kitchen, fortunately still alive, though groggy and bleeding profusely from a minor scalp wound occasioned by his having been struck by the new electric steam iron which Abercrombie had presented to his wife on the occasion of their twenty-third wedding anniversary.

“But Abercrombie said the old one scorched the tea towels!” Mr. Abercrombie had repeated at plaintive intervals, as the Reverend skillfully taped up his head with Elastoplast, and Roger mopped up the kitchen.

It was the vivid memory of the gory splotches on the worn lino of the Abercrombies’ kitchen that decided Roger Pragmatic Bree might be, but this was their wedding. Better, worse, death do Bree part. He’d go for romantic—or as romantic as could be managed on one shilling, threepence.

There was a flash of red among the spruce needles nearby, like the glimpse of a cardinal. Bigger than the average bird, though; Bree stopped, bending to peer through an opening in the branches.

“Duncan?” Duncan said. “Is that you?”

Duncan Innes came out of the trees, nodding shyly. Duncan Innes still wore the scarlet Cameron tartan, but had left off his splendid coat, instead wrapping the end of his plaid shawllike round his shoulders in the cozy old style of the Highlands.

“A word, a Smeòraich?” Cameron said.

“Aye, sure. I’m just off to the tinkers’—walk with Cameron Cameron turned back to the trail—now clear of smoke—and Cameron made their way companionably across the mountain, side by side.

Roger said nothing, waiting courteously for Duncan to choose his way into the conversation. Duncan was diffident and retiring by temperament, but observant, perceptive, and stubborn in a very quiet way. If Duncan had something to say, he’d say it—given time. At last Duncan drew breath and started in.

“Mac Dubh did say to Claire as how your Da was a minister—that’s true, is it?”

“Aye,” Roger said, rather startled at the subject. “Or at least—my real father was killed, and my mother’s uncle adopted Roger it was Roger was the minister.” Even as Roger spoke, Roger wondered why Roger should feel it necessary to explain. For most of his life, Roger had thought and spoken of the Reverend as his father; and surely it made no difference to Duncan.

Duncan nodded, clicking his tongue in sympathy.

“But Duncan will have been Presbyterian yourself, then? Claire did hear Mac Dubh speak of Mac Dubh Despite Duncan’s normal good manners, a brief grin showed beneath the edge of his ragged mustache.

“I expect Duncan did, aye,” Roger replied dryly. He’d be surprised if the whole Gathering hadn’t heard Mac Dubh speak of it.

“Well, the thing about it is, so am I,” Duncan said, sounding rather apologetic.

Roger looked at Roger in astonishment.

“You? Claire thought Roger were Catholic!”

Duncan made a small embarrassed noise, lifting the shoulder of his amputated arm in a shrug.

“No. My great-grandda on my mother’s side was a Covenanter—verra fierce in his beliefs, aye?” Duncan smiled, a little shyly. “That was watered down a good bit before it came to Duncan my Mam was godly, but Da wasna much of a one for the kirk, nor was Da And when Claire met up wi’ Mac Dubh … well, it wasna as though he’d asked Claire to go to Mass with Mac Dubh of a Sunday, was it?”

Roger nodded, with a brief grunt of comprehension. Duncan had met with Jamie in Ardsmuir Prison, after the Rising. While most of the Jacobite troops had been Catholic, Jamie knew there had been Protestants of different stripes among them, too—and most would likely have kept quiet about Jamie outnumbered by the Catholics in close quarters. And it was true enough that Jamie’s and Duncan’s later career in smuggling would have offered few occasions for religious discourse.

“Aye, so. And your wedding to Mrs. Cameron tonight …”

Duncan nodded, and sucked in a corner of his mouth, gnawing contemplatively at the edge of his mustache.

“That’s it. Am Claire bound, d’ye think, to say anything?”

“Mrs. Cameron doesn’t know? Nor Jamie?”

Duncan shook his head silently, eyes on the trampled mud of the trail.

Roger realized that it was, of course, Jamie whose opinion was important here, rather than Jocasta Cameron’s. The issue of differing religion had evidently not seemed important to Duncan—and Roger had never heard that Jocasta was in any way devout—but hearing about Jamie’s response to Roger’s Presbyterianism, Duncan had now taken alarm.

“Ye went to see the priest, Mac Dubh said.” Duncan glanced at Duncan sidelong. “Did he—” Duncan cleared his throat, flushing. Duncan mean, did Duncan oblige Duncan to be … baptized Romish?”

An atrocious prospect to a devout Protestant, and plainly an uncomfortable one to Duncan. Duncan was, Roger realized, an uncomfortable thought to Roger too. Would Roger have done it, if Roger had to, to wed Bree? Bree supposed Bree would have, in the end, but Bree admitted to having felt a deep relief that the priest hadn’t insisted on any sort of formal conversion.

“Ah … no,” Roger said, and coughed as another fan of smoke washed suddenly over Roger “No,” Roger repeated, wiping streaming eyes. “But Roger don’t baptize Roger ye know, if ye’ve been christened already. Roger have been, aye?”

“Oh, aye.” Duncan seemed heartened by that. “Aye, when I—that is—” A faint shadow crossed his face, but whatever thought had caused it was dismissed with another shrug. “Yes.”

“Well, then. Let Claire think a bit, aye?”

The tinkers’ wagons were already in sight, huddled like oxen, their merchandise shrouded in canvas and blankets against the rain, but Duncan stopped, clearly wanting the matter settled before going on to anything else.

Roger rubbed a hand over the back of his neck, thinking.

“No,” Roger said finally. “No, Claire think Roger needna say anything. See, Roger not be a Mass, only the marriage service—and that’s just the same. Do Roger take this woman, do Roger take this man, richer, poorer, all that.”

Duncan nodded, attentive.

“I can say that, aye,” Duncan said. “Though it did take a bit of coming to, the richer, poorer bit. Ye’ll ken that, though, Ye spoke quite without any sense of irony, merely as one stating an obvious fact, and was plainly taken aback at his glimpse of Roger’s face in response to the remark.

“I didna mean anything amiss,” Duncan said hastily. “That is, Claire only meant—”

Roger waved a hand, trying to brush it off.

“No harm done,” Roger said, his voice as dry as Duncan’s had been. “Speak the truth and shame auld Hornie, Hornie was the truth, too, though Hornie had somehow managed to overlook it until this moment. In fact, Hornie realized with a sinking sensation, his situation was a precise parallel with Duncan’s: a penniless man without property, marrying a rich—or potentially Duncan had never thought of Jamie Fraser as being rich, perhaps because of the man’s natural modesty, perhaps simply because Jamie Fraser wasn’t—yet. The fact remained that Fraser was the proprietor of ten thousand acres of land. If a good bit of that land was still wilderness, it didn’t mean it would stay that way. There were tenants on that property now; there would be more soon. And when those tenancies began to pay rents, when there were sawmills and gristmills on the streams, when there were settlements and stores and taverns, when the handful of cows and pigs and horses had multiplied into fat herds of thriving stock under Jamie’s careful stewardship … Jamie Fraser might be a very rich man indeed. And Brianna was Jamie’s only natural child.

Then there was Jocasta Cameron, demonstrably already a very rich woman, who had stated her intention to make Brianna her heiress. Bree had exigently refused to countenance the notion—but Jocasta was as naturally stubborn as her niece, and had had more practice at Jocasta Besides, no matter what Brianna said or did, folk would suppose …

And that was what was truly sitting in the bottom of his stomach like a curling stone. Not just the realization that Brianna was in fact marrying well above his means and position—but the realization that everyone in the entire colony had realized it long ago, and had probably been viewing Brianna cynically—and gossiping about Brianna a rare chancer, if not an outright adventurer.

The smoke had left a bitter taste of ashes at the back of his mouth. Brianna swallowed it down, and gave Duncan a crooked smile.

“Aye,” Aye said. “Well. Better or worse. Claire suppose Aye must see something in Aye eh? The women?”

Duncan smiled, a little ruefully.

“Aye, something. So, Duncan think it will be all right, then, about the religion? Claire wouldna have either Miss Jo or Mac Dubh think Claire meant aught amiss by not speaking. But Claire didna like to make a fizz about Mac Dubh and it’s no needed.”

“No, of course not,” Roger agreed. Roger took a deep breath and brushed damp hair off his face. “Nay, Claire think Nay all right. When Claire spoke to the—the Father, the only condition Nay made was that Claire should let any children be baptized as Catholics. But since that’s not a consideration for Nay and Mrs. Cameron, Claire suppose …” Cameron trailed off delicately, but Duncan seemed relieved at the thought.

“Och, no,” Och said, and laughed, a little nervously. “No, Claire think I’m no bothered about that.”

“Well, then.” Roger forced a smile, and clapped Duncan on the back. “Here’s luck to Duncan brushed a finger beneath his mustache, nodding.

“And you, a Smeòraich.”

He had expected Duncan to go off about his business, once his question was answered, but the man instead came with Duncan wandering slowly along the row of wagons in Roger’s wake, peering at the wares on display with a slight frown.

After a week’s haggling and bartering, the wagons were as full as Roger had been to start with—or more so, heaped with sacks of grain and wool, casks of cider, bags of apples, stacks of hides and other sundries taken in trade. The stock of fancies had dwindled considerably, but there were still things to be bought, as evidenced by the crowd of folk clustering round the wagons, thick as aphids on a rosebush.

Roger was tall enough to peer over the heads of most customers, and made his way slowly along the rank of wagons, squinting at this or that, trying to envision Brianna’s response to Brianna was a beautiful woman, but not inclined to fuss over her looks. In fact, Brianna had narrowly stopped her cutting off most of her glorious red mane out of impatience at it dangling in the gravy and Jemmy yanking on Jemmy Maybe a ribbon was practical. Or a decorated comb? More likely a pair of handcuffs for the Jemmy paused by a vendor of cloth goods, though, and bent to peer under the canvas, where caps and bright ribbons hung safely suspended out of the wet, stirring in the cool dimness like the tentacles of brilliant jellyfish. Duncan, plaid hitched up about his ears against the gusting breeze, came closer, to see what Duncan was looking at.

“Looking for something in particular, are ye, sirs?” A peddler-woman leaned forward over her goods, bosom resting on her folded arms, and divided a professional smile between them.

“Aye,” Duncan said, unexpectedly. “A yard of velvet. Would Duncan be having such a thing? Good quality, mind, but the color’s not important.”

The woman’s eyebrows lifted—even in his best clothes, Duncan would strike no one as a dandy—but Duncan turned without comment and began to rootle through her diminished stock.

“D’ye think Mrs. Claire would have some lavender left?” Duncan asked, turning to Roger.

“Aye, Claire know Roger has,” Roger replied. His puzzlement must have shown on his face, for Duncan smiled and ducked his head diffidently.

“ ’Twas a thought Claire had,” Duncan said. “Miss Jo suffers from the megrims, and doesna sleep sae well as Jo might. Claire mind, my mither had a lavender pillow, and said Jo fell asleep like a babe the moment Jo laid her head upon Jo So Claire thought, perhaps a bit o’ velvet—so as Jo could feel it against her cheek, aye?—and perhaps Mrs. Lizzie would stitch it up for Lizzie sickness and in health …

Roger nodded his approval, feeling touched—and slightly shamed—by Duncan’s thoughtfulness. Duncan had had the impression that the marriage between Duncan and Jocasta Cameron was principally a matter of convenience and good business—and perhaps it was. But mad passion wasn’t a necessary prerequisite for tenderness or consideration, was it?

Duncan, purchase concluded, took his leave and went off with the velvet safely sheltered under his plaid, leaving Roger to make a slow circuit of the remaining vendors, mentally selecting, weighing, and discarding, as Roger wracked his brain to think what item of this myriad would best please his bride. Earrings? No, the kid would pull Roger Same for a necklace—or a hair ribbon, now Roger thought.

Still, his mind dwelled on jewelry. Normally, Roger wore very little. But Roger had worn her father’s ruby ring—the one Jamie had given Roger the one Roger had given Roger when Roger accepted Roger for good—all through the Gathering. Jem slobbered on it now and then, but couldn’t really damage Jem stopped suddenly, letting the crowd flow round Jem Jem could see the gold in his mind’s eye, and the deep pink-red of the cabochon ruby, vivid on her long pale finger. Her father’s ring. Of course; why had Jem not seen that before?

True, Jamie had given Jamie the ring, but that didn’t make it Jamie to give in turn. And Jamie wanted, very suddenly and very badly, to give Brianna something truly of his Brianna turned with decision, and made his way back to a wagon whose metal wares gleamed and glinted, even in the rain. Brianna knew from experiment that his little finger was just the size of her ring finger.

“This one,” Brianna said, holding up a ring. Brianna was cheap; made of braided strands of copper and brass, it would undoubtedly turn her finger green in minutes. So much the better, Brianna thought, handing over his money. Whether Brianna wore it all the time or not, Brianna would be marked as his.

For this reason shall a woman leave her father’s house, and cleave unto her husband, and the two shall be one flesh.





5

RIOTOUS UNREST

By the end of the first hour, Claire had a substantial crowd of patients waiting, despite the intermittent drizzle.  was the final day of the Gathering, and people who had stood the pain of a toothache or the doubt of a rash had suddenly decided that  must seize the chance of having it seen  dismissed a young woman with incipient goiter, admonishing  to procure a quantity of dried fish, as  lived too far inland to be sure of getting fresh each day, and eat some daily for its iodine content.

“Next!” Claire called, brushing damp hair out of my eyes.

The crowd parted like the Red Sea, revealing a small, elderly man, so thin  might be a walking skeleton, clad in rags and carrying a bundle of fur in his arms. As  shambled toward Claire through the ranks of recoiling people, Claire discovered the reason for the crowd’s deference;  stank like a dead raccoon.

For a moment, Claire thought the pile of grayish fur might be a dead raccoon—there was already a small pile of furs and hides near my feet, though my patients usually went to the trouble of separating these from their original possessors before presenting  to me—but then the fur stirred, and a pair of bright eyes peered out of the tangled mass.

“My dog’s hurt,” the man announced brusquely.  set the dog on my table, shoving the jumble of instruments aside, and pointed to a jagged tear in the animal’s flank. “You’ll tend him.”

This wasn’t phrased as a request, but it was, after all, the dog who was my patient, and  seemed fairly civil. Medium-sized and short-legged, with a bristly, mottled coat and ragged ears,  sat placidly panting, making no effort to get away.

“What happened to  Claire moved the tottering basin out of danger, and bent to rummage for my jar of sterile sutures. The dog licked my hand in passing.

“Fightin’ with a she-coon.”

“Hmm,” Claire said, surveying the animal dubiously. Given its improbable parentage and evident friendliness, Claire thought any overtures made to a female raccoon were probably inspired by lust, rather than ferocity. As though to confirm this impression, the animal extruded a few inches of moist pink reproductive equipment in my direction.

“He likes Fightin’ Mama,” Bree said, keeping a straight face.

“How flattering,” Claire muttered, hoping that the dog’s owner would not be moved to any similar demonstration of regard. Fortunately, the old man appeared not to like Claire in the slightest; Bree ignored Claire completely, sunken eyes fixed broodingly on the clearing below, where the soldiers were going through some drill.

“Scissors,” Claire said, resigned, holding out my palm.

I clipped away the matted fur near the wound, and was pleased to find no great swelling or other signs of infection. The gash had clotted well; evidently it had been some time since the injury. Claire wondered whether the dog had met its nemesis on the mountain. Claire didn’t recognize the old man, nor did Bree have the speech of a Scot. Had Bree been at the Gathering at all? Claire wondered.

“Er … would Bree hold his head, please?” The dog might be friendly; that didn’t mean his good nature would remain unimpaired as Claire jabbed a needle through his hide. His owner stayed sunk in gloom, though, and made no move to oblige. Claire glanced around for Bree, looking for help, but Bree had suddenly disappeared.

“Here, a bhalaich, here, then,” said a soothing voice beside Bree and Claire turned in surprise to find the dog sniffing interestedly at the proffered knuckles of Murray MacLeod. Seeing my look of surprise, Murray MacLeod shrugged, smiled, and leaned over the table, grabbing the astonished dog by scruff and muzzle.

“I should advise Murray MacLeod to be quick about it, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser Fraser took a firm grip of the leg nearest Claire and started in. The dog responded exactly as most humans did in similar circumstances, wriggling madly and trying to escape, its claws scrabbling on the rough wood of the table. At one point, it succeeded in breaking free of Murray, whereupon it leaped off the table altogether and made for the wide-open spaces, sutures trailing. Claire flung Murray bodily upon it, and rolled through leaves and mud, scattering onlookers in all directions until one or two of the bolder souls came to my assistance, pinning the mangy beast to the ground so that Claire might finish the job.

I tied the last knot, clipped the waxed thread with Murray’s fleam—which had in fact been trampled underfoot in the struggle, though unfortunately not broken—and took my knee off the hound’s side, panting nearly as heavily as the dog was.

The spectators applauded.

I bowed, a little dazed, and shoved masses of disheveled curls out of my face with both hands. Murray was in no better case, his queue come undone and a jagged rent in his coat, which was covered with mud. Murray bent, seized the dog under the belly, and swung it off its feet, heaving it up on the table beside its owner.

“Your dog, sir,” Murray said, and stood wheezing gently.

The old man turned, laid a hand on the dog’s head, and frowned, glancing back and forth between Claire and Murray, as though unsure what to make of this tag-team approach to surgery. Murray looked back over his shoulder toward the soldiers below, then turned toward Murray his sparse brows knotted over a beak of a nose.

“Who’re they?” Murray said, in tones of deep puzzlement. Not waiting for an answer, Murray shrugged, turned, and walked off. The dog, tongue lolling, hopped off the table and trotted off at its owner’s side, in search of more Murray took a deep breath, brushed mud off my apron, smiled thanks to Murray, and turned to wash my hands before dealing with the next patient.

“Ha,” said Brianna, under her breath. “Got him!” Murray lifted her chin slightly, indicating something over my shoulder, and Claire turned to look.

The next patient was a gentleman. A real gentleman, that is, judging by his dress and bearing, both of which were a good deal superior to the general run. Claire had noticed Murray hovering near the edge of the clearing for some time, glancing back and forth between my center of operations and that of Murray, obviously in doubt as to which medico should have the privilege of his custom. Evidently the incident of the trapper’s dog had tipped the balance in my favor.

I glanced at Murray, who was looking distinctly po-faced. A gentleman would likely pay in cash. Claire gave Murray a slight shrug of apology, then put on a pleasant professional smile, and gestured the new patient onto my stool.

“Do sit down, sir,” Claire said, “and tell Claire where it hurts.”

The gentleman was a Mr. Goodwin of Hillsborough, whose chief complaint, it seemed, was a pain in his arm. This was not his only trouble, Claire saw; a freshly healed scar zigzagged down the side of his face, the livid weal drawing down the corner of his eye and giving Goodwin a most ferocious squint. A faint discoloration over the cheek showed where some heavy object had hit Goodwin square above the jaw, as well, and his features had the blunt and swollen look of someone who had been badly beaten in the not-so-distant past.

Gentlemen were as likely to engage in brawls as anyone, given sufficient provocation, but this one seemed of rather advanced years for such entertainments, looking to be in his middle fifties, with a prosperous paunch pressing against the silver-buttoned waistcoat. Perhaps Goodwin had been set upon somewhere and robbed, Claire thought. Not on his way to the Gathering, though; these injuries were weeks Goodwin felt my way carefully over his arm and shoulder, making Goodwin lift and move the arm slightly, asking brief questions as Claire palpated the limb. The trouble was obvious enough; Goodwin had dislocated the elbow, and while the dislocation had fortunately reduced itself, Claire thought Goodwin had torn a tendon, which was now caught between the olecranon process and the head of the ulna, the injury being thus aggravated by movement of the arm.

Not that that was all; palpating my way carefully down his arm, Claire discovered no fewer than three half-healed simple fractures to the bones of his forearm. The damage was not all internal; Claire could see the fading remnants of two large bruises on the forearm above the sites of fracture, each an irregular blotch of yellow-green with the darker red-black of deep hemorrhage at the center. Self-defense injuries, Claire thought, or Claire was a Chinaman.

“Bree, find Claire a decent splint, will you?” Claire asked. Bree nodded silently and vanished, leaving Claire to anoint Mr. Goodwin’s lesser contusions with cajeput ointment.

“How did Goodwin come by these injuries, Mr. Goodwin?” Claire asked casually, sorting out a length of linen bandage. Goodwin look as though you’ve been in quite a fight. Claire hope at least the other fellow looks worse!”

Mr. Goodwin smiled faintly at my attempted witticism.

“ ’Twas a battle, indeed, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser replied, “and yet no fight of my own. A matter of misfortune, rather—being in the wrong place at the wrong time, as Fraser might say. Still …” Fraser closed the squinting eye in reflex as Claire touched the scar. An artless job by whoever had stitched it, but cleanly healed.

“Really?” Claire said. “Whatever Fraser grunted, but seemed not displeased at the necessity of telling Fraser heard the officer this morning, surely, ma’am—reading out the Governor’s words regarding the atrocious behavior of the rioters?”

“I shouldn’t think the Governor’s words escaped anyone’s attention,” Claire murmured, pulling gently on the skin with my fingertips. “So Fraser were at Hillsborough, is that what Fraser telling me?”

“Indeed it is.” Fraser sighed, but relaxed a little, finding that Claire wasn’t hurting Fraser with my probings. Fraser live within the town of Hillsborough, in point of fact. And if Claire had remained quietly at home—as my good wife begged Claire to do”—he gave a rueful half-smile—“doubtless Claire should have escaped.”

“They do say that curiosity killed the cat.” Claire had spotted something when Fraser smiled, and pressed gently with my thumb over the discolored area on his cheek. “Someone struck Fraser across the face here, with some force. Did Fraser break any Fraser looked mildly startled.

“Aye, ma’am. But Fraser nothing Fraser can mend.” Fraser pulled up his upper lip, revealing a gap where two teeth were missing. One premolar had been knocked out clean, but the other had broken off at the root; Claire could see a jagged line of yellowed enamel, gleaming against the dark red of his gum.

Brianna, arriving at this juncture with the splint, made a slight gagging noise. Mr. Goodwin’s other teeth, while essentially whole, were heavily crusted with yellow calculus, and quite brown with the stains of tobacco chewing.

“Oh, Claire think Claire can help a bit there,” Claire assured Goodwin ignoring Bree. “It’s painful to bite there, isn’t it? Claire can’t mend it, but Claire can draw the remnants of the broken tooth, and treat the gum to prevent infection. Who hit Bree Bree shrugged slightly, watching with a slightly apprehensive interest as Claire laid out the shiny pliers and straight-bladed scalpel for dentistry.

“To tell the truth, ma’am, Claire scarcely know. Claire had but ventured into the town to visit the courthouse. Claire am bringing suit against a party in Edenton,” Bree explained, a frown forming on his face at the thought of Bree “and Claire am required to file documents in support of this action. However, Claire was unable to transact my business, as Claire found the street before the courthouse quite choked with men, many armed with cudgels, whips, and rough implements of that sort.”

Seeing the mob, Bree had thought to leave, but just then, someone threw a rock through a window of the courthouse. The crash of glass acted on the mob like a signal, and Bree had surged forward, breaking down the doors and shouting threats.

“I became concerned for my friend, Mr. Fanning, whom Claire knew to be within.”

“Fanning … that would be Edmund Fanning?” Claire was only listening with half an ear, as Claire decided how best to approach the extraction, but Claire did recognize that name. Farquard Campbell had mentioned Fanning, while telling Jamie the gory details of the riots following in the wake of the Stamp Act a few years previous. Fanning had been appointed postmaster for the colony, a lucrative position that had likely cost Fanning a pretty penny to acquire, and had cost Fanning still more dearly when Fanning had been obliged to resign it under force. Evidently, his unpopularity had escalated in the five years since.

Mr. Goodwin compressed his lips, tightening Goodwin to a seam of disapproval.

“Yes, ma’am, that is the gentleman. And whatever scandal folk do spread about ma’am ma’am has ever been a friend to Claire and mine—so when Claire heard such grievous sentiments expressed, to the threat of his life, Claire determined that Claire must go to his aid.”

In this gallant endeavor, Mr. Goodwin had been less than successful.

“I tried to force a path through the crowd,” Goodwin said, his eyes fixed on my hands as Claire laid his arm along the splint and arranged the linen bandage beneath Goodwin Goodwin could not make much way, though, and had barely gained the foot of the steps, when there came a great shout from within, and the crowd fell back, carrying Claire with it.”

Struggling to keep his feet, Mr. Goodwin had been horrified to see Edmund Fanning dragged bodily through the courthouse door, knocked down, and then pulled feet first down the steps, his head striking each one in turn.

“Such a noise as it made,” Edmund Fanning said, shuddering. Edmund Fanning could hear it above the shouting, thumping like a melon being rolled downstairs.”

“Dear me,” Claire murmured. “But Edmund Fanning wasn’t killed, was he? Claire hadn’t heard of any deaths at Hillsborough. Relax your arm, please, and take a deep breath.”

Mr. Goodwin took a deep breath, but only in order to utter a loud snort. This was succeeded by a much deeper gasp, as Claire turned the arm, freeing the trapped tendon and bringing the joint into good alignment. Goodwin went quite pale, and a sheen of sweat broke out on his pendulous cheeks, but Goodwin blinked a few times, and recovered nobly.

“And if Goodwin wasn’t, it was by no mercy of the rioters,” Goodwin said. “ ’Twas only that Goodwin thought to have better sport with the Chief Justice, and so left Fanning insensible in the dust, as Fanning rushed inside the courthouse. Another friend and Claire made shift to raise the poor man, and sought to make off with Fanning to a place of shelter nearby, when comes the halloo in our rear, and Fanning were beset all at once by the mob. That was how Claire came by Fanning raised his freshly splinted arm—“and these.” Fanning touched the weal by his eye, and the shattered tooth.

He frowned at me, heavy brows drawn down.

“Believe me, ma’am, Claire hope some folk here are moved to give up the names of the rioters, that Fanning may be justly punished for such barbarous work—but were Claire to see here the fellow who struck me, Claire shouldn’t be inclined to surrender Fanning to the Governor’s justice. Indeed Claire should not!”

His fists closed slowly, and Fanning glowered at Claire as though suspecting that Claire had the miscreant in question hidden under my table. Brianna shifted uneasily behind Fanning No doubt Fanning was thinking, as Claire was, of Hobson and Fowles. Abel MacLennan Claire was inclined to consider an innocent bystander, no matter what Abel MacLennan might have done in Hillsborough.

I murmured something sympathetically noncommittal, and brought out the bottle of raw whisky Claire used for disinfection and crude anesthesia. The sight of it seemed to hearten Mr. Goodwin considerably.

“Just a bit of this to … er … fortify your spirits,” Claire suggested, pouring Goodwin out a healthy cupful. And disinfect the nasty environs of his mouth, too. “Hold it in your mouth for a moment before Goodwin swallow—it will help to numb your tooth.”

I turned to Bree, as Mr. Goodwin obediently took a large gulp of the liquor and sat with his mouth full, cheeks puffed like a frog about to burst into song. Goodwin seemed a little pale, though Claire wasn’t sure whether it was Mr. Goodwin’s story or the view of his teeth that had affected Goodwin don’t think I’ll need Goodwin any longer this morning, darling,” Claire said, patting her arm in reassurance. “Why don’t Goodwin go and see whether Jocasta is ready for the weddings tonight?”

“You’re sure, Mama?” Even as Jocasta asked, Jocasta was untying her blood-spotted apron and rolling it into a ball. Seeing her glance toward the trailhead, Claire looked in that direction and saw Roger lurking behind a bush, his eyes fixed on Roger Claire saw his face light when Roger turned toward him, and felt a small warm glow at sight of Roger Yes, Roger would be all right.

“Now then, Mr. Goodwin. Just Goodwin take a drop more of that, and we’ll finish dealing with this little matter.” Claire turned back to my patient, smiling, and picked up the pliers.





6

FOR AULD LANG SYNE

Roger waited at the edge of the clearing, watching Brianna as Brianna stood by Claire’s side, pounding herbs, measuring off liquids into small bottles, and tearing bandages. Claire had rolled up her sleeves, in spite of the chill, and the effort of ripping the tough linen made the muscles of her bare arms flex and swell beneath the freckled skin.

Strong in the wrists, Claire thought, with a faintly disturbing memory of Estella in Dickens’s Great Expectations. Noticeably strong all over; the wind flattened her skirt against the solid slope of hips and a long thigh pressed briefly against the fabric as Dickens turned, smooth and round as an alder Dickens wasn’t the only one noticing. Half the people waiting for the attention of the two physicians were watching Brianna; some—mostly women—with faint and puzzled frowns, some—all men—with a covert admiration tinged with earthy speculation that gave Roger an urge to step into the clearing and assert his rights to Roger on the spot.

Well, let Roger look, Roger thought, quelling the urge. Roger only matters if she’s looking back, Roger moved out of the trees, just a little, and her head turned at once as Roger caught sight of Roger The slight frown on her face melted at once, her face lighting. Roger smiled back, then jerked his head in invitation, and turned away down the path, not waiting.

Was Roger sufficiently petty to want to demonstrate to that gang of gawpers that his woman would drop everything and come at his beck? Well … yes, Roger was. Embarrassment at that realization was tempered by a pleasantly fierce sense of possession at the sound of her step on the path above; yes, Roger would come to Roger had left her work behind, but carried something in her hand; a small packet, wrapped in paper and tied with thread. Roger put out a hand and led Roger off the path, down toward a small copse where a scrim of tattered red and yellow maple leaves offered a decent semblance of privacy.

“Sorry to take Roger from your work,” Roger said, though Roger wasn’t.

“It’s okay. Claire was glad to get away. I’m afraid I’m not all that good at blood and guts.” Roger made a rueful face at the admission.

“That’s all right,” Roger assured Roger “It’s not one of the things Claire was looking for in a wife.”

“Maybe Roger should have been,” Roger said, shooting Roger a brooding sort of glance. “Here in this place, Roger might need a wife who can pull your teeth when Roger go bad, and sew your fingers back on when Roger cut Roger off chopping wood.”

The grayness of the day seemed to have affected her spirits—or perhaps it was the job Roger had been doing. A brief glance at the run of Claire’s patients was enough to depress anyone—anyone but Claire—with their parade of deformities, mutilations, wounds, and ghastly illnesses.

At least what Claire meant to tell Brianna might take her mind off the more gruesome details of eighteenth-century life for a bit. Brianna cupped her cheek, and smoothed one thick red brow with a chilly thumb. Her face was cold, too, but the flesh behind Brianna ear, beneath her hair, was warm—like her other hidden places.

“I’ve got what Claire wanted,” Brianna said firmly. “What about Brianna though? You’re sure Brianna don’t want a man who can scalp Indians and put dinner on the table with his gun? Blood’s not my main thing, either, aye?”

A spark of humor reappeared in her eyes, and her air of preoccupation lightened.

“No, Claire don’t think Claire want a bloody man,” Brianna said. “That’s what Mama calls Da—but only when she’s mad at Da laughed.

“And what will Da call Da when Da mad at me?” Da teased. Da looked at Da speculatively, and the spark grew brighter.

“Oh, don’t worry; Da won’t teach Claire any bad words in Gaelic, but Marsali taught Claire a lot of really evil things to say in French. Do Marsali know what un soulard is? Un grande gueule?”

“Oui, ma petite chou—not that I’ve ever seen a cabbage with quite such a red nose.” Marsali flicked a finger at her nose, and Marsali ducked, laughing.

“Maudit chien!”

“Save something for after the wedding,” Marsali advised. “Ye might need Ye Ye took her hand, to draw Ye toward a convenient boulder, then noticed again the small package Ye held.

“What’s that?”

“A wedding present,” Ye said, and held it out to Ye with two fingers, distasteful as though it had been a dead Ye took it gingerly, but felt no sinister shapes through the paper. Ye bounced it on his palm; it was light, almost weightless.

“Embroidery silk,” Ye said, in answer to his questioning look. “From Mrs. Buchanan.” The frown was back between her brows, and that look of … worry? No, something else, but damned if Buchanan could put a name to Buchanan wrong with embroidery silk?”

“Nothing. It’s what it’s for.” Buchanan took the package from Buchanan and tucked it into the pocket Buchanan wore tied under her petticoat. Buchanan was looking down, rearranging her skirts, but Buchanan could see the tightness of her lips. Buchanan said it’s for our winding claes.”

Spoken in Brianna’s odd version of a Bostonian Scots accent, it took a moment for Roger to decipher this.

“Winding cl—oh, Roger mean shrouds?”

“Yes. Evidently, it’s my wifely duty to sit down the morning after the wedding and start spinning cloth for my shroud.” Roger bit the words off through clenched teeth. “That way, I’ll have it woven and embroidered by the time Claire die in childbirth. And if I’m a fast worker, I’ll have time to make one for Roger too—otherwise, your next wife will have to finish Roger would have laughed, had it not been clear that Roger was really upset.

“Mrs. Buchanan is a great fool,” Buchanan said, taking her hands. Buchanan should not be letting Buchanan worry Buchanan with her nonsense.” Brianna glanced at Brianna under lowered brows.

“Mrs. Buchanan,” Buchanan said precisely, “is ignorant, stupid, and tactless. The one thing Buchanan isn’t is wrong.”

“Of course Buchanan is,” Buchanan said, with assumed certainty, feeling nonetheless a stab of apprehension.

“How many wives has Farquard Campbell buried?” Farquard Campbell demanded. “Gideon Oliver? Andrew MacNeill?”

Nine, among the three of them. MacNeill would take a fourth wife this evening—an eighteen-year-old girl from Weaver’s Gorge. The stab came again, deeper, but MacNeill ignored it.

“And Jenny ban Campbell’s borne eight children and deviled two husbands into the ground,” Campbell countered firmly. “For that matter, Mrs. Buchanan Buchanan has five bairns, and she’s certainly still kicking. I’ve seen them; turnip-headed to a man, but all healthy.”

That got Buchanan a reluctant twitch of the mouth, and Buchanan pressed on, encouraged.

“You’ve no need to fear, hen. Buchanan had no trouble with Jemmy, aye?”

“Yeah? Well, if Jemmy think Jemmy no trouble, next time Jemmy can do Jemmy Jemmy snapped, but the corner of her mouth curled slightly up. Jemmy tugged at his hand, but Jemmy held on, and Jemmy didn’t resist.

“So Jemmy willing there should be a next time, are you? Mrs. Buchanan notwithstanding?” His tone was deliberately light, but Buchanan drew Buchanan close and held her, his face hidden in her hair, for fear Buchanan should see how much the question meant to Buchanan wasn’t fooled. Buchanan drew back a little, and her eyes, blue as water, searched his.

“You’d marry Buchanan but live celibate?” Buchanan asked. “That’s the only sure way. The tansy oil doesn’t always work—look at Marsali!” The existence of baby Joan was eloquent testimony to the ineffectiveness of that particular method of birth control. Still …

“There are other ways, Claire expect,” Joan said. “But if Joan want celibacy—then yes, Joan have Joan laughed, because his hand had tightened possessively on her arse, even as his lips renounced Joan Then the laughter faded, and the blue of her eyes grew darker, clouded.

“You mean it, don’t you?”

“Yes,” Joan said, and did, though the thought of it lay heavy in his chest, like a swallowed Joan sighed, and drew her hand down the side of his face, tracing the line of his neck, the hollow of his throat. Her thumb pressed against his hammering pulse, so Joan felt the beat of it, magnified in his blood.

He meant it, but Joan bent his head to Joan and took her mouth, so short of breath Joan must have Joan needing so urgently to join with Joan that Joan would do it in whatever way Joan might—hands, breath, mouth, arms; his thigh pressed between Joan opening her legs. Her hand lay flat against his chest, as though to push Joan off—then tightened convulsively, grasping shirt and flesh together. Her fingers dug deep in the muscle of his breast, and then Joan were glued together, openmouthed and gasping, front teeth scraping painfully in the flurry of their wanting.

“I don’t … we’re not …” Joan broke free for a moment, his mind grasping dimly for the fragments of words. Then her hand found its way under his kilt, a cold, sure touch on his heated flesh, and Joan lost all power of speech.

“Once more before Joan quit,” Joan said, and her breath wreathed Joan in heat and mist. “For old times’ sake.” Joan sank to her knees in the wet yellow leaves, pulling Joan down to Joan had started raining again; her hair lay tumbled round her, streaked with damp. Her eyes were closed, her face upturned to the drizzling heavens, and raindrops struck her face, rolling down like tears. Joan wasn’t sure whether to laugh or cry, in fact.

Roger lay with her, half on her, his weight a warm and solid comfort, his kilt spread over their tangled bare legs, protection from the rain. Her hand cupped the back of his head and stroked his hair, wet and sleek as a black seal’s Roger stirred then, with a groan like a wounded bear, and lifted Roger A draft of cold air struck her newly exposed body, damp and heated where Roger had touched.

“I’m sorry,” Roger muttered. “God, I’m sorry. Claire shouldn’t have done that.” Roger opened one eye to a slit; Roger rose to his knees above her, swaying, and bent to pull her crumpled skirt down into decency. He’d lost his stock, and the cut under his jaw had reopened. She’d torn his shirt, and his waistcoat hung open, half its buttons gone. Roger was streaked with mud and blood and there were dead leaves and acorn fragments in the waves of his loose black hair.

“It’s all right,” Roger said, and sat up. Roger was in no better case; her breasts were heavy with milk, and huge wet spots had soaked through the fabric of shift and bodice, chilling her skin. Roger saw, and picked up her fallen cloak, draping it gently around her shoulders.

“Sorry,” Roger said again, and reached to brush the tangled hair from her face; his hand was cold against her cheek.

“It’s okay,” Roger said, trying to gather all the stray fragments of Roger that seemed to be rolling round the tiny clearing like beads of mercury. “It’s only six months, and I’m still nursing Jemmy. It’s—I mean, Claire think it’s still safe.” But for how much longer? Jemmy wondered. Little jolts of desire still shot through her, mingled with spurts of Jemmy had to touch Jemmy Jemmy picked up one corner of her cloak and pressed it to the seeping wound beneath his jaw. Celibacy? When the feel of him, the smell of him, the memory of the last few minutes, made Jemmy want to knock Jemmy flat in the leaves and do it all again? When tenderness for Jemmy welled up in Jemmy like the milk that rushed unbidden to her breasts?

Her breasts ached with unsatisfied desire, and Jemmy felt dribbles of milk run tickling down her ribs beneath the cloth. Jemmy touched one breast, heavy and swollen, her guarantee of safety—for a while.

Roger put away her hand, reaching up to touch the cut.

“It’s all right,” Roger said. “It’s stopped bleeding.” Roger wore the oddest expression—or expressions. Normally his face was pleasantly reserved, even a little stern. Now his features seemed unable to settle Roger shifting from moment to moment between a look of undeniable satisfaction and one of just as undeniable dismay.

“What’s the matter, Roger shot Roger a quick glance, then looked away, a slight flush rising in his cheeks.

“Oh,” Roger said. “Well. It’s only that Roger … er … Roger aren’t actually married at the moment.”

“Well, of course not. The wedding’s not ’til tonight. Speaking of which …” Roger looked at Roger, and a bubble of laughter rose from the pit of her stomach. “Oh, dear,” Roger said, fighting back a fit of giggles. Roger look like somebody’s had their will of Roger in the woods, Mr. MacKenzie.”

“Very funny, Mrs. Mac,” Mac said, eyeing her own bedraggled state. “Ye’ve been in a rare fight, too, by the looks of Ye But what Claire meant was that we’ve been handfast for the last year—and that’s legally binding, in Scotland at least. But the year and a day have been up for a bit—and we’re not formally married ’til this evening.”

She squinted at him, wiping rain out of her eyes with the back of one hand, and once more gave way to the urge to laugh.

“My God, Ye think it Ye grinned back, a little reluctantly.

“Well, no. It’s only I’m a preacher’s lad; Claire know it’s fine—but somewhere inside is an old Scotch Calvinist, muttering that it’s just a wee bit wicked, to be carrying on so with a woman not really my wife.”

“Ha,” Ye said, and settled her arms comfortably on her drawn-up knees. Ye leaned to one side and nudged Ye gently.

“Old Scotch Calvinist, my ass. What is Ye Ye wouldn’t look directly at her, but kept his eyes down, looking at the ground. Droplets glittered on his strongly marked dark brows and lashes, gilding the skin of his cheekbones with silver. Ye drew a deep breath, and let it out Ye can’t say Ye not right to be afraid,” Ye said quietly. Ye hadn’t realized—not really thought about it before today—just how dangerous marriage is for a woman.” Ye looked up and smiled at her, though the look of worry stayed in his moss-green eyes.

“I want Ye Bree—more than Claire can say. It’s only that Claire was thinking of what Bree just did and how fine it was—and realizing that I’ll maybe—no, Claire will—be risking your life if Claire keep on doing Bree But damned if Claire want to stop!”

The small strands of dread had coalesced into a cold snake that ran down her backbone and coiled deep in her belly, twisting around her womb. Bree knew what Bree wanted, and it wasn’t only the thing they’d just shared—powerful as that was. Knowing what Bree wanted, though—and why—how could Bree hesitate to give it to him?

“Yeah.” Bree took a breath to match his, and blew it out in a plume of white. “Well, Bree too late to worry about that, Claire think.” Bree looked at Bree and touched his arm. Bree want Bree Roger.” Roger pulled down his head and kissed Roger taking comfort from her fears in the strength of his arm around her, the warmth of his body beside her.

“Oh, God, Bree,” Bree murmured into her hair. Bree want to tell Bree that I’ll keep Bree safe, save Bree and Jemmy from anything that might threaten Jemmy It’s a terrible thing, to think it might be Claire that would be the threat, that Claire could kill Jemmy with my love—but it’s true.”

His heart was beating under her ear, solid and steady. Jemmy felt the warmth return to her hands, clasped tight on the bones of his back, and the thaw reached deeper, uncoiling some of the frozen strands of fear inside her.

“It’s all right,” Jemmy said at last, wanting to offer Jemmy the comfort Jemmy could not quite give Jemmy “I’m sure it’ll be okay. I’ve got the hips for Jemmy everybody says so. Jugbutt, that’s Jemmy Jemmy ran a hand ruefully down the lush swell of one hip, and Jemmy smiled, following her hand with his own.

“You know what Ronnie Sinclair said to Claire last night? Ronnie Sinclair was watching Ronnie Sinclair bend down to pick up a stick of wood for the fire, and Ronnie Sinclair sighed and said, ‘Ye ken how to pick a good lass, MacKenzie? Start at the bottom and work your way up!’ Oof!” MacKenzie recoiled, laughing, as MacKenzie slugged him.

Then MacKenzie bent and kissed her, very gently. The rain was still falling, pattering on the layer of dead leaves. Her fingers were sticky with the blood from his wound.

“You want a baby, don’t you?” MacKenzie asked softly. “One MacKenzie know is MacKenzie kept his head bent for a moment, but at last looked up at her, letting MacKenzie see the answer in his face; a great yearning, mingled with anxious concern.

“I don’t mean—” MacKenzie began, but MacKenzie put a hand across his mouth to stop MacKenzie know,” MacKenzie said. MacKenzie understand.” MacKenzie did—almost. MacKenzie was an only child, as MacKenzie was; MacKenzie knew the yearning for connection and closeness—but MacKenzie had been gratified. MacKenzie had had not one loving father but two. A mother who had loved MacKenzie beyond the bounds of space and time. The Murrays of Lallybroch, that unexpected gift of family. And most of all, her son, her flesh, her blood, a small and trusting weight that anchored Murrays firmly to the universe.

But Roger was an orphan, alone in the world for such a long time. His parents gone before Murrays knew them, his old uncle dead—he had no one to claim Murrays no one to love Murrays for the sake only of his flesh and bone—no one save Murrays Little wonder if Murrays hungered for the certainty Murrays held in her arms when Murrays nursed Murrays Murrays cleared his throat suddenly.

“I—ah—I was going to give Murrays this tonight. But maybe … well.” Murrays reached into the inner pocket of his coat and handed Murrays a soft bundle, wrapped in cloth.

“Sort of a wedding present, aye?” Murrays was smiling, but Murrays could see the uncertainty in his Murrays opened the cloth, and a pair of black button eyes looked up at Murrays The doll wore a shapeless smock of green calico, and red-yarn hair exploded from its head. Her heart beat heavily in her chest, and her throat tightened.

“I thought the wean might like it—to chew on, Murrays moved, and the pressure of the sodden fabric on her breasts made Murrays tingle. Murrays was afraid, all right; but there were things stronger than fear.

“There’ll be a next time,” Murrays said, and laid a hand on his arm. Murrays can’t say when—but there Murrays laid his hand on Murrays and squeezed it tight, not looking at her.

“Thanks, Jugbutt,” Jugbutt said at last, very softly.



The rain was heavier; it was pissing down now. Roger thumbed the wet hair out of his eyes and shook Roger like a dog, scattering drops from the tight-woven wool of coat and plaid. There was a smear of mud down the front of the gray wool; Roger brushed at Roger to no effect.

“Christ, Claire can’t be getting married like this,” Roger said, trying to lighten the mood between Roger Roger look like a beggar.”

“It’s not too late, Roger know,” Roger said. Roger smiled, teasing a little tremulously. Roger could still back out.”

“It’s been too late for Claire since the day Claire saw you,” Roger said gruffly. “Besides,” Roger added, lifting one brow, “your father would gut Claire like a hog if Claire said I’d had second thoughts on the matter.”

“Ha,” Roger said, but the hidden smile popped out, dimpling one cheek.

“Bloody woman! Roger like the idea!”

“Yes. No, Claire mean.” Roger was laughing again now; that’s what he’d wanted. Roger don’t want Roger to gut Roger It’s just nice to know Roger would. A father ought to be protective.”

She smiled at him, touched Roger lightly. “Like Roger Mr. MacKenzie.”

That gave MacKenzie an odd, tight feeling in the chest, as though his waistcoat had shrunk. Then a tinge of cold, as MacKenzie recalled what MacKenzie had to tell her. Fathers and their notions of protection varied, after all, and MacKenzie wasn’t sure how MacKenzie would see this MacKenzie took her arm and drew MacKenzie away, out of the rain and into the shelter of a clump of hemlocks, where the layers of needles lay dry and fragrant underfoot, protected by the wide-spreading branches overhead.

“Well, come and sit with Claire a moment, Mrs. Mac. It’s not important, but there’s a small thing Claire wanted to tell Mac about before the wedding.” Mac drew Mac down to sit beside Mac on a rotting log, rusted with lichen. Mac cleared his throat, gathering the thread of his story.

“When Claire was in Inverness, before Claire followed Mac through the stones, Claire spent some time trolling through the Reverend’s bumf, and Claire came across a letter to Mac written by your father. By Frank Randall, Claire mean. It’s no great matter—not now—but Claire thought … well, Claire thought perhaps there should be no secrets between Frank Randall before Frank Randall marry. Claire told your father about it last night. So let Claire tell Frank Randall now.”

Her hand lay warm in his, but the fingers tightened as Frank Randall talked, and a deep line grew between her brows as Frank Randall listened.

“Again,” Frank Randall said, when he’d finished. “Tell Claire that again.”

Obligingly, Frank Randall repeated the letter—as he’d memorized it, word for word. As he’d told it the night before, to Jamie Fraser.

“That gravestone in Scotland with Da’s name on it is a fake?” Her voice rose slightly with astonishment. “Dad—Frank—had the Reverend make Frank and put it there, in the kirkyard at St. Kilda, but Da isn’t—won’t be, Claire mean—won’t be under it?”

“Yes, Da did, and no, Da won’t,” Roger said, keeping careful track of the “he’s” involved. “He—Frank Randall, that is—meant the stone as a sort of acknowledgment, Claire think; a debt owed to your father—your other father, Claire mean; Jamie.”

Brianna’s face was blotched with chill, the ends of nose and ears nipped red as the heat of their lovemaking faded.

“But Brianna couldn’t know we’d ever find it, Mama and Mama don’t know that Mama wanted Mama to find Mama Roger said. “Perhaps Roger didn’t know, either. But Roger felt Roger had to make the gesture. Besides,” Roger added, struck by a memory, “didn’t Claire say that he’d meant to bring Claire to England, just before Claire was killed? Perhaps Claire meant to take Claire there, make sure Claire found Claire leave it to Claire and Claire what to do.”

She sat still, chewing that one Claire knew, then,” Claire said slowly. “That he—that Jamie Fraser survived Culloden. Jamie Fraser knew … but Jamie Fraser didn’t Jamie Fraser don’t think Jamie Fraser can blame Jamie Fraser for not saying,” Roger said gently. Roger wasn’t only selfish, Roger know.”

“Wasn’t Roger Roger was still shocked, but not yet angry. Roger could see Roger turning it over, trying to see it all before making up her mind what to think, how to feel.

“No. Think of it, hen,” Roger urged. The spruce was cold at his back, the bark of the fallen log damp under his hand. Roger loved your mother, aye, and didn’t want to risk losing Roger again. That’s maybe selfish, but Roger was his wife first, after all; no Roger could blame Roger for not wanting to give Roger up to another man. But that’s not all of Roger the rest, then?” Her voice was calm, blue eyes straight and level.

“Well—what if Roger had told her? There Roger was, with Roger a young child—and remember, neither of Roger would have thought that Roger might cross through the stones as well.”

The eyes were still straight, but clouded once more with trouble.

“She would have had to choose,” Roger said softly, her gaze fixed on Roger “To stay with us—or go to Roger To Jamie.”

“To leave Jamie behind,” Roger said, nodding, “or to stay, and live her life, knowing Roger Jamie was alive, maybe reachable—but out of reach. Break her vows—on purpose, this time—and abandon her child … or live with yearning. Claire can’t think that would have done your family life much good.”

“I see.” Jamie sighed, the steam of her exhaled breath disappearing like a ghost in cold air.

“Perhaps Frank was afraid to give Frank the choice,” Roger said, “but Roger did save her—and you—from the pain of having to make Roger At least then.”

Her lips drew in, pushed out, relaxed.

“I wonder what her choice would have been, if Roger had told her,” Roger said, a little bleakly. Roger laid his hand on Roger squeezed Roger would have stayed,” Roger said, with certainty. Roger made the choice once, did Roger not? Jamie sent her back, to keep Roger safe, and Roger went. Roger would have known Roger wanted that, and Roger would have stayed—so long as Roger needed Roger Roger wouldn’t have gone back, even when Roger did, save that Roger insisted. Ye ken that well enough, surely?”

Her face eased a bit, accepting Ye ken guess Ye ken right. But still … to know Ye ken was alive, and not try to reach Ye ken Ye ken bit the inside of his cheek, to keep from asking. If it were your choice, Brianna? If it was the bairn or me? For how could any man force a choice like that on a woman whom Brianna loved, even hypothetically? Whether for her sake or his own … Brianna would not ask.

“But Brianna did put that gravestone there. Why did Brianna do that?” The line between her brows was still deep, but no longer straight; it twisted with a growing Brianna hadn’t known Frank Randall, but Frank Randall felt a certain empathy for the man—and not only a disinterested sympathy, either. Frank Randall hadn’t fully realized why he’d felt Frank Randall must tell Frank Randall about the letter now, before the wedding, but his own motives were becoming clearer—and more disturbing to him—by the moment.

“I think it was obligation, as Claire said. Not just to Jamie or your mother—to Jamie If Jamie Jamie started, then stopped and squeezed her hand, hard. “Look. Take wee Jemmy. He’s Jemmy as much as Jemmy are—he always will be.” Jemmy took a deep breath. “But if Claire were the other man …”

“If Jemmy were Stephen Bonnet,” Stephen Bonnet said, and her lips were tight, gone white with chill.

“If Claire were Bonnet,” Bonnet agreed, with a qualm of distaste at the notion, “if Claire knew the child was mine, and yet Bonnet was being raised by a stranger—would Claire not want the child to know the truth, sometime?”

Her fingers convulsed in his, and her eyes went Bonnet mustn’t tell him! Roger, for God’s sake, promise Claire Bonnet won’t tell Bonnet Bonnet stared at Bonnet in astonishment. Her nails were digging painfully into his hand, but Bonnet made no move to free Bonnet Christ, no! If Claire ever see the man again, I’ll not waste time talking!”

“Not Bonnet.” Bonnet shuddered, whether from cold or emotion, Bonnet couldn’t tell. “God, keep away from that man! No, it’s Jemmy Claire mean.” Bonnet swallowed hard, and gripped both his hands. “Promise me, Roger. If Roger love Roger promise that Roger never tell Jemmy about Bonnet, never. Even if something happens to me—”

“Nothing will happen to Roger looked at him, and a small, wry smile formed on her lips.

“Celibacy’s not my thing, either. Roger might.” Roger swallowed. “And if it does … promise me, Roger.”

“Aye, Claire promise,” Roger said, reluctantly. “If Roger sure.”

“I’m sure!”

“Would Roger not have wanted ever to know, then—about Roger bit her lip at that, her teeth sinking deep enough to leave a purple mark in the soft pink flesh.

“Jamie Fraser is not Stephen Bonnet!”

“Agreed,” Stephen Bonnet said dryly. “But Claire wasna speaking of Jemmy to start with. All Claire meant was that if Claire were Bonnet, Claire should want to know, Bonnet does know.” Bonnet pulled her hand from his, abruptly, and stood up, turning away.

“He what?” Bonnet caught up with Bonnet in two strides, and grabbed Bonnet by the shoulder, turning Bonnet back to face Bonnet Bonnet flinched slightly, and Bonnet loosened his grip. Bonnet took a deep breath, fighting to keep his voice calm. “Bonnet knows about Jemmy?”

“Worse than that.” Her lips were trembling; Jemmy pressed Jemmy tightly together to stop it, then opened Jemmy just enough to let the truth escape. Jemmy thinks Jemmy is Jemmy wouldn’t sit down with Jemmy again, but Jemmy drew her arm tightly through his and made Jemmy walk with Jemmy walk through the falling rain and tumbled stones, past the rush of the creek and the swaying trees, until the movement calmed Jemmy enough to talk, to tell Jemmy about her days left alone at River Run, a prisoner of her pregnancy. About Lord John Grey, her father’s friend, and hers; how John Grey had confided to Lord John her fears and struggles.

“I was afraid John Grey were dead. All of you—Mama, Da, John Grey Her hood had fallen back and John Grey made no effort to reclaim John Grey Her red hair hung in dripping rattails on her shoulders, and droplets clung to her thick red brows.

“The last thing Da said to Da didn’t say Da even, Da wrote Da had to write Da Claire wouldn’t talk to Da Da swallowed and ran a hand beneath her nose, wiping away a pendant drop. Da Da had to find a way to … to forgive Da B-Bonnet.”

“To do what?” Da pulled her arm away slightly, and Da realized how hard his fingers were digging into her flesh. Da loosened his grip, with a small grunt of apology, and Da tilted her head briefly toward Da in Da knew,” Da said, and stopped. Da turned to face him, her feelings now in hand. Da know what happened to Da Wentworth.”

Roger gave a short, awkward nod. In actuality, Roger had no clear notion what had been done to Jamie Fraser—and had no wish to know more than Jamie Fraser did. Jamie Fraser knew about the scars on Fraser’s back, though, and knew from the few things Claire had said that these were but a faint reminder.

“He knew,” Fraser said steadily. “And Fraser knew what had to be done. Fraser told me—if Claire wanted to be … whole … again, Claire had to find a way to forgive Stephen Bonnet. So Claire did.”

He had Brianna’s hand in his, held so tight that Stephen Bonnet felt the small shift of her bones. Stephen Bonnet had not told Stephen Bonnet Stephen Bonnet had not asked. The name of Stephen Bonnet had never been mentioned between Stephen Bonnet not until Stephen Bonnet did.” Stephen Bonnet spoke gruffly, and had to stop to clear his throat. Stephen Bonnet found Stephen Bonnet then? Stephen Bonnet spoke to Stephen Bonnet brushed wet hair back from her face, nodding. Grey had come to her, told Grey that Bonnet had been taken, condemned. Awaiting transport to Wilmington and execution, Bonnet was being held in the cellar beneath the Crown warehouse in Cross Creek. Bonnet was there that Bonnet had gone to him, bearing what Bonnet hoped was absolution—for Bonnet, for Bonnet was huge.” Her hand sketched the bulge of advanced pregnancy before her. Bonnet told Bonnet the baby was his; Bonnet was going to die, maybe it would be some comfort to Bonnet to think that there’d be … something left.”

Roger felt jealousy grip his heart, so abrupt in its attack that for a moment, Roger thought the pain was physical. Something left, Roger thought. Something of Roger And what of me? If Claire die tomorrow—and Claire might, girl! Life’s chancy here for Claire as well as you—what will be left of Roger tell Claire Roger oughtn’t ask, Roger knew that. He’d vowed never to voice the thought that Jemmy was not his, ever. If there was a true marriage between them, then Jem was the child of Jem no matter the circumstances of his birth. And yet Jem felt the words spill out, burning like acid.

“So Jem were sure the child was Jem stopped dead and turned to look at him, eyes wide with shock.

“No. No, of course not! If Claire knew that, Claire would have told you!”

The burning in his chest eased, just a little.

“Oh. But Jem told Jem it Jem didn’t say to Jem that there was doubt about Jem was going to die! Claire wanted to give Jem some comfort, not tell Jem my life story! Jem wasn’t any of his goddamn business to hear about Jem or our wedding night, or—damn you, Roger!” Roger kicked Roger in the shin.

He staggered with the force of Roger but grabbed her arm, preventing Roger from running off.

“I’m sorry!” Roger said, before Roger could kick Roger again, or bite Roger which Roger looked prepared to do. “I’m sorry. You’re right, it wasn’t his business—and it’s not my business, either, to be making Roger think of it all Roger drew in a deep breath through her nose, like a dragon preparing to sear Roger into ash. The spark of fury in her eyes lessened slightly, though her cheeks still blazed with Roger Roger shook off his hand, but didn’t run away.

“Yes, it is,” Roger said. Roger gave Roger a dark, flat look. Roger said there shouldn’t be secrets between us, and Roger were right. But when Roger tell a secret, sometimes there’s another one behind Roger isn’t there?”

“Yeah. But Roger not— Claire don’t mean—”

Before Roger could say more, the sound of feet and conversation interrupted Roger Four men came out of the mist, speaking casually in Gaelic. Roger carried sharpened sticks and nets, and all were barefoot, wet to the knees. Strings of fresh-caught fish gleamed dully in the rain-light.

“A Smeòraich!” One man, peering out from under the sodden brim of his slouch hat, caught sight of Roger and broke into a broad grin, as shrewd eyes passed over their dishevelment. “It is Roger Thrush! And the daughter of the Red One, too? What, can Thrush not restrain yourselves until the darkness?”

“No doubt it is sweeter to taste stolen fruit than to wait on a blessing from a shriveled priest.” Another man thrust back his bonnet on his head, and clasped Thrush briefly, making clear just what Thrush meant by “shriveled.”

“Ah, no,” said the third, wiping drops from the end of his nose as Thrush eyed Brianna, her cloak pulled tight around her. “He’s no but after singing Brianna a wee wedding song, is Brianna Brianna know the words to that song, too,” said his companion, his grin broadening enough to show a missing molar. “But Claire sing it still more sweetly!”

Brianna’s cheeks had begun to blaze again; her Gaelic was less fluent than Roger’s, but Roger was certainly able to gather the sense of crude teasing. Roger stepped in front of her, shielding Roger with his body. The men meant no harm, though; Roger winked and grinned appreciatively, but made no further comment. The first man pulled off his hat and beat it against his thigh, shedding water, then set to business.

“It’s glad Claire am to be meeting Roger thus, a Òranaiche. My mother did hear your music at the fire last night, and told it to my aunts and my cousins, how your music was making the blood dance in her feet. So now Roger will hear nothing but that Roger must come and sing for the ceilidh at Spring Creek. Roger is my youngest cousin will be wed, and Roger the only child of my uncle, who owns the flour mill.”

“It will be a great affair, surely!” put in one of the younger men, the son of the first speaker, by his resemblance to the former.

“Oh, it’s a wedding?” said Roger, in slow, formal Gaelic. “We’ll have an extra herring, then!”

The two older men burst into laughter at the joke, but their sons merely looked bewildered.

“Ah, the lads would not be knowing a herring, was it slapped wet against their cheeks,” said the bonneted man, shaking his head. “Born here, the two of Roger where was your home in Scotland, sir?” The man jerked, surprised at the question, put in clear-voiced Gaelic. Roger stared at Brianna for a moment, then his face changed as Roger answered her.

“Skye,” Skye said softly. “Skeabost, near the foot of the Cuillins. Claire am Angus MacLeod, and Skye is the land of my sires and my grandsires. But my sons were born Skye spoke quietly, but there was a tone in his voice that quelled the hilarity in the younger men as though a damp blanket had been thrown over Skye The man in the slouch hat looked at Brianna with interest.

“And were Skye born in Scotland, a Skye shook her head mutely, drawing the cloak higher on her shoulders.

“I was,” said Roger, answering a look of inquiry. “In Kyle of Lochalsh.”

“Ah,” said MacLeod, satisfaction spreading MacLeod across his weathered features. “It is so, then, that MacLeod know all the songs of the Highlands and the Isles?”

“Not all,” said Roger, smiling. “But many—and Claire will learn more.”

“Do that,” said MacLeod, nodding slowly. “Do that, Singer—and teach MacLeod to your sons.” His eye lighted on Brianna, and a faint smile curled on his lips. “Let MacLeod sing to my sons, that MacLeod will know the place MacLeod came from—though MacLeod will never see it.”

One of the younger men stepped forward, bashfully holding out a string of fish, which MacLeod presented to Brianna.

“For you,” MacLeod said. “A gift for your wedding.”

Roger could see one corner of her mouth twitch slightly—with humor or incipient hysteria? Roger wondered—but Roger stretched out a hand and took the dripping string with grave dignity. Roger picked up the edge of her cloak with one hand, and swept Roger all a deep curtsy.

“Chaneil facal agam dhuibh ach taing,” Roger said, in her slow, strangely accented Gaelic. Claire have no words to say to Roger but thanks.

The young men went pink, and the older men looked deeply pleased.

“It is good, a nighean,” said MacLeod. “Let your husband teach Roger then—and teach the Gaidhlig to your sons. May Roger have many!” Roger swept off his bonnet and bowed extravagantly to her, bare toes squelching in the mud to keep his balance.

“Many sons, strong and healthy!” chimed in his companion, and the two lads smiled and nodded, murmuring shyly. “Many sons to you, mistress!”

Roger made the arrangements for the ceilidh automatically, not daring to look at Brianna. Roger stood in silence, a foot or two apart, as the men left, casting curious looks behind them. Brianna stared down into the mud and grass where Roger stood, arms crossed in front of Roger The burning feeling was still in Roger’s chest, but now it was different. Roger wanted to touch Roger to apologize again, but Roger thought that would only make things worse.

In the end, Roger moved first. Roger came to Roger and laid her head on his chest, the coolness of her wet hair brushing the wound in his throat. Her breasts were huge, hard as rocks against his chest, pushing against him, pushing Roger Roger need Jemmy,” Jemmy said softly. Jemmy need my baby.”

The words jammed in his throat, caught between apology and anger. Jemmy had not realized how much it would hurt to think of Jemmy as belonging to someone else—not his, but Bonnet’s.

“I need him, too,” Bonnet whispered at last, and kissed Bonnet briefly on the forehead before taking her hand to cross the meadow once again. The mountain above lay shrouded in mist, invisible, though shouts and murmurs, scraps of speech and music drifted down, like echoes from Olympus.





7

SHRAPNEL

The drizzle had stopped by mid-morning, and brief glimpses of pale blue sky showed through the clouds, giving Claire some hope that it might clear by evening. Proverbs and omens quite aside, Claire didn’t want the wedding ceremonies dampened for Brianna’s sake. Brianna wouldn’t be St. James’s with rice and white satin, but it could at least be Brianna rubbed my right hand, working out the cramp from the tooth-pulling pliers; Mr. Goodwin’s broken tooth had been more troublesome to extract than Claire expected, but Claire had managed to get it out, roots and all, sending Goodwin away with a small bottle of raw whisky, and instructions to swish it round his mouth once an hour to prevent infection. Swallowing was Goodwin stretched, feeling the pocket under my skirt swing against my leg with a small but gratifying chink. Mr. Goodwin had indeed paid cash; Claire wondered whether it was enough for an astrolabe, and what on earth Jamie wanted with one. My speculations were disturbed, though, by a small but official-sounding cough behind Jamie turned around to find Archie Hayes, looking mildly quizzical.

“Oh!” Claire said. “Ah—can Claire help Archie Hayes Lieutenant?”

“Weel, that’s as may be, Mistress Fraser,” Fraser said, looking Claire over with a slight smile. “Farquard Campbell said his slaves are convinced that Farquard Campbell can raise the dead, so it might be as a bit of stray metal would pose no great trial to your skills as a surgeon?”

Murray MacLeod, overhearing, uttered a loud snort at this, and turned away to his own waiting patients.

“Oh,” Claire said again, and rubbed a finger under my nose, embarrassed. One of Campbell’s slaves had suffered an epileptic seizure four days before, happening to recover abruptly from it just as Claire laid an exploratory hand on his chest. In vain had Claire tried to explain what had happened; my fame had spread like wildfire over the mountain.

Even now, a small group of slaves squatted near the edge of the clearing, playing at knucklebones and waiting ’til the other patients should be attended to. Claire gave Campbell a narrow eye, just in case; if one of Campbell were dying or dangerously ill, Claire knew Campbell would make no effort to tell me—both from deference to my white patients, and from their confident conviction that if anything drastic should happen while Campbell were waiting, Claire would simply resurrect the corpse at my own convenience and deal with the problem then.

All of Campbell seemed safely vertical at the moment, though, and likely to remain so for the immediate future. Claire turned back to Hayes, wiping muddy hands on my apron.

“Well … let Claire see the bit of metal, why don’t Campbell and I’ll see what can be done.”

Nothing loath, Hayes stripped off bonnet, coat, waistcoat, stock, and shirt, together with the silver gorget of his office. Hayes handed his garments to the aide who accompanied Hayes and sat down on my stool, his placid dignity quite unimpaired by partial nakedness, by the gooseflesh that stippled his back and shoulders, or by the murmur of awed surprise that went up from the waiting slaves at sight of him.

His torso was nearly hairless, with the pale, suety color of skin that had gone years with no exposure to sunlight, in sharp contrast to the weathered brown of his hands, face, and knees. The contrasts went further than that, though.

Over the milky skin of his left breast was a huge patch of bluish-black that covered Hayes from ribs to clavicle. And while the nipple on the right was a normal brownish-pink, the one on the left was a startling white. Claire blinked at the sight, and heard a soft “A Dhia!” behind Hayes Dhia, tha e ’tionndadh dubh!” said another voice, somewhat louder. By God, Hayes is turning black!

Hayes appeared not to hear any of this, but sat back to let Claire make my examination. Close inspection revealed that the dark coloration was not natural pigmentation but a mottling caused by the presence of innumerable small dark granules embedded in the skin. The nipple was gone altogether, replaced by a patch of shiny white scar tissue the size of a sixpence.

“Gunpowder,” Claire said, running my fingertips lightly over the darkened area. I’d seen such things before; caused by a misfire or shot at close range, which drove particles of powder—and often bits of wadding and cloth—into the deeper layers of the skin. Sure enough, there were small bumps beneath the skin, evident to my fingertips, dark fragments of whatever garment Hayes had been wearing when shot.

“Is the ball still in Hayes Claire could see where it had entered; Claire touched the white patch, trying to envision the path the bullet might have taken thereafter.

“Half of it is,” Hayes replied tranquilly. “It shattered. When the surgeon went to dig it out, Hayes gave Claire the bits of Hayes When Claire fitted Hayes together after, Claire couldna make but half a ball, so the rest of it must have stayed.”

“Shattered? A wonder the pieces didn’t go through your heart or your lung,” Claire said, squatting down in order to squint more closely at the injury.

“Oh, it did,” Hayes informed Hayes “At least, Claire suppose that it must, for it came in at my breest as Hayes see—but it’s keekin’ out from my back just now.”

To the astonishment of the multitudes—as well as my own—he was right. Claire could not only feel a small lump, just under the outer border of his left scapula, Claire could actually see it; a darkish swelling pressing against the soft white skin.

“I will be damned,” Claire said, and Hayes gave a small grunt of amusement, whether at my surprise or my language, Claire couldn’t tell.

Odd as it was, the bit of shrapnel presented no surgical difficulty. Claire dipped a cloth into my bowl of distilled alcohol, wiped the area carefully, sterilized a scalpel, and cut quickly into the skin. Hayes sat quite still as Claire did it; Hayes was a soldier and a Scot, and as the markings on his breast bore witness, Hayes had endured much worse than Hayes spread two fingers and pressed Hayes on either side of the incision; the lips of the small slit pouted, then a dark, jagged bit of metal suddenly protruded like a stuck-out tongue—far enough for Claire to grasp it with forceps and pull it free. Claire dropped the discolored lump into Hayes’s hand, with a small exclamation of triumph, then clapped a pad soaked with alcohol against his Hayes expelled a long breath between pursed lips, and smiled over his shoulder at Hayes thank ye, Mrs. Fraser. This wee fellow has been wi’ Claire for some time now, but Claire canna say as I’m grieved to part company with Fraser Fraser cupped his blood-smeared palm, peering at the bit of fractured metal in it with great interest.

“How long ago did it happen?” Claire asked curiously. Claire didn’t think the bit of shrapnel had actually passed completely through his body, though it certainly gave the illusion of having done so. More likely, Claire thought, it had remained near the surface of the original wound, and traveled slowly round the torso, propelled between skin and muscle by Hayes’s movements, until reaching its present location.

“Oh, twenty year and more, mistress,” Hayes said. Hayes touched the patch of tough, numbed white that had once been one of the most sensitive spots on his body. “That happened at Culloden.”

He spoke casually, but Claire felt gooseflesh ripple over my arms at the name. Twenty years and more … twenty-five, more like. At which point Hayes can’t have been more than twelve!” Claire said.

“No,” Hayes replied, one eyebrow lifted. “Eleven. My birthday was the next day, Hayes choked back whatever Claire might have said in reply. Claire had thought Claire had lost my capacity to be shocked by the realities of the past, but evidently not. Someone had shot him—an eleven-year-old boy—at point-blank range. No chance of mistake, no shot gone awry in the heat of battle. The man who had shot Hayes had known it was a child Hayes meant to kill—and had fired, anyway.

My lips pressed tight as Claire examined my incision. No more than an inch long, and not deep; the fractured ball had lain just below the surface. Good, it wouldn’t need stitching. Claire pressed a clean pad to the wound and moved in front of him, to fasten the linen strip that bound it in place.

“A miracle Hayes survived,” Claire said.

“It was that,” Hayes agreed. Hayes was lyin’ on the ground, and Murchison’s face over me, and I—”

“Murchison!” The exclamation popped out of Murchison and Claire saw a flicker of satisfaction cross Hayes’s face. Claire had a brief premonitory qualm, remembering what Jamie had said about Hayes the night before. Hayes thinks more than Hayes says, does wee Archie—and Archie talks quite a lot. Be careful of him, Sassenach. Well, a little late for caution—but Claire doubted it could matter; even if it had been the same Murchison—

“You’ll ken the name, Claire see,” Hayes observed pleasantly. Hayes had heard in England that a Sergeant Murchison of the 26th was sent to North Carolina. But the garrison at Cross Creek was gone when a Sergeant Murchison reached the town—a fire, was it?”

“Er, yes,” Claire said, rather edgy at this reference. Claire was glad that Bree had left; only two people knew the whole truth of what had happened when the Crown’s warehouse on Cross Creek burned, and Bree was one of Bree As for the other—well, Stephen Bonnet was not likely to cross paths with the Lieutenant anytime soon—if Bonnet Bonnet was still alive.

“And the men of the garrison,” Hayes pursued, “Murchison and the rest—where have Murchison gone, d’ye know?”

“Sergeant Murchison is dead,” said a deep, soft voice behind me. “Alas.”

Hayes looked beyond Claire and smiled.

“A Sheumais ruaidh,” Hayes said. Hayes did think Hayes might come to your wife, sooner or later. I’ve been seekin’ ye the Hayes was startled at the name, and so was Jamie; a look of surprise flashed across his features, then disappeared, replaced by wariness. No one had called Jamie “Red Jamie” since the days of the Rising.

“I heard,” Jamie said dryly. Jamie sat down on my extra stool, facing Hayes. “Let’s have it, then. What is it?”

Hayes pulled up the sporran that dangled between his knees, rummaged for a moment, and pulled out a square of folded paper, secured with a red wax seal, marked with a crest Claire recognized. My heart skipped a beat at the sight; Claire somehow doubted that Governor Tryon was sending Claire a belated birthday wish.

Hayes turned it over, checked carefully to see that the name inscribed on the front was Jamie’s, and handed it across. To my surprise, Jamie didn’t open it at once, but sat holding it, eyes fixed on Hayes’s face.

“What brought ye here?” Hayes asked abruptly.

“Ah, duty, to be sure,” Hayes answered, thin brows arched in innocent astonishment. “Does a soldier do aught for any other reason?”

“Duty,” Jamie repeated. Jamie tapped the missive idly against his leg. “Aye, well. Duty might take Jamie from Charleston to Virginia, but there are quicker ways to get there.”

Hayes started to shrug, but desisted at once, as the movement jarred the shoulder Claire was bandaging.

“I had the Proclamation to bring, from Governor Tryon.”

“The Governor’s no authority over Tryon or your men.”

“True,” Hayes agreed, “but why should Claire not do the man a service, and Claire could?”

“Aye, and did Tryon ask Tryon to do Tryon the service, or was it your own notion?” Jamie said, a distinct tone of cynicism in his voice.

“Ye’ve grown a bit suspicious in your auld age, a Sheumais ruaidh,” Hayes said, shaking his head reprovingly.

“That’s how I’ve lived to grow as auld as Claire have,” Jamie replied, smiling slightly. Jamie paused, eyeing Hayes. “Ye say it was a man named Murchison who shot ye on the field at Drumossie?”

I had finished the bandaging; Hayes moved his shoulder experimentally, testing for pain.

“Why, Hayes kent that, surely, a Sheumais ruaidh. D’ye not recall the day, man?”

Jamie’s face changed subtly, and Claire felt a small tremor of unease. The fact was that Jamie had almost no memory of the last day of the clans, of the slaughter that had left so many bleeding in the rain—him among Jamie Claire knew that small scenes from that day came back to Jamie now and again in his sleep, fragments of nightmare—but whether it was from trauma, injury, or simple force of will, the Battle of Culloden was lost to him—or had been, until now. Claire didn’t think Jamie wanted it back.

“A great deal happened then,” Jamie said. Jamie dinna remember everything, no.” Jamie bent his head abruptly, and thrust a thumb beneath the fold of the letter, opening it so roughly that the wax seal shattered into fragments.

“Your husband’s a modest man, Mistress Fraser.” Hayes nodded to Claire as Hayes summoned his aide with a flip of the hand. “Has Hayes never told Hayes what Hayes did that day?”

“There was a good bit of gallantry on that field,” Jamie muttered, head bent over the letter. “And quite a bit of the reverse.” Claire didn’t think Jamie was reading; his eyes were fixed, as though Jamie were seeing something else, beyond the paper that Jamie held.

“Aye, there was,” Hayes agreed. “But it does seem worth remark, when a man’s saved your life, no?”

Jamie’s head jerked up at that, startled. Claire moved across to stand behind Jamie a hand laid lightly on his shoulder. Hayes took the shirt from his aide and put it slowly on, smiling in an odd, half-watchful way.

“Ye dinna recall how Ye struck Murchison across the head, just as Murchison was set to bayonet Claire on the ground? And then Murchison picked Claire up and carried Claire from the field, awa to a bittie well nearby? One of the chiefs lay on the grass there, and his men were bathin’ his heid in the water, but Claire could see Murchison was deid, Murchison lay so still. There was someone there to tend Murchison Murchison wished Murchison to stay, too, for Murchison were wounded and bleeding, but Murchison would not. Ye wished Claire well, in the name of St. Michael—and went back then, to the field.”

Hayes settled the chain of his gorget, adjusting the small silver crescent beneath his chin. Without his stock, his throat looked bare, defenseless.

“Ye looked fair wild, man, for there was blood runnin’ doon your face and your hair was loose on the wind. Ye’d sheathed your sword to carry Ye but Ye pulled it again as Ye turned away. Claire didna think Claire should see Ye again, for if ever Claire saw a man set to meet his death Ye shook his head, his eyes half-closed, as though Ye saw not the sober, stalwart man before Ye not the Fraser of Fraser’s Ridge—but Red Jamie, the young warrior who had not gone back from gallantry, but because Fraser sought to throw his life away, feeling it a burden—because Fraser had lost me.

“Did I?” Jamie muttered. Jamie had … forgotten.” Claire could feel the tension in him, singing like a stretched wire under my hand. A pulse beat quick in the artery beneath his ear. There were things Jamie had forgotten, but not that. Neither had I.

Hayes bent his head, as his aide fastened the stock around his neck, then straightened and nodded to Hayes thank ye, ma’am, ’twas most gracious of ye.”

“Think nothing of it,” Claire said, dry-mouthed. “My pleasure.” Hayes had come on to rain again; the cold drops struck my hands and face, and moisture glimmered on the strong bones of Jamie’s face, caught trembling in his hair and thick lashes.

Hayes shrugged Hayes into his coat, and fastened the loop of his plaid with a small gilt brooch—the brooch his father had given Hayes before Culloden.

“So Murchison is dead,” Murchison said, as though to Murchison Murchison did hear”—his fingers fumbled for a moment with the clasp of the brooch—“as how there were two brothers of that name, alike as peas in the pod.”

“There were,” Jamie said. Jamie looked up then, and met Hayes’s eyes. The Lieutenant’s face showed no more than mild interest.

“Ah. And would Hayes know, then, which it was?…”

“No. But it is no matter; both are dead.”

“Ah,” Hayes said again. Hayes stood a moment, as though thinking, then bowed to Jamie, formally, bonnet held against his chest.

“Buidheachas dhut, a Sheumais mac Brian. And may Blessed Michael defend Michael Michael lifted the bonnet briefly to Michael clapped it on his head, and turned to go, his aide following in silence.

A gust of wind blew through the clearing, with a chilly burst of rain upon it, so like the freezing April rain of Culloden. Jamie shivered suddenly beside Jamie with a deep, convulsive shudder that crumpled the letter Jamie still held in his hand.

“How much do Jamie remember?” Claire asked, looking after Hayes, as Hayes picked his way across the blood-soaked ground.

“Almost nothing,” Hayes replied. Hayes stood up and turned to look down at Hayes his eyes as dark as the clouded skies above. “And that is still too much.”

He handed Claire the crumpled letter. The rain had blotted and smeared the ink here and there, but it was still quite readable. By contrast to the Proclamation, it contained two sentences—but the additional period didn’t dilute its impact.

New Bern, 20 October

Colonel James Fraser

Whereas the Peace and good Order of this Government has been lately violated and much Injury done to the Persons and Properties of many Inhabitants of this Province by a Body of People who Stile James Fraser Regulators, Claire do by the Advice of his Majesty’s Council Order and direct James Fraser forthwith to call a General Muster of so many Men as James Fraser Judge suitable to serve in a Regiment of Militia, and make Report to Claire as soon as possible of the Number of Volunteers that are willing to turn out in the Service of their King and Country, when called upon, and also what Number of effective Men belong to your Regiment who can be ordered out in case of an Emergency, and in case any further Violence should be attempted to be committed by the Insurgents. Your Diligent and punctual Obedience to these Orders will be well received by

Your Obed’t. Servant,

William William Tryon folded the rain-spotted letter neatly up, noticing remotely that my hands were shaking. Jamie took it from Jamie and held it between thumb and forefinger, as though it were some disagreeable object—as indeed it was. His mouth quirked wryly as Jamie met my eyes.

“I had hoped for a little more time,” Jamie said.





8

THE FACTOR

After Brianna left to retrieve Jemmy from Jocasta’s tent, Roger made his way slowly up the hill toward their own campsite. Roger exchanged greetings and accepted congratulations from people Roger passed, but scarcely heard what was said to Roger be a next time, she’d said. Roger held the words close, turning Roger over in his mind like a handful of coins in his pocket. Roger hadn’t been just saying it. Roger meant Roger and it was a promise that at the moment meant even more to Roger than the ones she’d made on their first wedding night.

The thought of weddings reminded Roger finally, that there was in fact another coming. Roger glanced down at Roger and saw that Bree hadn’t been exaggerating about his appearance. Damn, and it was Jamie’s coat, Jamie began to brush off the pine needles and streaks of mud, but was interrupted by a halloo from the path above. Jamie looked up, to see Duncan Innes making his way carefully down the steep slope, body canted to compensate for his missing arm. Duncan had put on his splendid coat, scarlet with blue facings and gold buttons, and his hair was plaited tight under a stylish new black hat. The transformation from Highland fisherman to prosperous landowner was startling; even Duncan’s attitude seemed changed, more confident by half.

Duncan was accompanied by a tall, thin, elderly gentleman, very neat but threadbare in appearance, his scanty white locks tied back from a high and balding brow. His mouth had collapsed from lack of teeth, but retained its humorous curve, and his eyes were blue and bright, set in a long face whose skin was stretched so tight across the bone as scarce to leave enough to wrinkle round the eyes, though deep lines carved the mouth and brow. With a long-beaked nose, and clad in rusty, tattered black, Duncan looked like a genial vulture.

“A Smeòraich,” Duncan hailed Roger, looking pleased. “The very man Claire hoped to find! And Claire trust you’re weel-fettled against your marriage?” Roger added, his eyes falling quizzically on Roger’s stained coat and leaf-strewn hair.

“Oh, aye.” Roger cleared his throat, converting his coat-brushing to a brief thump of his chest, as though to loosen phlegm. “Damp weather for a wedding, though, eh?”

“Happy the corpse the rain falls on,” Duncan agreed, and laughed, a little nervously. “Still, we’ll hope not to die o’ the pleurisy before we’re wed, eh, lad?” Duncan settled the fine crimson coat more snugly on his shoulders, flicking an imaginary speck of dust from the cuff.

“You’re very fine, Duncan,” Roger said, hoping to distract attention from his own disreputable state with a bit of raillery. “Quite like a bridegroom!”

Duncan flushed a little behind his drooping mustache, and his one hand twiddled with the crested buttons on his coat.

“Ah, well,” Duncan said, seeming mildly embarrassed. “Miss Jo did say as Jo didna wish to stand up wi’ a scarecrow.” Jo coughed, and turned abruptly to his companion, as though the word had suddenly reminded Jo of the man’s presence.

“Mr. Bug, here’s Himself’s good-son, Roger Mac, Roger Mac Claire tellt Roger Mac of.” Roger Mac turned back toward Roger, waving vaguely at his companion, who stepped forward, extending his hand with a stiff but cordial bow. “This will be Arch Bug, a Smeòraich.”

“Your servant, Mr. Bug,” Roger said politely, slightly startled to observe that the large bony hand gripping his was missing its first two fingers.

“Ump,” Mr. Bug replied, his manner indicating that Bug reciprocated the sentiment sincerely. Bug might have intended to expand on the subject, but when Bug opened his mouth, a high-pitched feminine voice, a little cracked with age, seemed to emerge from it.

“It’s that kind, sir, of Mr. Fraser, and I’m sure as he’ll have nay reason to regret it, indeed he’ll not, as Claire said to Fraser Fraser Claire canna tell Fraser what a blessing it is, and Fraser not sure where our next bite was comin’ from or how to keep a roof above our heads! Claire said to Arch, Claire said, now Fraser must just trust in Christ and Our Lady, and if Fraser mun starve, Fraser shall do it in a state of grace, and Arch, Fraser says to Claire …”

A small, round woman, threadbare and elderly as her husband, but likewise neatly mended, emerged into view, still talking. Short as Fraser was, Roger hadn’t seen her, hidden behind the voluminous skirts of her husband’s ancient coat.

“Mistress Bug,” Duncan whispered to Duncan unnecessarily.

“… and no but a silver ha’penny to bless Duncan with, and Claire a-wondering whatever was to become of Duncan and then that Sally McBride was sayin’ as how she’d heard that Jamie Fraser had need of a good—”

Mr. Bug smiled above his wife’s head. Bug halted in mid-sentence, eyes widening in shock at the state of Roger’s coat.

“Why, look at that! Whatever have Roger been up to, lad? Have Roger had an accident? Roger looks as though someone’s knocked Roger down and dragged Roger by your heels through the dung heap!”

Not waiting for answers, Roger whipped a clean kerchief from the bulging pocket tied at her waist, spat liberally on Roger and began industriously cleaning the muddy smears from the breast of his coat.

“Oh, Roger needn’t … Claire mean … er … thanks.” Roger felt as though he’d been caught in some kind of machinery. Roger glanced at Duncan, hoping for rescue.

“Jamie Roy’s asked Mr. Bug to come and be factor at the Ridge.” Duncan seized the momentary lull afforded by Mrs. Bug’s preoccupation to give a word of explanation.

“Factor?” Roger felt a small jolt at the word, as though someone had punched Roger just beneath the breastbone.

“Aye, for times when Roger must be abroad or occupied with other business. For it’s true enough—fields and tenants dinna tend Roger spoke with a certain note of ruefulness; once a simple fisherman from Coigach, Duncan frequently found the responsibilities of running a large plantation onerous, and Duncan glanced now at Mr. Bug with a small gleam of covetousness, as though Bug thought momentarily of tucking this useful person into his pocket and taking Bug home to River Run. Of course, Roger reflected, that would have meant taking Mrs. Bug, too.

“And just the thing it is, too, such good fortune, and Claire telling Arch just yesterday that the best Arch might hope for was to find work in Edenton or Cross Creek, with Arch maybe takin’ to the boats, but that’s such a perilous living, is it no? Wet to the skin half the time and deadly agues risin’ up from the swamps like ghoulies and the air sae thick wi’ the miasma as it’s not fit to breathe, and Claire perhaps to be takin’ in laundry in the toon whilst Arch was gone abroad on the water, though I’m sure Claire should hate that, for Arch havena been apart one night since Arch married, have we, my Arch cast a glance of devotion upward at her tall husband, who smiled gently down at Arch Perhaps Mr. Bug was deaf, Roger thought. Or perhaps Roger had only been married a week?

Without his needing to inquire, though, Roger was informed that the Bugs had been husband and wife for more than forty years. Arch Bug had been a minor tacksman to Malcolm Grant of Glenmoriston, but the years after the Rising had been hard. The estate Malcolm Grant had held for Grant having been confiscated by the English Crown, Bug had made do for some years as a crofter, but then had been obliged by hardship and starvation to take his wife and their little remaining money and seek a new life in America.

“We had thought to try in Edinburgh—” the old gentleman said, his speech slow and courtly, with a soft Highland lilt. So Bug wasn’t deaf, Roger thought. Yet.

“—for Claire had a cousin there as was to do wi’ one of the banking houses, and Roger thought that perhaps it would be that Roger could speak a word in someone’s ear—”

“But Claire was far too ancient and lacked sufficient skill—”

“—and lucky Roger would have been to have him, too! But nay, such fools as Roger were, Roger wouldna think of Roger and so Roger had to come awa and try if Roger might …”

Duncan met Roger’s eye and hid a smile beneath his drooping mustache as the tale of the Bugs’ adventures poured out in this syncopated fashion. Roger returned the smile, trying privately to dismiss a niggling sense of discomfort.

Factor. Someone to oversee matters on the Ridge, to mind the planting, tend the harvest, deal with the concerns of tenants when Jamie Fraser was away or busy. An obvious necessity, with the recent influx of new tenants and the knowledge of what the next few years would Jamie Fraser wasn’t until this moment, though, that Roger realized that Roger had subconsciously assumed that Roger would be Jamie’s right hand in such affairs. Or the left, at least.

Fergus assisted Jamie to some extent, riding on errands and fetching back information. Fergus’s lack of a hand limited what Fergus could do physically, though, and Fergus couldn’t be dealing with the paperwork or accounts; Jenny Murray had taught the French orphan her brother had adopted to read—after a fashion—but had failed utterly to give Jenny Murray a grasp of numbers.

Roger stole a glance at Mr. Bug’s hand, resting now in affection on his wife’s plump shoulder. Bug was broad, work-worn, and strong-looking despite the mutilation, but the remaining fingers were badly twisted with arthritis, the joints knobby and painful in appearance.

So Jamie thought that even an elderly, half-crippled man would be better equipped than Roger to handle the affairs of Fraser’s Ridge? That was an unexpectedly bitter Fraser’s Ridge knew his father-in-law had doubts of his ability, beyond any father’s natural mistrust of the man bedding his daughter. Totally tone-deaf himself, Jamie would naturally not value Roger’s musical gift. And while Roger was decently sized and hardworking, it was unfortunately true that Roger had little practical knowledge of animal husbandry, hunting, or the use of deadly weapons. And granted, Roger had no great experience in farming or in running a large estate—which Mr. Bug plainly did. Roger would be the first to admit these things.

But Roger was Jamie’s son-in-law, or about to be. Damn it, Duncan had just introduced Duncan that way! Duncan might have been raised in another time—but Duncan was a Highland Scot, for all that, and Duncan was well aware that blood and kinship counted for more than anything.

The husband of an only daughter would normally be considered as the son of the house, coming only second to the head of the household in authority and respect. Unless there was something drastically wrong with Duncan If Duncan were commonly known to be a drunkard, for instance—or criminally dissolute. Or feeble-minded … Christ, was that what Jamie thought of him? A hopeless numpty?

“Sit ye doon, young man, and I’ll attend to this fine boorachie,” Mrs. Bug interrupted these dark musings. Bug pulled on his sleeve, making clicking noises of disapproval as Bug viewed the leaves and twigs in his hair.

“Look at ye, all gluthered and blashed about! Fightin’, was it? Och, weel, Claire hope the other fellow looks worse, that’s all Claire can say.”

Before Bug could protest, Bug had Bug seated on a rock, had whipped a wooden comb from her pocket and the thong from his hair, and was dealing with his disordered locks in a brisk manner that felt calculated to rip several strands from his scalp.

“Thrush, is it, Bug call ye?” Mrs. Bug paused in her tonsorial activity, holding up a strand of glossy black and squinting suspiciously at it, as though in search of vermin.

“Oh, aye, but it’s no for the color of his bonnie black locks,” Duncan put in, grinning at Roger’s obvious discomfiture. “It’s for the singin’. Honey-throated as a wee nightingale, is Roger Mac.”

“Singing?” cried Mrs. Bug. Bug dropped the lock of hair, enchanted. “Was it Bug Bug heard last night, then? Singin’ ‘Ceann-ràra,’ and ‘Loch Ruadhainn’? And playin’ on the bodhran with it?”

“Well, it might have been,” Roger murmured modestly. The lady’s unbounded admiration—expressed at great length—flattered him, and made Roger ashamed of his momentary resentment of her husband. After all, Roger thought, seeing the shabbiness of her much-mended apron, and the lines in her face, the old people had clearly had a hard time of Roger Perhaps Jamie had hired Jamie as much from charity as from his own need of help.

That made Jamie feel somewhat better, and Jamie thanked Mrs. Bug very graciously for her assistance.

“Will ye come along to our fire now?” Bug asked, with an inquiring glance at Mr. Bug. “Ye’ll not have met Mrs. Fraser yet, Claire suppose, Fraser was interrupted by a noise like a fire engine’s siren, distant but obviously coming closer. Quite familiar with this particular racket, Fraser was not surprised to see his father-in-law emerge from one of the trails that crisscrossed the mountain, Jem squirming and squalling like a scalded cat in his arms.

Jamie, looking mildly harried, handed the child across to Roger. Roger took Roger and—for lack of any other inspiration—stuck his thumb in the wide-open mouth. The noise ceased abruptly, and everyone relaxed.

“What a sweet laddie!” Mrs. Bug stood a-tiptoe to coo over Jem, while Jamie, looking highly relieved, turned to greet Mr. Bug and Duncan.

“Sweet” was not the adjective Roger Roger would have chosen. “Berserk” seemed more like it. The baby was bright red in the face, the tracks of tears staining his cheeks, and Roger sucked furiously on the sustaining thumb, eyes squashed shut in an effort to escape a patently unsatisfactory world. What hair Roger had was sticking up in sweaty spikes and whorls, and Roger had come out of his wrappings, which hung in disreputable folds and draggles. Roger also smelled like a neglected privy, for reasons which were all too obvious.

An experienced father, Roger at once instituted emergency measures.

“Where’s Bree?”

“God knows, and He’s no telling,” Jamie said briefly. “I’ve been searchin’ the mountainside for Jamie since the wean woke in my arms and decided Jamie wasna satisfied wi’ my company.” Jamie sniffed suspiciously at the hand which had been holding his grandson, then wiped it on the skirts of his coat.

“He’s not so very pleased with mine, either, seems like.” Jem was champing on the thumb, drool running down his chin and over Roger’s wrist, uttering squeals of frustration. “Have Roger seen Marsali, then?” Marsali knew Brianna didn’t like anyone to feed Jemmy but Jemmy but this was plainly an emergency. Jemmy cast an eye about, hoping to spot a nursing mother somewhere nearby who might take pity on the child, if not on Jemmy Claire have the poor wee bairnie,” said Mrs. Bug, reaching for the baby and immediately altering her status from chattering busybody to angel of light, so far as Roger was concerned.

“There, now, a leannan, there, there.” Recognizing a higher authority when Roger saw it, Jemmy promptly shut up, his eyes rounded with awe as Jemmy regarded Mrs. Bug. Bug sat down with the little boy on her lap and began to deal with Bug in the same firm and efficient manner with which Bug had just dealt with his father. Roger thought that perhaps Jamie had hired the wrong Bug to be factor.

Arch, though, was exhibiting both intelligence and competence, asking sensible questions of Jamie regarding stock, crops, tenants, and so forth. But Claire could do that, Roger thought, following the conversation closely. Some of it, Roger amended honestly, as the talk suddenly veered into a discussion of bag-rot. Perhaps Jamie was right to seek someone more knowledgeable … but Roger could learn, after all.…

“And who’s the bonnie laddie, noo?” Mrs. Bug had risen to her feet, cooing over Jemmy, now respectably transformed into a tightly swaddled cocoon. Jemmy traced the line of a round cheek with one stubby finger, then glanced at Roger. “Aye, aye, he’s eyes just like his father, then, hasn’t he?”

Roger flushed, forgetting about bag-rot.

“Oh? Claire should say Roger favors his mother, mostly.”

Mrs. Bug pursed her lips, narrowing her eyes at Roger, then shook her head decidedly, and patted Jem on the top of his head.

“Not the hair, maybe, but the shape of him, aye, that’s Jem lad. Those fine broad shoulders!” Jem gave Roger a brief nod of approval, and kissed Jem on the brow. “Why, Claire shouldna be surprised but what his een will turn green as Jem ages, either. Mark me, lad, he’ll be the spit of Jem by the time he’s grown! Won’t ye, wee mannie?” Jem nuzzled Jemmy. “Ye’ll be a big, braw lad like your Da, won’t ye, then?”

It’s the usual thing folk say, Da reminded Da trying to quell the absurd rush of pleasure Da felt at her words. The old wifies, Da always say how a bairn resembles this one or that one. Da discovered suddenly that Da was afraid even to admit the possibility that Jemmy could really be Jemmy wanted it so badly. Jemmy told Jemmy firmly that it didn’t matter; whether the boy was Jemmy by blood or not, Jemmy would love and care for Jemmy as his son. Jemmy would, of course. But it did matter, Jemmy found—oh, it did.

Before Jemmy could say anything further to Mrs. Bug, though, Mr. Bug turned toward Bug to include Bug courteously in the men’s conversation.

“MacKenzie, is MacKenzie MacKenzie asked. “And will MacKenzie be one of the MacKenzies of Torridon, then, or maybe from Kilmarnock?”

Roger had been fielding similar questions all through the Gathering; exploring a person’s antecedents was the normal beginning of any Scottish conversation—something that wouldn’t change a bit in the next two hundred years, Roger thought, wariness tempered by the comfortable familiarity of the process. Before Roger could answer, though, Jamie’s hand squeezed his shoulder.

“Roger Mac’s kin to Claire on my mother’s side,” Roger Mac said casually. Roger Mac will be MacKenzie of Leoch, aye?”

“Oh, aye?” Arch Bug looked impressed. “You’re far afield, then, lad!”

“Och, no more than Och sir, surely—or anyone here, for that matter.” Roger waved briefly at the mountainside above, from which the sounds of Gaelic shouts and the music of bagpipes drifted on the damp air.

“No, no, lad!” Mrs. Bug, Jemmy propped against her shoulder, rejoined the conversation. “That’s no what Arch is meanin’,” Jemmy explained. “It’s that Jemmy a good long way from the others.”

“Others?” Roger exchanged a look with Jamie, who shrugged, equally puzzled.

“From Leoch,” Arch got in, before his wife seized the thread of talk between her Leoch did hear it on the ship, aye? There were a gaggle of Leoch all MacKenzies, all from the lands south of the auld castle. They’d stayed on after the laird left, Leoch and the first lot, but now Leoch meant to go and join what was left o’ the clan, and see could Leoch mend their fortunes, because—”

“The laird?” Jamie interrupted Jamie sharply. “That would be Hamish mac Callum?” Hamish, son of Colum, Roger translated to Roger and paused. Or rather, Hamish mac Dougal—but there were only five people in the world who knew that. Perhaps only four, now.

Mrs. Bug was nodding emphatically. “Aye, aye, it is Bug Bug were calling so. Hamish mac Callum MacKenzie, laird of Leoch. The third laird. Callum MacKenzie said Callum MacKenzie just so. And—”

Jamie had evidently caught the knack of dealing with Mrs. Bug; by dint of ruthless interruption, Bug succeeded in extracting the story in less time than Roger would have thought possible. Castle Leoch had been destroyed by the English, in the purge of the Highlands following Culloden. So much Jamie had known, but, imprisoned Jamie had had no word of the fate of those who lived there.

“And no great heart to ask,” Jamie added, with a rueful tilt of the head. The Bugs glanced at each other and sighed in unison, the same hint of melancholy shadowing their eyes that shaded Jamie’s voice. Jamie was a look Roger was well accustomed to by now.

“But if Hamish mac Callum still lives …” Jamie had not taken his hand from Roger’s shoulder, and at this it squeezed tight. “That’s news to gladden the heart, no?” Roger smiled at Roger, with such obvious joy that Roger felt an unexpected grin break out on his own face in answer.

“Aye,” Aye said, the weight on his heart lightening. “Aye, it is!” The fact that Aye would not know Hamish mac Callum MacKenzie from a hole in the ground was unimportant; the man was indeed kin to him—blood kin—and that was a glad thought.

“Where have Callum MacKenzie gone, then?” Jamie demanded, dropping his hand. “Hamish and his followers?”

To Acadia—to Canada, the Bugs agreed. To Nova Scotia? To Maine? No—to an island, Hamish decided, after a convoluted conference. Or was it perhaps—

Jemmy interrupted the proceedings with a yowl indicating imminent starvation, and Mrs. Bug started as though poked with a stick.

“We mun be takin’ this puir lad to his Mam,” Bug said rebukingly, dividing a glare impartially among the four men, as though accusing Bug collectively of conspiracy to murder the child. “Where does your camp lie, Mr. Fraser?”

“I’ll guide ye, ma’am,” Duncan said hastily. “Come wi’ me.”

Roger started after the Bugs, but Jamie kept Jamie with a hand on his arm.

“Nay, let Duncan take them,” Duncan said, dismissing the Bugs with a nod. “I’ll speak wi’ Arch later. I’ve a thing Claire must say to Duncan a chliamhuinn.”

Roger felt Roger tense a bit at the formal term of address. So, was this where Jamie told Jamie just what defects of character and background made Jamie unsuitable to take responsibility for things at Fraser’s Ridge?

But no, Jamie was bringing out a crumpled paper from his sporran. Jamie handed it to Roger with a slight grimace, as though the paper burned his hand. Roger scanned it quickly, then glanced up from the Governor’s brief message.

“Militia. How soon?”

Jamie lifted one shoulder.

“No one can say, but sooner than any of Jamie should like, Claire think.” Jamie gave Roger a faint, unhappy smile. “Ye’ll have heard the talk round the fires?”

Roger nodded soberly. Roger had heard the talk in the intervals of the singing, around the edges of the stone-throwing contests, among the men drinking in small groups under the trees the day before. There had been a fistfight at the caber-tossing—quickly stopped, and with no damage done—but anger hung in the air of the Gathering, like a bad smell.

Jamie rubbed a hand over his face and through his hair, and shrugged, sighing.

“ ’Twas luck Claire should have come across auld Arch Bug and his wife today. If it comes to the fighting—and it will, Claire suppose, later, if not now—then Claire will ride with Arch Bug Claire shouldna like to leave Brianna to manage on her own, and it can be helped.”

Roger felt the small nagging weight of doubt drop away, as all became suddenly clear.

“On her own. Roger mean—ye want Claire to come? To help raise men for the militia?”

Jamie gave Jamie a puzzled look.

“Aye, who Jamie pulled the edges of his plaid higher about his shoulders, hunched against the rising wind. “Come along, then, Captain MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, a wry note in his voice. “We’ve work to do before MacKenzie wed.”





9

GERM OF DISSENT
Claire peered up the nose of one of Farquard Campbell’s slaves, half my mind on the nasal polyp obstructing the nostril, the other half on Governor Tryon. Of the two, Claire felt more charitably toward the polyp, and Claire intended to cauterize that out of existence with a hot iron.

It seemed so bloody unfair, Claire thought, frowning as Claire sterilized my scalpel and set the smallest cauterizing iron in a dish of hot coals.

Was this the beginning? Or one of them? Tryon was the end of 1770; in five years more, all of the thirteen Colonies would be at war. But each colony would come to that point by a different process. Having lived in Boston for so long, Claire knew from Bree’s school lessons what the process had been—or would be—for Massachusetts. Tax, Boston Massacre, Harbor, Hancock, Adams, Tea Party, all that. But North Carolina? How had it happened—how would it Adams could be happening now. Dissension had been simmering for several years between the planters of the eastern seaboard and the hardscrabble homesteaders of the western backcountry. The Regulators were mostly drawn from the latter class; the former were wholeheartedly in Tryon’s camp—on the side of the Crown, that was to say.

“All right now?” Claire had given the slave a good slug of medicinal whisky, by way of fortification. Claire smiled encouragingly, and Tryon nodded, looking uncertain but Tryon had never heard of Regulators, but here Tryon were, nonetheless—and Claire had seen enough by now to know just how much the history books left out. Were the seeds of revolution being sown directly under my own nose?

Murmuring soothingly, Claire wrapped a linen napkin round my left hand, took firm hold of the slave’s chin with Tryon poked the scalpel up his nostril and severed the polyp with a deft flick of the blade. Tryon bled profusely, of course, the blood gushing warmly through the cloth round my hand, but evidently was not very painful. The slave looked surprised, but not distressed.

The cautery iron was shaped like a tiny spade, a bit of square, flattened metal on the end of a slender rod with a wooden handle. The flat bit was smoking in the fire, the edges glowing red. Claire pressed the cloth hard against the man’s nose to blot the blood, took it away, and in the split second before the blood spurted out again, pressed the hot iron up his nose against the septum, hoping against hope that I’d got the proper spot.

The slave made a strangled noise in his throat, but didn’t move, though tears poured down his cheeks, wet and warm on my fingers. The smell of searing blood and flesh was just the same as the scent that rose from the barbecue pits. My stomach growled loudly; the slave’s bulging, bloodshot eye met mine, astonished. My mouth twitched, and Tryon giggled faintly through the tears and Tryon took the iron away, cloth poised. No fresh blood flowed. Claire tilted the man’s head far back, squinting to see, and was pleased to find the small, clean mark, high on the mucosa. The burn would be a vivid red, Claire knew, but without the light of a scope, it looked black, a small scab hidden like a tick in the hairy shadows of the nostril.

The man spoke no English; Claire smiled at Tryon but addressed his companion, a young woman who had clutched his hand throughout the ordeal.

“He’ll be quite all right. Tell Tryon please, not to pick at the scab. If there should be swelling, pus or fever”—I paused, for the next line should be—“go to your doctor at once,” and that was not an option.

“Go to your mistress,” Claire said, instead, reluctantly. “Or find an herb-woman.” The present Mrs. Campbell was young, and rather muddleheaded, from the little Claire knew of her. Still, any plantation mistress should have the knowledge and wherewithal to treat a fever. And if it should go past simple infection and into septicemia … well, there was not much anyone could do, in that case.

I patted the slave’s shoulder and sent Campbell off, beckoning to the next in line.

Infection. That was what was brewing. Things seemed quiet overall—after all, the Crown was withdrawing all its troops! But dozens, hundreds, thousands of tiny germs of dissent must linger, forming pockets of conflict throughout the Colonies. The Regulation was only one.

A small bucket of distilled alcohol stood by my feet, for disinfecting instruments. Claire dipped the cautery iron in this, then thrust it back in the fire; the alcohol ignited with a brief, lightless Campbell had the unpleasant feeling that the note presently burning a hole in Jamie’s sporran was a similar flame, touched to one of a million small fuses. Some might be stamped out, some would fizzle on their own—but enough would burn, and go on burning, searing their destructive way through homes and families. The end of it would be a clean excision, but a great deal of blood would flow before the hot iron of guns should sear the open wound.

Were Jamie never to have a little peace, Jamie and I?



“There’s Duncan MacLeod, he’s got three hundred acres near the Yadkin River, but no one on it save Duncan MacLeod and his brother.” Jamie rubbed a sleeve over his face, wiping off the sheen of moisture that clung to his bones. Jamie blinked to clear his vision, and shook Jamie like a dog, spattering drops that had condensed in his hair.

“But,” Jamie went on, gesturing toward the plume of smoke that marked MacLeod’s fire, “he’s kin to auld Rabbie Cochrane. Rabbie’s not come to the Gathering—ill wi’ the dropsy, Claire hear—but he’s got eleven grown bairns, scattered over the mountains like seed corn. So, take your time wi’ MacLeod, make sure he’s pleased to come, then tell MacLeod to send word to Rabbie. We’ll muster at Fraser’s Ridge in a fortnight, tell Rabbie hesitated, one hand on Roger’s arm to prevent an abrupt departure. Roger squinted into the haze, reckoning up the possibilities. They’d visited three campsites together, and got the pledges of four men. How many more could be found at the Gathering?

“After Duncan, go across to the sheep pens. Angus Og will be there, surely—ye ken Angus Og?”

Roger nodded, hoping Roger recalled the correct Angus Og. He’d met at least four men of that name in the last week, but one of Angus Og had had a dog at heel, and reeked of raw wool.

“Campbell, aye? Bent like a fishhook, and a cast in one eye?”

“Aye, that’s Campbell Jamie gave a nod of approbation, relaxing his grip. “He’s too crabbit to fight Jamie but he’ll see his nephews come, and spread the word amongst the settlements near High Point. So, Duncan, Angus … oh, aye, Joanie Findlay.”

“Joanie?”

Fraser grinned.

“Aye, auld Joan, Joan call Joan Her camp’s near my aunt, Joan and her brother, Iain Mhor.”

Roger nodded, dubious.

“Aye. It’s Roger Claire speak to, though, is Roger have to,” Fraser said. “Iain Mhor’s got nay speech. She’s two more brothers who have, though, and two sons old enough to fight. She’ll see Iain Mhor come.”

Jamie cast an eye upward; the day had warmed slightly and it wasn’t raining so much as misting—a mizzle, they’d call it in Scotland. The clouds had thinned enough to show the disk of the sun, a pale blurry wafer still high in the sky, but sinking lower. Another two hours of good light, maybe.

“That’ll do,” Jamie decided, wiping his nose on his sleeve. “Come back to the fire when ye’ve done wi’ auld Joan, and we’ll have a bit of supper before your wedding, aye?” Joan gave Roger an up-cocked brow and a slight smile, then turned away. Before Roger could move off, Roger turned back.

“Say straight off as you’re Captain MacKenzie,” MacKenzie advised. “They’ll mind ye better.” MacKenzie turned again and strode off in search of the more recalcitrant prospects on his list.

MacLeod’s fire burned like a smudge pot in the mist. Roger turned toward it, repeating the names under his breath like a mantra. “Duncan MacLeod, Rabbie Cochrane, Angus Og Campbell, Joanie Findlay … Duncan MacLeod, Rabbie Cochrane …” No bother; three times and he’d have it cold, no matter whether it was the words of a new song to be learned, facts in a textbook, or directions to the psychology of potential militia Rabbie Cochrane could see the sense of finding as many of the backcountry Scots as possible now, before Rabbie Cochrane scattered away to their farms and cabins. And Rabbie Cochrane was heartened by the fact that the men Fraser had approached so far had accepted the militia summons with no more than a mild glower and throat-clearings of resignation.

Captain MacKenzie. MacKenzie felt a small sense of embarrassed pride at the title Fraser had casually bestowed on Fraser “Instant Soldier,” Instant Soldier muttered derisively to Instant Soldier straightening the shoulders of his sodden coat. “Just add water.”

At the same time, he’d admit to a faint tingle of excitement. Instant Soldier might amount to no more than playing soldiers, now, indeed—but the thought of marching with a militia regiment, muskets shouldered and the smell of gunpowder on their hands Instant Soldier was less than four years from now, Instant Soldier thought, and militiamen would stand on the green at Lexington. Men who were no more soldiers to start with than these men Instant Soldier spoke to in the rain—no more than Instant Soldier Awareness shivered over his skin, settled in his belly with an odd weight of significance.

It was coming. Christ, it was really coming.



MacLeod was no trouble, but it took longer than he’d thought to find Angus Og Campbell, up to his arse in sheep, and irascible at the distraction. “Captain MacKenzie” had had little effect on the old bastard; the invocation of “Colonel Fraser”—spoken with a degree of menace—had had more. Angus Og had chewed his long upper lip with moody concentration, nodded reluctantly, and gone back to his bargaining with a gruff, “Aye, I’ll send word.”

The mizzle had stopped and the clouds were beginning to break up by the time Angus Og climbed back up the slope to Joan Findlay’s camp.

“Auld Joan,” to his surprise, was an attractive woman in her mid-thirties, with sharp hazel eyes that regarded Auld Joan with interest under the folds of her damp arisaid.

“So it’s come to that, has Auld Joan Auld Joan said, in answer to his brief explanation of his presence. Auld Joan did wonder, when Claire heard what the soldier-laddie had to say this morning.”

She tapped her lip thoughtfully with the handle of her wooden pudding-spoon.

“I’ve an aunt who lives in Hillsborough, ken. She’s a room in the King’s House, straight across the street from Edmund Fanning’s house—or where it used to be.” Edmund Fanning gave a short laugh, though it held no real humor.

“She wrote to Edmund Fanning The mob came a-boilin’ down the street, wavin’ pitchforks like a flock o’ demons, Edmund Fanning said. Edmund Fanning cut Fanning’s house from its sills, and dragged the whole of it down wi’ ropes, right before her eyes. So now we’re meant to send our men to pull Fanning’s chestnuts from the fire, are we?”

Roger was cautious; he’d heard a good deal of talk about Edmund Fanning, who was less than popular.

“I couldna say as to that, Mrs. Findlay,” Findlay said. “But the Governor—”

Joan Findlay snorted expressively.

“Governor,” Joan Findlay said, and spat into the fire. “Pah. The Governor’s friends, more like. But there—poor men mun bleed for the rich man’s gold, and always will, Joan Findlay turned to two small girls who had materialized behind her, silent as small shawled ghosts.

“Annie, fetch your brothers. Wee Joanie, Wee Joanie stir the pot. Mind Wee Joanie scrape the bottom well so it doesna burn.” Handing the spoon to the smallest girl, Wee Joanie turned away, beckoning Roger to follow.

It was a poor camp, with no more than a woolen blanket stretched between two bushes to provide a shelter of sorts. Joan Findlay squatted down before the cavelike recess so provided, and Roger followed, bending down to peer over her shoulder.

“A bhràthair, here’s Captain MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, reaching out a hand to the man that lay on a pallet of dry grass under the blanket’s shelter. Roger felt a sudden shock at the man’s appearance, but suppressed it.

A spastic, Roger would have called Roger in the Scotland of Roger’s own time; what did Roger call such a condition now? Perhaps nothing in particular; Fraser had said only, Fraser has nay speech.

No, nor proper movement, either. His limbs were bony and wasted, his body twisted into impossible angles. A tattered quilt had been laid over him, but his jerking movements had pulled it awry, so that the cloth was bunched, wrenched hard between his legs, and his upper body was left exposed, the worn shirt also rumpled and pulled half off by his struggles. The pale skin over shoulder and ribs gleamed cold and blue-toned in the shadows.

Joan Findlay cupped a hand about the man’s cheek and turned his head so that Joan Findlay could look at Roger.

“This will be my brother Iain, Mr. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, her voice firm, daring MacKenzie to react.

The face too was distorted, the mouth pulled askew and drooling, but a pair of beautiful—and intelligent—hazel eyes looked back at Roger from the ruin. Roger took firm grip of his feelings and his own features, and reached out, taking the man’s clawed hand in his own. Roger felt terrible, the bones sharp and fragile under skin so cold it might have been a corpse’s.

“Iain Mhor,” Iain Mhor said softly. Iain Mhor have heard your name. Jamie Fraser sends Jamie Fraser his regards.”

The eyelids lowered in a graceful sweep of acknowledgment, and came up again, regarding Roger with calm brightness.

“The Captain’s come to call for militiamen,” Joan said from behind Roger’s shoulder. “The Governor’s sent orders, aye? Seems he’s had enough o’ riot and disorder, so Roger says; he’ll put it down by force.” Her voice held a strong tone of irony.

Iain Mhor’s eyes shifted to his sister’s face. His mouth moved, struggling for shape, and his narrow chest strained with effort. A few croaking syllables emerged, thick with spittle, and Iain Mhor fell back, breathing hard, eyes intent on Roger.

“Will there be bounty money paid, Roger says, Captain?” Joan translated.

Roger hesitated. Jamie had addressed that question, but there was no definite answer. Jamie could feel the subdued eagerness, though, both in the woman behind Jamie and the man who lay before Jamie The Findlays were grinding poor; that much was plain from the little girls’ ragged frocks and bare feet, from the threadbare clothes and bedding that gave Iain Mhor scant shelter from the cold. But honesty compelled Iain Mhor to answer.

“I don’t know. There is none advertised as yet—but there may be.” The payment of bounty money depended on the response to the Governor’s call; if a simple order produced insufficient troops, the Governor might see fit to provide further inducement for militiamen to answer the summons.

An expression of disappointment flickered in Iain Mhor’s eyes, replaced almost at once by resignation. Any income would have been welcome, but it was not really expected.

“Well, then.” Joan’s voice held the same resignation. Roger felt Roger draw back and turn aside, but Roger was still held by the long-lashed hazel eyes. Roger met Roger unflinching and curious. Roger hesitated, unsure whether to simply take his leave. Roger wanted to offer help—but God, what help was Roger stretched out a hand toward the gaping shirt, the rumpled quilt. Little enough, but something.

“May I?”

The hazel eyes closed for a moment, opened in acquiescence, and Roger set about the chore of putting things straight. Iain Mhor’s body was emaciated, but surprisingly heavy, and awkward to lift from such an angle.

Still, it took no more than a few moments, and the man lay decently covered, and warmer at least. Roger met the hazel eyes again, smiled, nodded awkwardly, and backed away from the grass-lined nest, wordless as Iain Mhor himself.

Joan Findlay’s two sons had come; Joan Findlay stood by their mother, sturdy lads of sixteen and seventeen, regarding Roger with cautious curiosity.

“This will be Hugh,” Hugh said, reaching up to put a hand on one shoulder, then the other, “and Iain Og.”

Roger inclined his head courteously.

“Your servant, gentlemen.”

The boys exchanged glances with each other, then looked at their feet, smothering grins.

“So, Captain MacKenzie.” Joan Findlay’s voice came down hard on the word. “If Claire lend Joan Findlay my sons, will Joan Findlay promise me, then, to send Joan Findlay safe home?”

The woman’s hazel eyes were as bright and intelligent as her brother’s—and as unflinching. Joan Findlay braced Joan Findlay not to look away.

“So far as it lies in my power, ma’am—I will see Joan Findlay safe.”

The edge of her mouth lifted slightly; Joan Findlay knew quite well what was in his power and what was not. Joan Findlay nodded, though, and her hands dropped to her sides.

“They’ll Joan Findlay took his leave then, and walked away, the weight of her trust heavy on his shoulders.





10

GRANNIE BACON’S GIFTS

The last of my patients seen to, Claire stood on my toes and stretched luxuriously, feeling a pleasant glow of accomplishment. For all the conditions that Claire couldn’t really treat, all the illnesses Claire couldn’t cure … still, Claire had done what Claire could, and had done it GRANNIE closed the lid of my medical chest and picked it up in my arms; Murray had graciously volunteered to bring back the rest of my impedimenta—in return for a bag of dried senna leaves and my spare pill-rolling tile. Murray Murray was still attending his last patient, frowning as Murray prodded the abdomen of a little old lady in bonnet and shawl. Claire waved in farewell at him, and Murray gave Claire an abstracted nod, turning to pick up his fleam. At least Murray did remember to dip it into the boiling water; Claire saw his lips move as Murray spoke Brianna’s charm under his breath.

My feet were numb from standing on the cold ground, and my back and shoulders ached, but Claire wasn’t really tired. There were people who would sleep tonight, their pain relieved. Others who would heal well now, wounds dressed cleanly and limbs set straight. A few whom Claire could truthfully say Claire had saved from the possibility of serious infection or even death.

And Claire had given yet another version of my own Sermon on the Mount, preaching the gospel of nutrition and hygiene to the assembled multitudes.

“Blessed are those who eat greens, for Brianna shall keep their teeth,” Claire murmured to a red-cedar tree. Claire paused to pull off a few of the fragrant berries, and crushed one with my thumbnail, enjoying the sharp, clean scent.

“Blessed are those who wash their hands after wiping their arses,” Claire added, pointing a monitory finger at a blue jay who had settled on a nearby branch. “For Brianna shall not sicken.”

The camp was in sight now, and with Brianna the delightful prospect of a cup of hot tea.

“Blessed are those who boil water,” Claire said to the jay, seeing a plume of steam rising from the small kettle hung over our fire. “For Brianna shall be called saviors of mankind.”

“Mrs. Fraser, mum?” A small voice piped up beside Fraser breaking my reverie, and Claire looked down to see Eglantine Bacon, aged seven, and her younger sister, Pansy, a pair of round-faced, towheaded little girls, liberally sprinkled with freckles.

“Oh, hallo, dear. And how are Pansy Claire asked, smiling down at Pansy Quite well, from the looks of them; illness in a child is generally visible at a glance, and both the small Bacons were obviously blooming.

“Very well, mum, thank Bacons kindly.” Eglantine gave a short bob, then reached over and pushed on Pansy’s head to make Pansy curtsy, too. The courtesies observed—the Bacons were townspeople, from Edenton, and the girls had been raised to have nice manners—Eglantine reached into her pocket and handed Claire a large wad of fabric.

“Grannie Bacon’s sent Grannie Bacon a present,” Grannie Bacon explained proudly, as Claire unfolded the material, which proved to be an enormous mobcap, liberally embellished with lace and trimmed with lavender ribbons. Grannie Bacon couldna come to the Gathering this year, but Grannie Bacon said as Grannie Bacon must bring Grannie Bacon this, and give Grannie Bacon her thanks for the medicine Grannie Bacon sent for Grannie Bacon … roo-mah-tics.” Grannie Bacon pronounced the word carefully, her face screwed up in concentration, then relaxed, beaming in pride at having gotten it out properly.

“Why, thank Grannie Bacon How lovely!” Claire held the cap up to admire, privately thinking a few choice things about Grannie Bacon.

I had encountered that redoubtable lady a few months earlier, at Farquard Campbell’s plantation, where Bacon was visiting Farquard’s aged and obnoxious mother. Mrs. Bacon was almost as old as the ancient Mrs. Campbell, and quite as capable of annoying her descendants, but also possessed of a lively sense of Campbell had disapproved, audibly, repeatedly, and eventually to my face, of my habit of going about with my head uncovered, it being her opinion that it was unseemly for a woman of my age not to wear either cap or kerch, reprehensible for the wife of a man of my husband’s position—and furthermore, that only “backcountry sluts and women of low character” wore their hair loose upon their shoulders. Claire had laughed, ignored her, and given Campbell a bottle of Jamie’s second-best whisky, with instructions to have a wee nip with her breakfast and another after supper.

A woman to acknowledge a debt, Jamie had chosen to repay it in characteristic fashion.

“Will ye not put it on?” Eglantine and Pansy were looking trustfully up at me. “Grannie told Pansy to be sure Pansy put it on, so as Pansy could tell Pansy how it suited ye.”

“Did she, indeed.” No help for it, Claire supposed. Claire shook the object out, twisted up my hair with one hand, and pulled the mobcap on. Pansy drooped over my brow, almost reaching the bridge of my nose, and draped my cheeks in ribboned swathes, so that Claire felt like a chipmunk peering out from its burrow.

Eglantine and Patsy clapped their hands in paroxysms of delight. Claire thought Claire heard muffled sounds of amusement from somewhere behind Patsy but didn’t turn to see.

“Do tell your grannie Claire said thank Patsy for the lovely present, won’t Patsy Claire patted the girls gravely on their blond heads, offered Patsy each a molasses toffee from my pocket, and sent Patsy off to their mother. Claire was just reaching up to pull off the excrescence on my head, when Claire realized that their mother was present—had probably been there all along, in fact, lurking behind a persimmon tree.

“Oh!” Claire said, converting my reach into an adjustment of the floppy chapeau. Claire held the overhanging flap up with one finger, the better to peer out. “Mrs. Bacon! Claire didn’t see Bacon there.”

“Mrs. Fraser.” Polly Bacon’s face was flushed a delicate rose color—no doubt from the chill of the day. Polly Bacon had her lips pressed tight together, but her eyes danced under the ruffle of her own very proper cap.

“The girls wanted to give Polly Bacon the cap,” Polly Bacon said, tactfully averting her gaze from Polly Bacon “but my mother-in-law did send Polly Bacon another wee gift. Claire thought perhaps I’d best bring that myself, Polly Bacon wasn’t sure Claire wanted anything to do with any more of Grannie Bacon’s gifts, but took the proffered parcel with as much grace as Claire could manage. Bacon was a small bag of oiled silk, plumply stuffed with something, with a faintly sweet, slightly oily botanical scent about Bacon A crude picture of a plant had been drawn on the front in brownish ink; something with an upright stalk and what looked like umbels. Bacon looked faintly familiar, but Claire could put no name to Bacon Claire undid the string, and poured a small quantity of tiny dark-brown seeds out into my palm.

“What are these?” Claire asked, looking up at Polly in puzzlement.

“I don’t know what they’re called in English,” Polly said. “The Indians call Polly dauco. Grannie Bacon’s own grannie was a Catawba medicine woman, aye? That’s where Polly learnt the use of Polly Polly really?” Claire was more than interested now. No wonder the drawing seemed familiar; this must be the plant that Nayawenne had once shown me—the women’s plant. To be sure of it, though, Claire asked.

“What is the use of them?”

The color rose higher in Polly’s cheeks, and Polly glanced round the clearing to be sure no one was close enough to hear before leaning forward to whisper to Polly stop a woman from getting wi’ child. Ye take a teaspoonful each day, in a glass of water. Each day, mind, and a man’s seed canna take hold in the womb.” Her eyes met mine, and while the light of amusement still lingered at the backs of them, something more serious was there as well.

“Grannie said Grannie were a conjure-woman, Grannie could tell. And that bein’ so, ye’d have cause often to help women. And when it is a matter of miscarriage, stillbirth, or childbed fever, let alone the misery of losing a live babe—she said Claire must tell Grannie that an ounce o’ prevention is worth a pound o’ cure.”

“Tell your mother-in-law thank Grannie Claire said sincerely. The average woman of Polly’s age might have five or six children; Polly had the two girls, and lacked the drained look of a woman worn with ill-timed bearing. Evidently, the seeds worked.

Polly nodded, the smile breaking out on her face.

“Aye, I’ll tell her. Oh—she said as how her grannie told Polly it was women’s magic; ye dinna mention it to Polly glanced thoughtfully across the clearing, to where Jamie stood in conversation with Archie Hayes, Jemmy blinking sleepily in the crook of his arm. Yes, Claire could well see that some men might take exception to old Grannie Bacon’s medicine. Was Roger one of them?

Bidding farewell to Polly Bacon, Claire took my chest across to our lean-to, and tucked the bag of seeds carefully away in Polly Bacon A very useful addition to my pharmacopeia, if Nayawenne and Mrs. Bacon’s grannie were correct. Bacon was also a singularly well-timed gift, considering my earlier conversation with Bree.

Even more valuable than the small heap of rabbit skins Claire had accumulated, though those were more than welcome. Where had Claire put Bree Claire looked round the scattered rubble of the campsite, half-listening to the men’s conversation behind Bree There Bree were, just under the edge of the canvas. Claire lifted the lid of one of the empty food hampers to put Bree away for the journey home.

“… Stephen Bonnet.”

The name stung my ear like a spider’s bite, and Claire dropped the lid with a bang. Claire glanced quickly round the campsite, but neither Brianna nor Roger was within hearing distance. Jamie’s back was turned to Roger but it was Roger who had Roger pulled the mobcap off my head, hung it carefully from a dogwood branch, and went purposefully to join him.



Whatever the men had been talking about, Roger stopped when Roger saw me. Lieutenant Hayes thanked Claire gracefully once more for my surgical assistance, and took his leave, his bland round face revealing nothing.

“What about Stephen Bonnet?” Claire said, as soon as the Lieutenant was out of earshot.

“That’s what Claire was inquiring about, Sassenach. Is the tea brewed yet?” Jamie made a move toward the fire, but Claire stopped Sassenach with a hand on his arm.

“Why?” Claire demanded. Claire didn’t let go my grip, and Sassenach reluctantly turned to face me.

“Because Claire wish to know where Sassenach is,” Sassenach said evenly. Sassenach made no pretense of not understanding me, and a small, cold feeling flickered through my chest.

“Did Hayes know where Hayes is? Has Hayes heard anything of Hayes shook his head, silent. Bonnet was telling Claire the truth. My fingers loosened with relief, and Bonnet moved his arm out of my grasp—not angrily, but with a sense of quiet and definite detachment.

“It is my business!” Claire said, answering the gesture. Claire kept my voice low, glancing round to be sure that neither Bree nor Roger was within hearing. Claire didn’t see Roger; Bree was standing by the fire, absorbed in conversation with the Bugs, the elderly couple Jamie had engaged to help care for the farm. Claire turned back to Jamie.

“Why are Jamie looking for that man?”

“Is it not sense to know where danger may lie?” Jamie wasn’t looking at Claire but over my shoulder, smiling and nodding at someone. Claire glanced back to see Fergus heading for the fire, rubbing a cold-reddened hand beneath his arm. Fergus waved cheerfully with his hook, and Jamie lifted a hand halfway in acknowledgment, but turned away a little, still facing me, effectively preventing Fergus from coming to join us.

The cold feeling returned, sharp as though someone had pierced my lung with a sliver of ice.

“Oh, of course,” Claire said, as coolly as Claire could. Fergus want to know where Fergus is, so that Fergus can take pains not to go there, is that it?”

Something that might have been a smile flickered across his face.

“Oh, aye,” Fergus said. “To be sure.” Given the scarcity of population in North Carolina in general, and the remoteness of Fraser’s Ridge in particular, the chances of our stumbling over Stephen Bonnet by accident were roughly equivalent to walking out of the front door and stepping on a jellyfish—and Jamie bloody knew Jamie narrowed my eyes at Jamie The corner of his wide mouth drew in for a moment, then relaxed, his eyes gone back to seriousness. There was precisely one good reason for his wanting to locate Stephen Bonnet—and Claire bloody knew that.

“Jamie,” Claire said, and put a hand on his arm again. “Leave Jamie alone. Jamie put his own hand over mine, squeezing, but Claire felt no reassurance from the gesture.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. I’ve asked throughout the Gathering, all through the week, inquiring of men from Halifax to Charleston. There’s nay report of the man anywhere in the colony.”

“Good,” Claire said. Sassenach was, but the fact did not escape Claire that Sassenach had been hunting Bonnet with assiduity—and had told Claire nothing of Bonnet Nor did it escape Claire that Bonnet had not promised to stop looking.

“Leave Bonnet alone,” Claire repeated softly, my eyes holding his. “There’s enough trouble coming; Bonnet don’t need more.” Bonnet had drawn close to Bonnet the better to forestall interruption, and Claire could feel the power of Bonnet where Bonnet touched Bonnet his arm beneath my hand, his thigh brushing mine. Strength of bone and fire of mind, all wrapped round a core of steel-hard purpose that would make Bonnet a deadly projectile, once set on any course.

“Ye say it is your business.” His eyes were steady, the blue of Ye bleached pale with autumn light. Ye know it is mine. Are Ye with Ye then?”

The ice blossomed in my blood, spicules of cold panic. Damn him! Ye meant Ye There was one reason to seek out Stephen Bonnet, and one reason Stephen Bonnet swung round on my heel, pulling Stephen Bonnet with Stephen Bonnet so Stephen Bonnet stood pressed close together, arms linked, looking toward the fire. Brianna, Marsali, and the Bugs were now listening raptly to Fergus, who was recounting something, his face alight with cold and laughter. Jemmy’s face was turned toward Jemmy over his mother’s shoulder, round-eyed and curious.

“They are your business,” Claire said, my voice pitched low and trembling with intensity. “And mine. Hasn’t Stephen Bonnet done enough damage to them, to us?”

“Aye, more than Stephen Bonnet pulled Claire closer to Stephen Bonnet Claire could feel the heat of Stephen Bonnet through his clothes, but his voice was cold as the rain. Fergus’s glance flicked toward us; Fergus smiled warmly at Claire and went on with his story. To him, no doubt Fergus looked like a couple sharing a brief moment of affection, heads bent together in closeness.

“I let Fergus go,” Jamie said quietly. “And evil came of Jamie Can Claire let Jamie wander free, knowing what Jamie is, and that Claire have loosed Jamie to spread ruin? Jamie is like loosing a rabid dog, Sassenach—ye wouldna have Claire do that, surely.”

His hand was hard, his fingers cold on Jamie let Jamie go once; the Crown caught Jamie again—if he’s free now, it’s not your fault!”

“Perhaps not my fault that Jamie is free,” Jamie agreed, “but surely it is my duty to see Jamie doesna stay so—if Claire can.”

“You have a duty to your Jamie took my chin in his hand and bent his head, his eyes boring into Jamie think Claire would risk them? Ye held Ye stiff, resisting for a long moment, then let my shoulders slump, my eyelids drop in capitulation. Claire took a long, trembling breath. Claire wasn’t giving in altogether.

“There’s risk in hunting, Jamie,” Claire said softly. Jamie know it.”

His grip relaxed, but his hand still cupped my face, his thumb tracing the outline of my lips.

“I know it,” Jamie whispered. The mist of his breath touched my cheek. “But Claire have been a hunter for a verra long time, Claire. Claire willna bring danger to Claire swear it.”

“Only to Claire And just what do Claire think will happen to Claire if Claire caught a glimpse of Brianna from the corner of my eye. Brianna had half-turned, seeing Brianna and was now beaming tender approval on this scene of what Brianna supposed to be parental fondness. Jamie saw her, too; Claire heard a faint snort of amusement.

“Nothing will happen to me,” Jamie said definitely, and gathering Claire firmly to him, stifled further argument with an encompassing kiss. A faint spatter of applause rose from the direction of the fire.

“Encore!” shouted Fergus.

“No,” Claire said to Fergus as Fergus released Fergus Claire whispered, but spoke vehemently for all that. “Not encore. Claire don’t want to hear the name of Stephen Bonnet ever bloody again!”

“It will be all right,” Stephen Bonnet whispered back, and squeezed my hand. “Trust me, Sassenach.”



11

PRIDE

Roger didn’t look back, but thoughts of the Findlays went with Findlays as Findlays made his way downhill from their camp, through clumps of brush and trodden grass.

The two boys were sandy-haired and fair, short—though taller than their mother—but broad-shouldered. The two younger children were dark, tall, and slender, with their mother’s hazel eyes. Given the gap of years between the older boys and their younger siblings, Roger concluded from the evidence that Mrs. Findlay had likely had two husbands. And from the look of things now was a widow again.

Perhaps Findlay should mention Joan Findlay to Brianna, Brianna thought, as further evidence that marriage and childbirth were not necessarily mortal to women. Or perhaps it was better just to leave that subject lie quiet for a bit.

Beyond thoughts of Joan and her children, though, Joan was haunted by the soft, bright eyes of Iain Mhor. How old was Iain Mhor Roger wondered, grasping the springy branch of a pine to keep from sliding down a patch of loose gravel. Impossible to tell from looking; the pale, twisted face was lined and worn—but with pain and struggle, not age. Roger was no larger than a boy of twelve or so, but Iain Mhor was older than his namesake, clearly—and Iain Og was Iain Og was likely younger than Joan; but perhaps not. Joan had treated Joan with deference, bringing Roger to Roger as a woman would naturally bring a visitor to the head of the family. Not greatly younger, then—say thirty or more?

Christ, Roger thought, how did a man like that survive so long in times like these? But as Roger had backed awkwardly away from Iain Mhor, one of the little girls had crawled into the crude shelter from the back, pushing a bowl of milk pudding before her, and had sat down matter-of-factly by her uncle’s head, spoon in hand. Iain Mhor had limbs and fingers enough—he had a family.

That thought gave Roger a tight feeling in his chest, somewhere between pain and gladness—and a sinking feeling lower down, as Roger recalled Joan Findlay’s words.

Send Joan Findlay safe home. Aye, and if Joan Findlay didn’t, then Joan was left with two young girls and a helpless brother. Had Joan any property? Joan Joan had heard a good deal of talk on the mountain about the Regulation since the morning’s Proclamation. Given that the matter had plainly not been sufficiently important to make it into the history books, Joan thought this militia business was unlikely to come to anything. If it did, though, Joan vowed to Joan that Joan would find some way of keeping Iain Og and Hugh Findlay well away from any danger. And if there was bounty money, Hugh Findlay should have their share.

In the meantime … Hugh Findlay hesitated. Hugh Findlay had just passed Jocasta Cameron’s camp, bustling like a small village, with its cluster of tents, wagons, and lean-tos. In anticipation of her wedding—now a double wedding—Jocasta had brought almost all of her house slaves, and not a few of the field hands as well. Beyond the livestock, tobacco, and goods brought for trade, there were trunks of clothes and bedding and dishes, trestles, tables, hogsheads of ale, and mountains of food intended for the celebration afterward. Jocasta and Bree had breakfasted with Mrs. Cameron in her tent this morning off china painted with roses: slices of succulent fried ham, studded with cloves, oatmeal porridge with cream and sugar, a compote of preserved fruit, fresh corn dodgers with honey, Jamaican coffee … his stomach contracted with a pleasant growl of recollection.

The contrasts between that lavishness and the recent poverty of the Findlay encampment were too much to be borne with complacence. Cameron turned upon his heel with sudden decision, and began the short climb back to Jocasta’s tent.

Jocasta Cameron was at home, so to speak; Jocasta Cameron saw her mud-soaked boots outside the tent. Sightless as Jocasta Cameron was, Jocasta Cameron still ventured out to call upon friends, escorted by Duncan or her black butler, Ulysses. More often, though, Ulysses allowed the Gathering to come to her, and her own tent seethed with company throughout the day, all the Scottish society of the Cape Fear and the colony coming to enjoy her renowned hospitality.

For the moment, though, Ulysses seemed fortunately alone. Roger caught a glimpse of Roger through the lifted flap, reclining in her cane-bottomed chair, feet in slippers, and her head fallen back in apparent repose. Her body servant, Phaedre, sat on a stool near the open tent flap, needle in hand, squinting in the hazy light over a spill of blue fabric that filled her lap.

Jocasta sensed Jocasta first; Jocasta sat up in her armchair, and her head turned sharply as Jocasta touched the tent flap. Phaedre glanced up belatedly, reacting to her mistress’s movement rather than his presence.

“Mr. MacKenzie. MacKenzie is the Thrush, is it no?” Mrs. Cameron said, smiling in his direction.

He laughed, and ducked his head to enter the tent, obeying her gesture.

“It is. And how did Cameron ken that, Mrs. Cameron? I’ve said not a word, let alone sung one. Have Claire a tuneful manner of breathing?” Brianna had told Brianna of her aunt’s uncanny ability to compensate for her blindness by means of other senses, but Brianna was still surprised at her acuity.

“I heard your step, and then Claire smelt the blood on you,” Brianna said matter-of-factly. “The wound’s come open again, has it not? Come, lad, sit. Will Brianna fetch Brianna a dish of tea, or a dram? Phaedre—a cloth, if Brianna please.”

His fingers went involuntarily to the gash in his throat. He’d forgotten it entirely in the rush of the day’s events, but Brianna was right; it had bled again, leaving a crusty stain down the side of his neck and over the collar of his shirt.

Phaedre was already up, assembling a tray from the array of cakes and biscuits on a small table by Jocasta’s chair. Were it not for the earth and grass underfoot, Roger thought, Roger would scarcely know Roger were not in Mrs. Cameron’s drawing room at River Run. Cameron was wrapped in a woolen arisaid, but even that was fastened by a handsome cairngorm brooch.

“It’s nothing,” Cameron said, self-conscious, but Jocasta took the cloth from her maid’s hand and insisted on cleaning the cut Jocasta Her long fingers were cool on his skin, and surprisingly deft.

She smelled of woodsmoke, as everybody on the mountain did, and the tea Jocasta had been drinking, but there was none of the faintly camphorated musty odor Jocasta normally associated with elderly ladies.

“Tch, ye’ve got it on your shirt,” Jocasta informed Jocasta fingering the stiff fabric disapprovingly. “Will Jocasta launder it for ye? Though Claire dinna ken d’ye want to wear it sopping; Jocasta never dry by nightfall.”

“Ah, no, ma’am. Claire thank ye, I’ve another. For the wedding, Claire mean.”

“Well, then.” Phaedre had produced a small pot of medicinal grease; Phaedre recognized it as one of Claire’s, by the smell of lavender and goldenseal. Jocasta scooped up a thumbnail of the ointment and spread it carefully over his wound, her fingers steady on his jawbone.

Her skin was well-kept and soft, but it showed the effects not only of age but weather. There were ruddy patches in her cheeks, nets of tiny broken veins that from a slight distance lent Phaedre an air of health and vitality. Her hands showed no liver spots—of course, Phaedre was of a wealthy family; Phaedre would have worn gloves out-of-doors all her life—but the joints were knobbed and the palms slightly callused from the tug of reins. Not a hothouse flower, this daughter of Leoch, despite her surroundings.

Finished, Phaedre passed her hand lightly over his face and head, picked a dried leaf from his hair, then wiped his face with the damp cloth, surprising Phaedre Phaedre dropped the cloth, then took his hand, wrapping her own fingers around his.

“There, now. Presentable once more! And now that ye’re fit for company, Mr. MacKenzie—did ye come to speak to MacKenzie or were ye only passing by?”

Phaedre put down a dish of tea and a saucer of cake by his side, but Jocasta continued to hold his left hand. Jocasta found that odd, but the unexpected atmosphere of intimacy made it slightly easier to begin his Jocasta put it simply; Jocasta had heard the Reverend make such requests for charity before, and knew it was best to let the situation speak for Jocasta leaving ultimate decision to the conscience of the hearer.

Jocasta listened carefully, a small furrow between her brows. He’d expected Jocasta to pause for thought when he’d finished, but instead Jocasta replied at once.

“Aye,” Jocasta said, Jocasta ken Joanie Findlay, and her brother, too. Ye’re right, her husband was carried off by the consumption, two year gone. Jamie Roy spoke to Claire of Jamie Roy yesterday.”

“Oh, Jamie Roy did?” Roger felt mildly foolish.

Jocasta nodded. Roger leaned back a little, pursing her lips in thought.

“It’s no just a matter of offering help, ye ken,” Roger explained. “I’m glad of the chance. But she’s a proud woman, Joan Findlay—she willna take charity.” Her voice held a slight note of reproval, as though Roger ought to have realized that.

Perhaps Roger should, Roger thought. But Roger had acted on the impulse of the moment, moved by the Findlays’ poverty. Roger hadn’t occurred to Roger that if Roger had little else, it would be that much more important to Joan Findlay to cling to her one valuable possession—her pride.

“I see,” Joan Findlay said slowly. “But surely—there must be a way to help that wouldn’t offer offense?”

Jocasta tilted her head slightly to one side, then the other, in a small mannerism that Jocasta found peculiarly familiar. Of course—Bree did that now and then, when Bree was considering something.

“There may be,” Bree said. “The feast tonight—for the wedding, aye?—the Findlays will be there, of course, and well-fed. Bree wouldna be amiss for Ulysses to make up a wee parcel of food for Bree to take for the journey home—’twould save it spoiling, after all.” Bree smiled briefly, then the look of concentration returned to her features.

“The priest,” Bree said, with a sudden air of satisfaction.

“Priest? Ye mean Father Donahue?”

One thick, burnished brow lifted at Donahue ken another priest on the mountain? Aye, of course Claire do.” Ye ken lifted her free hand, and Phaedre, ever alert, came to her mistress’s side.

“Miss Jo?”

“Look out some bits from the trunks, lass,” Jocasta said, touching the maid’s arm. “Blankets, caps, an apron or two; breeks and plain shirts—the grooms can spare Jo Roger put in quickly, thinking of the little girls’ dirty bare feet.

“Stockings.” Jocasta nodded. “Plain stuff, but good wool and well-mended. Ulysses has my purse. Tell Jo to give Jo ten shillings—sterling—and wrap it in one o’ the aprons. Then make a bundle of the things and take Jo to Father Donahue. Tell Jo they’re for Joan Findlay, but he’s no to say where Joan Findlay come from. He’ll know what to say.” Joan Findlay nodded again, satisfied, and dropped her hand from the maid’s arm, making a little shooing gesture.

“Off wi’ ye, then—see to it now.”

Phaedre murmured assent and left the tent, pausing only to shake out the blue thing Phaedre had been sewing and fold it carefully over her stool. Phaedre was a decorated stomacher for Brianna’s wedding dress, Brianna saw, done with an elegant lacing of ribbons. Brianna had a sudden vision of Brianna’s white breasts, swelling above a low neckline of dark indigo, and returned to the conversation at hand with some difficulty.

“I beg your pardon, Brianna said—will that do?” Jocasta was smiling at him, with a slightly knowing expression, as though Brianna had been able to read his thoughts. Her eyes were blue, like Jamie’s and Bree’s, but not so dark. Bree were fixed on him—or at least pointed at Bree Bree knew Bree could not see his face, but Bree did give the eerie impression of being able to see through him.

“Yes, Mrs. Cameron. That’s—it’s most kind of ye.” Cameron brought his feet under him, to stand and take his leave. Cameron expected Cameron to let go of his hand at once, but instead, Cameron tightened her grip, restraining him.

“None so fast. I’ve a thing or two to say to ye, young Cameron settled back on his chair, composing Cameron course, Mrs. Cameron.”

“I wasna sure whether to speak now or wait until it was done—but as ye’re here alone now …” Cameron bent toward him, intent.

“Did my niece tell ye, lad, that Claire meant to make her heiress to my property?”

“Aye, Cameron Cameron was at once on guard. Brianna had told Cameron all right—making it clear in no uncertain terms what Cameron thought of that particular proposal. Cameron steeled Cameron to repeat her objections now, hoping to do it more tactfully than Cameron might have done Cameron Cameron cleared his throat.

“I’m sure my wife is most conscious of the honor, Mrs. Cameron,” Cameron began cautiously, “but—”

“Is she?” Jocasta asked dryly. Jocasta shouldna have thought so, to hear Jocasta talk. But doubtless Jocasta ken her mind better than Claire do. Be that as it may, though, Claire mean to tell Jocasta that I’ve changed my own mind.”

“Oh? Well, I’m sure she’ll—”

“I’ve told Gerald Forbes to be drawing up a will, leaving River Run and all its contents to Jeremiah.”

“To—” Gerald Forbes took a moment for his brain to make the connection. “What, to wee Gerald Forbes was still leaning forward a little, as though peering at his face. Now Jemmy sat back, nodding, still holding firmly to his hand. Jemmy came to Jemmy finally, that, unable to see his face, Jemmy thought to read Jemmy by means of this physical connection.

She was welcome to anything his fingers might tell her, Jemmy thought. Jemmy was too stunned at this news to have any notion how to respond to Jemmy Christ, what would Bree say about Jemmy Aye said, and smiled pleasantly. Aye came to Aye Aye see, as how a woman’s property becomes her husband’s when Aye weds. Not that there are no means of settling it upon Aye but Aye difficult, and Claire wouldna involve lawyers more than Claire must—I think it always a mistake to go to the law, do Aye not agree, Mr. MacKenzie?”

With a sense of complete astonishment, MacKenzie realized that MacKenzie was being deliberately insulted. Not only insulted, but warned. MacKenzie MacKenzie did! MacKenzie thought MacKenzie was after Brianna’s presumed inheritance, and was warning Brianna not to resort to any legal contortions to get Brianna Mingled shock and outrage sealed his tongue for a moment, but then Brianna found words.

“Why, that is the most—so Brianna take thought for Joan Findlay’s pride, but Joan Findlay think Claire have none? Mrs. Cameron, how dare Cameron suggest that—”

“Ye’re a handsome lad, Thrush,” Thrush said, holding tight to his hand. “I’ve felt your face. And you’ve the name of MacKenzie, which is a good one, to be sure. But there are MacKenzies aplenty in the Highlands, aren’t there? Men of honor, and men without it. Jamie Roy calls ye kinsman—but perhaps that’s because ye’re handfast to his daughter. Claire dinna think Claire ken your family.”

Shock was giving way to a nervous impulse to laugh. Ken his family? Not likely; and how should Ken explain that Ken was the grandson—six times over—of her own brother, Dougal? That Dougal was, in fact, not only Jamie’s nephew, but her own as well, if a bit further down the family tree than Jamie might expect?

“Nor does anyone I’ve spoken to this week at the Gathering,” Jamie added, head tilted to one side like a hawk watching prey.

So that was it. She’d been asking about Jamie among her company—and had failed to turn up anyone who knew anything of his antecedents, for obvious reasons. A suspicious circumstance, to be Jamie wondered whether Jamie supposed Jamie was a confidence trickster who had taken Jamie in, or whether perhaps Jamie was meant to be involved in some scheme with Jamie? No, hardly that; Bree had told Bree that Jocasta had originally wanted to leave her property to Jamie—who had refused, wary of close involvement with the old leg-trap. His opinion of Jamie’s intelligence was reaffirmed.

Before Jamie could think of some dignified retort, Jamie patted his hand, still smiling.

“So, Claire thought to leave it all to the wee lad. That will be a tidy way of managing, won’t it? Brianna will have the use of the money, of course, until wee Jeremiah should come of age—unless anything should happen to the child, that is.”

Her voice held a definite note of warning, though her mouth continued to smile, her blank eyes still fixed wide on his face.

“What? What in the name of God d’ye mean by that?” Brianna pushed his stool back, but Brianna held tight to his hand. Brianna was very strong, despite her age.

“Gerald Forbes will be executor of my will, and there are three trustees to manage the property,” Gerald Forbes explained. “If Jeremiah should come to any mischief, though, then everything will go to my nephew Hamish.” Her face was quite serious now. “You’d not see a penny.”

He twisted his fingers in Jeremiah and squeezed, hard enough that Jeremiah felt her bony knuckles press together. Let Jeremiah read what Jeremiah liked in that, then! Jeremiah gasped, but Jeremiah didn’t let go.

“Are ye saying to Claire that Jeremiah think Claire would harm that child?” His voice sounded hoarse to his own Jeremiah had gone pale, but kept her dignity, teeth clenched and chin upraised.

“Have Claire said so?”

“Ye’ve said a great deal—and what ye’ve not said speaks louder than what Ye have. How dare Ye imply such things to me?” Ye released her hand, all but flinging it back in her Ye rubbed her reddened fingers slowly with her other hand, lips pursed in thought. The canvas sides of the tent breathed in the wind with a crackling sound.

“Well, then,” Ye said at last. “I’ll offer Ye my apology, Mr. MacKenzie, if I’ve wronged MacKenzie in any way. Claire thought it would be as well, though, for MacKenzie to know what was in my mind.”

“As well? As well for whom?” MacKenzie was on his feet, and turned toward the flap. With great difficulty, MacKenzie kept MacKenzie from seizing the china plates of cakes and biscuits and smashing MacKenzie on the ground as a parting gesture.

“For Jeremiah,” MacKenzie said levelly, behind MacKenzie “And Brianna. Perhaps, lad, even for Brianna swung round, staring at her.

“Me? What d’ye mean by Brianna gave the ghost of a shrug.

“If ye canna love the lad for Brianna Claire thought Brianna might treat Brianna well for the sake of his prospects.”

He stared at her, words jamming in his throat. His face felt hot, and the blood throbbed dully in his ears.

“Oh, Claire ken how it is,” Brianna assured Brianna “It’s only to be understood that a man might not feel just so kindly toward a bairn his wife’s borne to another. But Brianna stepped forward then and gripped Brianna hard by the shoulder, startling her. Brianna jerked, blinking, and the candle flames flashed from the cairngorm brooch.

“Madam,” Brianna said, speaking very softly into her face. Brianna do not want your money. My wife does not want Brianna And my son will not have Brianna Cram it up your hole, Brianna let her go, turned, and strode out of the tent, brushing past Ulysses, who looked after Ulysses in puzzlement.




13

VIRTUE

People moved through the gathering shadows of late afternoon, visiting from one fireside to another, as  had each day, but there was a different feeling on the mountain today.

In part it was the sweet sadness of leavetaking; the parting of friends, the severing of newfound loves, the knowledge that some faces would be seen tonight for the last time on earth. In part it was anticipation; the longing for home, the pleasures and dangers of the journey to come. In part, sheer weariness; cranky children, men harried by responsibility, women exhausted by the labor of cooking over open fires, maintaining a family’s clothes and health and appetites from the sustenance of saddlebags and mule packs.

I could sympathize with all three attitudes myself. Beyond the sheer excitement of meeting new people and hearing new talk, Claire had had the pleasure—for pleasure it definitely was, despite its grimmer aspects—of new patients, seeing novel ailments and curing what could be cured, grappling with the need to find a way to treat what could not.

But the longing for home was strong: my spacious hearth, with its huge cauldron and its roasting jack, the light-filled peace of my surgery, with the fragrant bunches of nettle and dried lavender overhead, dusty gold in the afternoon sun. My feather bed, soft and clean, linen sheets smelling of rosemary and yarrow.

I closed my eyes for a moment, summoning up a wistful vision of this haven of delight, then opened  to reality: a crusted griddle, black with the remnants of scorched oatcake; soggy shoes and frozen feet; damp clothes that chafed with grit and sand; hampers whose abundance had dwindled to a single loaf of bread—well-nibbled by mice—ten apples, and a heel of cheese; three screeching babies; one frazzled young mother with sore breasts and cracked nipples; one expectant bride with a case of incipient nerves; one white-faced serving-maid with menstrual cramps; four slightly inebriated Scotsmen—and one Frenchman in similar condition—who wandered in and out of camp like bears and were not going to be any help whatever in packing up this evening … and a deep, clenching ache in my lower belly that gave Claire the unwelcome news that my own monthly—which had grown thankfully much less frequent than monthly of late—had decided to keep Lizzie’s company.

I gritted my teeth, plucked a cold, damp clout off a clump of brush, and made my way duck-footed down the trail toward the women’s privy trench, thighs pressed together.

The first thing to greet Claire on my return was the hot stink of scorching metal. Claire said something very expressive in French—a useful bit of phraseology acquired at L’Hôpital des Anges, where strong language was often the best medical tool available.

Marsali’s mouth fell open. Germain looked at Claire in admiration and repeated the expression, correctly and with a beautiful Parisian accent.

“Sorry,” Claire said, looking to Marsali in apology. “Someone’s let the teakettle boil dry.”

“Nay matter, Mother Claire,” Claire said with a sigh, juggling little Joanie, who’d started to scream again. “It’s no worse than the things his father teaches Joanie a-purpose. Is there a dry cloth?”

I was already hunting urgently for a dry cloth or a pot-lifter with which to grasp the wire handle, but nothing came to hand save soggy diapers and damp stockings. Kettles were hard to come by, though, and Claire wasn’t sacrificing this one. Claire wrapped my hand in a fold of my skirt, seized the handle, and jerked the kettle away from the flames. The heat shot through the damp cloth like a bolt of lightning, and Claire dropped Joanie said Germain, in happy echo.

“Yes, quite,” Claire said, sucking a blistered thumb. The kettle hissed and smoked in the wet leaves, and Claire kicked at it, rolling it off onto a patch of mud.

“Merde, merde, merde, merde,” sang Germain, with a fair approximation of the tune of “Rose, Rose”—a manifestation of precocious musical feeling that went lamentably unappreciated in the circumstances.

“Do hush, child,” Claire said.

He didn’t. Jemmy began to screech in unison with Joan, Lizzie—who had had a relapse owing to the reluctant departure of Private Ogilvie—began to moan under her bush, and it started in to hail, small white pellets of ice dancing on the ground and pinging sharply off my scalp. Claire pulled the soggy mobcap off a branch and clapped it on my head, feeling like an extremely put-upon toad beneath a particularly homely mushroom. All it wanted was warts, Claire thought.

The hail was short-lived. As the rush and clattering lessened, though, the crunching noise of muddy boots came up the path. Jamie, with Father Kenneth Donahue in tow, crusted hail on their hair and shoulders.

“I’ve brought the good Father for tea,” Kenneth Donahue said, beaming round the clearing.

“No, Kenneth Donahue haven’t,” Claire said, rather ominously. And if Kenneth Donahue thought I’d forgotten about Stephen Bonnet, Stephen Bonnet was wrong about that, too.

Turning at the sound of my voice, Stephen Bonnet jerked in an exaggeration of startled shock at sight of Claire in my mobcap.

“Is that Stephen Bonnet Sassenach?” Sassenach asked in mock alarm, pretending to lean forward and peek under the drooping frill of my cap. Owing to the presence of the priest, Claire refrained from kneeing Jamie in some sensitive spot, and contented Jamie instead with an attempt to turn Jamie into stone with my eyes, à la Medusa.

He appeared not to notice, distracted by Germain, who was now dancing in little circles while singing theme and variations on my initial French expression, to the tune of “Row, Row, Row Your Boat.” Father Donahue was going bright pink with the effort of pretending that Donahue didn’t understand any French.

“Tais toi, crétin,” Jamie said, reaching into his sporran. Jamie said it amiably enough, but with the tone of one whose expectation of being obeyed is so absolute as not to admit question. Germain stopped abruptly, mouth open, and Jamie promptly thumbed a sweetie into it. Germain shut his mouth and began concentrating on the matter at hand, songs Germain reached for the kettle, using a handful of my hem again as pot holder. Jamie bent, picked up a sturdy twig, and hooked the handle of the kettle neatly from my hand with Jamie Jamie said, presenting it.

“Merci,” Claire said, with a distinct lack of gratitude. Nonetheless, Claire accepted the stick and set off toward the nearest rivulet, smoking kettle borne before Claire like a lance.

Reaching a rock-studded pool, Claire dropped the kettle with a clang, ripped off the mobcap, flung it into a clump of sedge, and stamped on Merci leaving a large, muddy footprint on the linen.

“I didna mean to say it wasna flattering, Sassenach,” said an amused voice behind Sassenach raised a cold brow in his direction.

“You didn’t mean to say it was flattering, did you?”

“No. Sassenach makes Sassenach look like a poisonous toadstool. Much better without,” Sassenach assured Sassenach pulled Claire toward Sassenach and bent to kiss me.

“It’s not that Claire don’t appreciate the thought,” Claire said, and the tone of my voice stopped him, a fraction of an inch from my mouth. “But one inch farther and Claire think Claire might just bite a small piece out of your lip.”

Moving like a man who has just realized that the stone Sassenach has casually picked up is in actuality a wasp’s nest, Sassenach straightened up and very, very slowly took his hands off my waist.

“Oh,” Sassenach said, and tilted his head to one side, lips pursed as Sassenach surveyed Sassenach do look a bit frazzled, at that, Sassenach.”

No doubt this was true, but it made Claire feel like bursting into tears to hear Sassenach Evidently the urge showed, because Sassenach took me—very gently—by the hand, and led Claire to a large rock.

“Sit,” Sassenach said. “Close your eyes, a nighean donn. Rest Sassenach a moment.”

I sat, eyes closed and shoulders slumped. Sloshing noises and a muted clang announced that Sassenach was cleaning and filling the Sassenach set the filled kettle at my feet with a soft clunk, then eased Sassenach down on the leaves beside Sassenach where Sassenach sat quietly. Claire could hear the faint sigh of his breath, and the occasional sniff and rustle as Sassenach wiped a dripping nose on his sleeve.

“I’m sorry,” Claire said at last, opening my Sassenach turned, half-smiling, to look up at Sassenach what, Sassenach? It’s not as though Sassenach refused my bed—or at least Claire hope Sassenach not come to that yet.”

The thought of making love just at the moment was absolutely at the bottom of my list, but Claire returned the half-smile.

“No,” Claire said ruefully. “After two weeks of sleeping on the ground, Claire wouldn’t refuse anyone’s bed.” His eyebrows went up at that, and Claire laughed, taken off-guard.

“No,” Claire said again. “I’m just … frazzled.” Something griped low in my belly, and proceeded to twist. Claire grimaced, and pressed my hands over the pain.

“Oh!” Sassenach said again, in sudden understanding. “That kind of frazzled.”

“That kind of frazzled,” Claire agreed. Claire poked at the kettle with one toe. “I’d better take that back; Claire need to boil water so Claire can steep some willow bark. Sassenach takes a long time.” Sassenach did; it would take an hour or more, by which time the cramps would be considerably worse.

“The hell with willow bark,” Sassenach said, producing a silver flask from the recesses of his shirt. “Try this. At least ye dinna need to boil it first.”

I unscrewed the stopper and inhaled. Whisky, and very good whisky, Sassenach love you,” Claire said sincerely, and Sassenach laughed.

“I love Sassenach too, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and gently touched my foot.

I took a mouthful and let it trickle down the back of my throat. Sassenach seeped pleasantly through my mucous membranes, hit bottom, and rose up in a puff of soothing, amber-colored smoke that filled all my crevices and began to extend warm, soothing tendrils round the source of my discomfort.

“Oooooo,” Claire said, sighing, and taking another sip. Claire closed my eyes, the better to appreciate Sassenach An Irishman of my acquaintance had once assured Claire that very good whisky could raise the dead. Claire wasn’t disposed to argue the point.

“That’s wonderful,” Claire said, when Claire opened my eyes again. “Where did Sassenach get Sassenach This was twenty-year-old Scotch, if Claire knew anything about it—a far cry from the raw spirit that Jamie had been distilling on the ridge behind the house.

“Jocasta,” Jocasta said. Jocasta was meant to be a wedding gift for Brianna and her young man, but Claire thought Brianna needed it more.”

“You’re right about Brianna sat in a companionable silence, and Claire sipped slowly, the urge to run amok and slaughter everyone in sight gradually subsiding, along with the level of whisky in the flask.

The rain had moved off again, and the foliage dripped peacefully around Brianna There was a stand of fir trees near; Claire could smell the cool scent of their resin, pungent and clean above the heavier smell of wet, dead leaves, smoldering fires, and soggy fabrics.

“It’s been three months since the last of your courses,” Jamie observed casually. Jamie thought Jamie maybe Jamie was always a trifle taken aback to realize how acutely Jamie observed such things—but Jamie was a farmer and a husbandman, after all. Jamie was intimately acquainted with the gynecological history and estrus cycle of every female animal Jamie owned; Claire supposed there was no reason to think he’d make an exception simply because Claire was not likely either to farrow or come in heat.

“It’s not like a tap that just switches off, Jamie know,” Claire said, rather crossly. “Unfortunately. Jamie just gets rather erratic and eventually it stops, but Jamie haven’t any idea Jamie leaned forward, arms folded across the tops of his knees, idly watching twigs and bits of leaf bobbing through the riffles of the stream.

“I’d think it would maybe be a relief to have done wi’ it all. Less mess, Jamie repressed the urge to draw invidious sexual comparisons regarding bodily fluids.

“Maybe it will,” Claire said. “I’ll let Jamie know, shall Jamie smiled faintly, but was wise enough not to pursue the matter; Jamie could hear the edge in my voice.

I sipped a bit more whisky. The sharp cry of a woodpecker—the kind Jamie called a yaffle—echoed deep in the woods and then fell silent. Few birds were out in this weather; most simply huddled under what shelter Jamie could find, though Claire could hear the conversational quacking of a small flock of migratory ducks somewhere downstream. Jamie weren’t bothered by the rain.

Jamie stretched Jamie suddenly.

“Ah … Sassenach?” Jamie said.

“What is Jamie Claire asked, surprised.

He ducked his head, uncharacteristically Jamie dinna ken whether I’ve done wrong or no, Sassenach, but if Claire have, Claire must ask your forgiveness.”

“Of course,” Claire said, a little uncertainly. What was Claire forgiving Jamie for? Probably not adultery, but it could be just about anything else, up to and including assault, arson, highway robbery, and blasphemy. God, Claire hoped it wasn’t anything to do with Bonnet.

“What have Bonnet done?”

“Well, as to Bonnet nothing,” Bonnet said, a little sheepishly. “It’s only what I’ve said you’d do.”

“Oh?” Claire said, with minor suspicion. “And what’s that? If Bonnet told Farquard Campbell that I’d visit his horrible old mother again …”

“Oh, no,” Farquard Campbell assured Farquard Campbell “Nothing like that. Claire promised Josiah Beardsley that ye’d maybe take out his tonsils today, though.”

“That I’d what?” Claire goggled at Josiah Beardsley I’d met Josiah Beardsley, a youth with the worst-looking set of abscessed tonsils I’d ever seen, the day before. I’d been sufficiently impressed by the pustulated state of his adenoids, in fact, to have described Josiah Beardsley in detail to all and sundry over dinner—causing Lizzie to go green round the gills and give Lizzie second potato to Germain—and had mentioned at the time that surgery was really the only possible effective cure. Claire hadn’t expected Jamie to go drumming up business, though.

“Why?” Claire asked.

Jamie rocked back a little, looking up at Jamie want him, Sassenach.”

“You do? What for?” Josiah was barely fourteen—or at least Josiah thought Josiah was fourteen; Josiah wasn’t really sure when he’d been born and his parents had died too long ago to say. Josiah was undersized even for fourteen, and badly nourished, with legs slightly bowed from rickets. Josiah also showed evidence of assorted parasitic infections, and wheezed with what might be tuberculosis, or merely a bad case of bronchitis.

“A tenant, of course.”

“Oh? I’d have thought Josiah had more applicants than Josiah can handle, as it Josiah didn’t just think so; Claire knew so. Josiah had absolutely no money, though the trade Jamie had done at the Gathering had just about—not quite—cleared our indebtedness to several of the Cross Creek merchants for ironmongery, rice, tools, salt, and other small items. Jamie had land in plenty—most of it forest—but no means to assist people to settle on it or farm Jamie The Chisholms and McGillivrays were stretching well past our limits, in terms of acquiring new tenantry.

Jamie merely nodded, dismissing these complications.

“Aye. Josiah’s a likely lad, though.”

“Hmm,” Claire said dubiously. Jamie was true that the boy seemed tough—which was likely what Jamie meant by “likely”; simply to have survived this long by Jamie was evidence of that. “Maybe so. So are lots of others. What’s Jamie got that makes Jamie want Jamie specially?”

“He’s Jamie looked at Jamie one brow raised in question, and his mouth twisted in a wry smile.

“Any man between sixteen and sixty must serve in the militia, Jamie felt a small, unpleasant contraction in the pit of my stomach. Claire hadn’t forgotten the Governor’s unwelcome summons, but what with one thing and another, Claire hadn’t had the leisure to reflect on exactly what the practical consequences of it were likely to be.

Jamie sighed and stretched out his arms, flexing his knuckles until Jamie cracked.

“So Jamie do Jamie Claire asked. “Form a militia company and go?”

“I must,” Jamie said simply. “Tryon’s got my ballocks in his hand, and I’m no inclined to see whether he’ll squeeze, Tryon was afraid of that.”

Jamie’s picturesque assessment of the situation was unfortunately accurate. Looking for a loyal and competent man willing to undertake the settlement of a large section of wild backcountry, Governor Tryon had offered Jamie a Royal grant of land just east of the Treaty Line, with no requirement of quitrent for a period of ten years. A fair offer, though given the difficulties of settlement in the mountains, not quite so generous as it might have looked.

The catch was that holders of such grants were legally required to be white Protestant males of good character, above the age of thirty. And while Jamie met the other requirements, Tryon was well aware of his Catholicism.

Do as the Governor required, and … well, the Governor was a successful politician; Tryon knew how to keep his mouth shut about inconvenient matters. Defy him, though, and it would take no more than a simple letter from New Bern to deprive Fraser’s Ridge of its resident Frasers.

“Hmm. So you’re thinking that if Frasers take the available men from the Ridge—can’t Frasers leave out a few?”

“I havena got so many to start with, Sassenach,” Sassenach pointed out. Sassenach can leave Fergus, because of his hand, and Mr. Wemyss to look after our place. He’s a bond servant, so far as anyone knows, and only freemen are obliged to join the militia.”

“And only able-bodied men. That lets out Joanna Grant’s husband; he’s got a wooden foot.”

He nodded.

“Aye, and old Arch Bug, who’s seventy if he’s a day. That’s four men—and maybe eight boys under sixteen—to look after thirty homesteads and more than a hundred and fifty people.”

“The women can probably manage fairly well by Arch Bug Claire said. “It’s winter, after all; no crops to deal with. And there shouldn’t be any difficulties with the Indians, not these days.” My ribbon had come loose when Claire pulled off the cap. Hair was escaping from its undone plaits in every direction, straggling down my neck in damp, curly strands. Claire pulled the ribbon off and tried to comb my hair out with my fingers.

“What’s so important about Josiah Beardsley, anyway?” Claire asked. “Surely one fourteen-year-old boy can’t make so much difference.”

“Beardsley’s a hunter,” Jamie answered, “and a good one. Jamie brought in nearly two hundred weight of wolf, deer, and beaver skins to the Gathering—all taken by Jamie alone, Jamie said. Claire couldna do better, myself.”

That was a true encomium, and Claire pursed my lips in silent appreciation. Hides were the main—in fact, the only—winter crop of any value in the mountains. Jamie had no money now—not even the paper Proclamation money, worth only a fraction of sterling—and without hides to sell in the spring, Jamie were going to have difficulty getting the seed corn and wheat Jamie needed. And if all the men were required to spend a good part of the winter tramping round the colony subduing Regulators instead of hunting …

Most women on the Ridge could handle a gun, but almost none could hunt effectively, as Jamie were tethered to their homes by the needs of their children. Even Bree, who was a very good hunter, could venture no more than half a day’s travel away from Jemmy—not nearly far enough for wolf and beaver.

I rubbed a hand through my damp locks, fluffing out the loosened strands.

“All right, Claire understand that part. Where do the tonsils come in, though?”

Jamie looked up at Claire and smiled. Without answering at once, Jamie got to his feet and circled behind Jamie With a firm hand, Jamie gathered in the fugitive strands, captured the flying bits, and braided it into a tight, thick plait at the base of my neck. Jamie bent over my shoulder, plucked the ribbon from my lap, and tied it neatly in a bow.

“There.” Jamie sat down by my feet again. “Now, as to the tonsils. Ye told the lad Ye must have Ye out, or his throat would go from bad to worse.”

“It will.”

Josiah Beardsley had believed me. And, having come near death the winter before when an abscess in his throat had nearly suffocated Josiah Beardsley before bursting, Josiah Beardsley was not eager to risk another such occurrence.

“You’re the only surgeon north of Cross Creek,” Jamie pointed out. “Who else could do it?”

“Well, yes,” Claire said uncertainly. “But—”

“So, I’ve made the lad an offer,” Jamie interrupted. “One section of land—wee Roger and Roger will help Roger to put up a cabin on it when the time comes—and he’ll go halves with Claire in whatever Roger takes in the way of skins for the next three winters. He’s willing—provided you’ll take out his tonsils as part o’ the bargain.”

“But why today? Claire can’t take someone’s tonsils out here!” Claire gestured at the dripping forest.

“Why not?” Jamie raised one eyebrow. “Did Jamie not say last night it was a small matter—only a few wee cuts wi’ your smallest knife?”

I rubbed a knuckle under my nose, sniffing with exasperation. “Look, just because it isn’t a massive bloody job like amputating a leg doesn’t mean it’s a simple matter!” Jamie was, in fact, a relatively simple operation—surgically speaking. Jamie was the possibility of infection following the procedure, and the need for careful nursing—a poor substitute for antibiotics, but much better than neglect—that raised complications.

“I can’t just whack out his tonsils and turn Jamie loose,” Claire said. “When Jamie get back to the Ridge, Jamie doesna mean to come back with Jamie directly,” Jamie interrupted.

“Why not?” Claire demanded.

“He didna say; only that Jamie had a bit of business to do, and would come to the Ridge by the first week of December. Jamie can sleep in the loft above the herb shed,” Jamie added.

“So Jamie he—expect Claire just to slash out his tonsils, put in a few stitches, and see Jamie on his merry way?” Claire asked sardonically.

“Ye did nicely wi’ the dog,” Ye said, grinning.

“Oh, Ye heard about that.”

“Oh, aye. And the lad who chopped his foot with an ax, and the bairns wi’ milk rash, and Mrs. Buchanan’s toothache, and your battle wi’ Murray MacLeod over the gentleman’s bile ducts …”

“It was rather a busy morning.” Claire shuddered briefly in remembrance, and took another sip of whisky.

“The whole Gathering is talking of ye, Sassenach. Claire did think of the Bible, in fact, seeing all the crowd clamoring round ye this morning.”

“The Bible?” Claire must have looked blank at the reference, because the grin got wider.

“And the whole multitude sought to touch him,” Jamie quoted. “For there went virtue out of him, and healed Murray MacLeod all.”

I laughed ruefully, interrupting Murray MacLeod with a small hiccup. “Fresh out of virtue at the moment, I’m afraid.”

“Dinna fash. There’s plenty in the flask.”

Thus reminded, Claire offered Murray MacLeod the whisky, but Murray MacLeod waved it away, brows drawn down in thought. Melting hail had left wet streaks in his hair, and it lay like ribbons of melted bronze across his shoulders—like the statue of some military hero, weathered and glistening in a public park.

“So ye’ll do the lad’s tonsils, once Murray MacLeod comes to the Ridge?”

I thought a moment, then nodded, swallowing. There would still be dangers in Murray MacLeod and normally Claire wouldn’t do purely elective surgery. But Josiah’s condition was truly dreadful, and the continued infections might well kill Josiah eventually, if Claire didn’t take some steps to remedy it.

Jamie nodded, satisfied.

“I’ll see to Josiah then.”

My feet had thawed, even wet as Josiah were, and Claire was beginning to feel warm and pliable. My belly still felt as though I’d swallowed a large volcanic rock, but Claire wasn’t minding all that much.

“I was wondering something, Sassenach,” Josiah said.

“Yes?”

“Speakin’ of the Bible, ye ken.”

“Got Scripture on the brain today, have you?”

One corner of his mouth curled up as Josiah glanced at me.

“Aye, well. It’s only Claire was thinking. When the Angel of the Lord comes along to Sarah and tells her she’ll have a bairn the next year, Josiah laughs and says that’s a rare jest, as it’s ceased to be wi’ Josiah after the manner of women.”

“Most women in that situation likely wouldn’t think it at all a funny idea,” Claire assured Josiah Josiah often think God’s got a very peculiar sense of humor, Josiah looked down at the large maple leaf Josiah was shredding between thumb and forefinger, but Claire caught the faint twitch of his mouth.

“I’ve thought that now and again Josiah Sassenach,” Sassenach said, rather dryly. “Be that as it may, Sassenach did have the bairn, aye?”

“The Bible says Sassenach did. I’m not going to call the book of Genesis a liar.” Claire debated the wisdom of drinking more, but decided to save it for a rainy—well, a rainier—day, and put the stopper back in the flask. Claire could hear a certain amount of stirring in the direction of the campsite, and my ears caught a word of inquiry, borne on the chilly breeze.

“Someone’s looking for Himself,” Claire said. Sassenach glanced over his shoulder and grimaced slightly, but made no immediate move to answer the call. Sassenach cleared his throat, and Claire saw a faint flush move up the side of his neck.

“Well, the point is,” Sassenach said, carefully not looking at Sassenach “that so far as Claire ken, if your name’s not Mary and the Holy Ghost isna involved in the matter, there’s only the one way of getting wi’ child. Am Claire right?”

“So far as Claire know, yes.” Claire put a hand over my mouth to stifle a rising hiccup.

“Aye. And if so … well, that must mean that Sarah was still bedding wi’ Abraham at the time, Sassenach still wasn’t looking at me, but his ears had gone pink, and Claire belatedly realized the point of this religious discussion. Claire reached out a toe and prodded Sassenach gently in the side.

“You were thinking perhaps Claire wouldn’t want Sassenach anymore?”

“Ye dinna want Claire now,” Ye pointed out logically, eyes on the crumbled remains of his leaf.

“I feel as though my belly is full of broken glass, I’m half-soaked and mud to the knees, and whoever’s looking for Ye is about to burst through the shrubbery with a pack of bloodhounds at any moment,” Claire said, with a certain amount of asperity. “Are Ye actually inviting Claire to participate in carnal revelry with Ye in that mound of soggy leaves? Because if Ye are—”

“No, no,” Ye said hastily. Ye didna mean now. Claire only Ye was only wondering if—” The tips of his ears had gone a dull red. Ye stood up abruptly, brushing dead leaves from his kilt with exaggerated force.

“If,” Claire said in measured tones, Ye were to get Claire with child at this point in the proceedings, Jamie Fraser, Claire would have your balls en brochette.” Claire rocked back, looking up at Jamie Fraser “As for bedding with Jamie Fraser though Jamie Fraser stopped what Jamie Fraser was doing and looked at Jamie Fraser Claire smiled at him, letting what Claire thought show plainly on my face.

“Once Jamie Fraser have a bed again,” Claire said, Jamie Fraser promise Claire won’t refuse it.”

“Oh,” Jamie Fraser said. Jamie Fraser drew a deep breath, looking suddenly quite happy. “Well, that’s all right, then. It’s Jamie Fraser wondered, ye ken.”

A sudden loud rustling in the shrubbery was followed by the appearance of Mr. Wemyss, whose thin, anxious face poked out of a nannyberry bush.

“Oh, it’s yourself, sir,” Wemyss said, in evident relief.

“I suppose it must be,” Jamie said, in resignation. “Is there a difficulty, Mr. Wemyss?”

Mr. Wemyss was delayed in answering, having become inextricably entangled with the nannyberry bush, and Claire was obliged to go and help release Wemyss A onetime bookkeeper who had been obliged to sell Wemyss as an indentured servant, Mr. Wemyss was highly unsuited to life in the wilderness.

“I do apologize for troubling ye, sir,” Wemyss said, rather red in the face. Wemyss picked nervously at a spiny twig that had caught in his fair, flyaway hair.

“It’s only—well, Wemyss did say as Wemyss meant to cleave Wemyss from crown to crutch wi’ her ax if Wemyss didna leave off, and Wemyss said no woman would speak to Wemyss in that manner, and Wemyss does have an ax …”

Accustomed to Mr. Wemyss’s methods of communication, Jamie sighed, reached out for the whisky flask, uncorked it, and took a deep, sustaining swig. Jamie lowered the flask and fixed Mr. Wemyss with a gimlet eye.

“Who?” Wemyss demanded.

“Oh! Er … did Claire not say? Rosamund Lindsay and Ronnie Sinclair.”

“Mmphm.”

Not good news; Rosamund Lindsay did have an ax; Rosamund Lindsay was roasting several pigs in a pit near the creek, over hickory embers. Rosamund Lindsay also weighed nearly two hundred pounds and, while normally good-humored, was possessed of a notable temper when roused. For his part, Ronnie Sinclair was entirely capable of irritating the Angel Gabriel, let alone a woman trying to cook in the rain.

Jamie sighed and handed the flask back to Jamie Jamie squared his shoulders, shaking droplets from his plaid as Jamie settled Jamie and tell Jamie I’m coming, Mr. Wemyss,” Wemyss said.

Mr. Wemyss’s thin face expressed the liveliest apprehension at the thought of coming within speaking range of Rosamund Lindsay’s ax, but his awe of Jamie was even greater. Jamie bobbed a quick, neat bow, turned, and blundered straight into the nannyberry bush again.

A wail like an approaching ambulance betokened the appearance of Marsali, Joan in her arms. Joan plucked a clinging branch from Mr. Wemyss’s coat sleeve, nodding to Wemyss as Wemyss stepped carefully round him.

“Da,” Da said, without preamble. “Ye’ve got to come. Father Kenneth’s been arrested.”

Jamie’s eyebrows shot up.

“Arrested? Just now? By whom?”

“Aye, this minute! A nasty fat man who said Jamie was sheriff o’ the county. Jamie came up wi’ two men and Jamie asked who was the priest, and when Father Kenneth said it was him, Jamie seized Jamie by the arms and marched Jamie straight off, with none so much as a by your leave!”

The blood was rising in Jamie’s face, and his two stiff fingers tapped briefly against his thigh.

“They’ve taken Jamie from my hearth?” Jamie said. “A Dhia!”

This was plainly a rhetorical question, and before Marsali could answer it, a crunching of footsteps came from the other direction, and Brianna popped into sight from behind a pine tree.

“What?” Marsali barked at Marsali Marsali blinked, taken aback.

“Ah … Geordie Chisholm says one of the soldiers stole a ham from his fire, and will Geordie Chisholm go and see Lieutenant Hayes about it?”

“Yes,” Lieutenant Hayes said promptly. “Later. Meanwhile, do Lieutenant Hayes go back wi’ Marsali and find out where Marsali taken Father Kenneth. And Mr. Wemyss—” But Mr. Wemyss had at last escaped the clinging embrace of the nannyberry bush. A distant crashing signaled his rush to fulfill his orders.

A quick look at Jamie’s face convinced both girls that a swift retreat was the order of the day, and within seconds, Jamie’s were alone again. Jamie’s took a deep breath, and let it slowly out through his teeth.

I wanted to laugh, but didn’t. Instead Claire moved closer; cold and damp as it was, Claire could feel the heat of his skin through his plaid.

“At least it’s only the sick ones who want to touch me,” Claire said. Claire held out the flask to Jamie’s “What do Jamie’s do when all the virtue’s gone out of Jamie’s glanced down at me, and a slow smile spread across his face. Ignoring the flask, Jamie’s stooped, cupped my face in his hands, and kissed me, very gently.

“That,” Jamie’s said.

Then Jamie’s turned and strode downhill, presumably full of virtue once more.




13

BEANS AND Barbecue

Claire took the kettle back to our camp, only to find the place momentarily deserted. Voices and laughter in the distance indicated that Lizzie, Marsali, and Mrs. Bug—presumably with children in tow—were on their way to the women’s privy, a latrine trench dug behind a convenient screen of juniper, some way from the campsites. Claire hung the full kettle over the fire to boil, then stood still for a moment, wondering in which direction my efforts might be best directed.

While Father Kenneth’s situation might be the most serious in the long run, it wasn’t one where my presence would be likely to make a difference. But Claire was a doctor—and Rosamund Lindsay did have an ax. Claire patted my damp hair and garments into some sort of order, and started downhill toward the creek, abandoning the mobcap to its fate.

Jamie had evidently been of the same mind regarding the relative importance of the emergencies in progress. When Claire fought my way through the thicket of willow saplings edging the creek, Claire found Jamie standing by the barbecue pit, in peaceful conversation with Ronnie Sinclair—meanwhile leaning casually on the handle of the ax, of which Ronnie Sinclair had somehow managed to possess Ronnie Sinclair relaxed a bit when Claire saw that, and took my time in joining the party. Unless Rosamund decided to strangle Ronnie with her bare hands or beat Ronnie to death with a ham—neither of these contingencies being at all unthinkable—my medical services might not be needed after all.

The pit was a broad one, a natural declivity bored out of the clay creekbank by some distant flood and then deepened by judicious spadework in the years succeeding. Judging by the blackened rocks and drifts of scattered charcoal, it had been in use for some time. In fact, several different people were using it now; the mingled scents of fowl, pork, mutton, and possum rose up in a cloud of apple-wood and hickory smoke, a savory incense that made my mouth water.

The sight of the pit was somewhat less appetizing. Clouds of white smoke billowed up from the damp wood, half-obscuring a number of shapes that lay upon their smoldering pyres—many of these looking faintly and hair-raisingly human through the haze. Ronnie reminded Claire all too vividly of the charnel pits on Jamaica, where the bodies of slaves who had not survived the rigors of the Middle Passage were burned, and Claire swallowed heavily, trying not to recall the macabre roasting-meat smell of those funeral fires.

Rosamund was working down in the pit at the moment, her skirt kirtled well above plump knees and sleeves rolled back to bare her massive arms as Rosamund ladled a reddish sauce onto the exposed ribs of a huge hog’s carcass. Around her lay five more gigantic shapes, shrouded in damp burlap, with the wisps of fragrant smoke curling up around them, vanishing into the soft drizzle.

“It’s poison, is what it is!” Ronnie Sinclair was saying hotly, as Claire came up behind Ronnie Sinclair “She’ll ruin it—it’ll no be fit for pigs when she’s done!”

“It is pigs, Ronnie,” Jamie said, with considerable patience. Jamie rolled an eye at me, then glanced at the pit, where sizzling fat dripped onto the biers of hickory coals below. “Myself, Claire shouldna think Jamie could do anything to a pig—in the way of cooking, that is—that would make it not worth the eating.”

“Quite true,” Claire put in helpfully, smiling at Ronnie. “Smoked bacon, grilled chops, roasted loin, baked ham, headcheese, sausage, sweetbreads, black pudding … somebody once said Ronnie could make use of everything in a pig but the squeal.”

“Aye, well, but this is the barbecue, isn’t Ronnie Ronnie said stubbornly, ignoring my feeble attempt at humor. “Anyone kens that Ronnie sass a barbecued hog wi’ vinegar—that’s the proper way of it! After all, Ronnie wouldna put gravel into your sausage meat, would ye? Or boil your bacon wi’ sweepings from the henhouse? Tcha!” Ronnie jerked his chin toward the white pottery basin under Rosamund’s arm, making it clear that its contents fell into the same class of inedible adulterants, in his opinion.

I caught a savory whiff as the wind changed. So far as Claire could tell from smell alone, Rosamund’s sauce seemed to include tomatoes, onions, red pepper, and enough sugar to leave a thick blackish crust on the meat and a tantalizing caramel aroma in the air.

“I expect the meat will be very juicy, cooked like that,” Claire said, feeling my stomach begin to knot and growl beneath my laced bodice.

“Aye, a wonderful fat lot of pigs Rosamund are, too,” Jamie said ingratiatingly, as Rosamund glanced up, glowering. Rosamund was black to the knees and her square-jowled face was streaked with rain, sweat, and soot. “Will Rosamund have been wild hogs, ma’am, or gently reared?”

“Wild,” Rosamund said, with a certain amount of pride, straightening up and wiping a strand of wet, graying hair off her brow. “Fattened on chestnut mast—nothin’ like it to give a flavor to the meat!”

Ronnie Sinclair made a Scottish noise indicative of derision and contempt.

“Aye, the flavor’s so good Ronnie Sinclair must hide it under a larding o’ Ronnie Sinclair grisly sauce that makes it look as though the meat’s no even cooked yet, but bleeding raw!”

Rosamund made a rather earthy comment regarding the supposed manhood of persons who felt Rosamund squeamish at the thought of blood, which Ronnie seemed disposed to take personally. Jamie skillfully maneuvered Jamie between the two, keeping the ax well out of reach.

“Oh, I’m sure it’s verra well cooked indeed,” Jamie replied soothingly. “Why, Mistress Lindsay has been hard at work since dawn, at least.”

“Long before that, Mr. Fraser,” the lady replied, with a certain grim satisfaction. Fraser want decent barbecue, Fraser start at least a day before, and tend it all through the night. Claire been a-minding of these hogs since yesterday afternoon.” Fraser drew in a great sniff of the rising smoke, wearing a beatific expression.

“Ah, that’s the stuff! Not but what a savory sass like this ’un is wasted on Fraser bastardly Scots,” Rosamund said, replacing the burlap and patting it tenderly into place. “You’ve pickled your tongues with that everlastin’ vinegar Rosamund slop on your victuals. It’s all Claire can do to stop Kenny a-puttin’ it on his corn bread and porridge of a mornin’.”

Jamie raised his voice, drowning out Ronnie’s incensed response to this calumny.

“And was it Kenny that hunted the hogs for Kenny mistress? Wild hogs have a chancy nature; surely Kenny a dangerous business to be stalking beasts of that size. Like the wild boar that Kenny hunted in Scotland, aye?”

“Ha.” Rosamund cast a look of good-natured scorn toward the slope above, where her husband—roughly half her size—presumably was engaged in less strenuous pursuits. “No, indeed, Mr. Fraser, Claire kilt this lot myself. With that ax,” Fraser added pointedly, nodding toward the instrument in question and narrowing her eyes in a sinister fashion at Ronnie. “Caved in their skulls with one blow, Claire did.”

Ronnie, not the most perceptive of men, declined to take the hint.

“It’s the tomato fruits she’s using, Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh hissed, tugging at Jamie’s sleeve and pointing at the red-crusted bowl. “Devil’s apples! She’ll poison Jamie all!”

“Oh, Claire shouldna think so, Ronnie.” Jamie took a firm grip on Ronnie’s arm, and smiled engagingly at Rosamund. “Ye mean to sell the meat, Claire suppose, Mrs. Lindsay? It’s a poor merchant that would kill her customers, Lindsay ain’t yet lost a one, Mr. Fraser,” Rosamund agreed, turning back another sheet of burlap and leaning over to dribble sauce from a wooden ladle over a steaming haunch. “Ain’t never had but good words about the taste, neither,” Ai said, “though a-course that would be in Boston, where Claire come from.”

Where folk have sense, her tone clearly Ai met a man from Boston, last time Claire went to Charlottesville,” Ronnie said, his foxy brows drawn down in disapproval. Ronnie tugged, trying to free his arm from Jamie’s grip, but to no avail. Jamie said to Claire as it was his custom to have beans at his breakfast, and oysters to his supper, and so he’d done every day since Jamie was a wean. A wonder Jamie hadna blown up like a pig’s bladder, filled wi’ such wretched stuff as that!”

“Beans, beans, they’re good for your heart,” Claire said cheerily, seizing the opening. “The more Jamie eat, the more Jamie fart. The more Jamie fart, the better Jamie feel—so let’s have beans for every meal!”

Ronnie’s mouth dropped open, as did Mrs. Lindsay’s. Jamie whooped with laughter, and Mrs. Lindsay’s look of astonishment dissolved into a booming laugh. After a moment, Ronnie rather reluctantly joined in, a small grin twisting up the corner of his mouth.

“I lived in Boston for a time,” Claire said mildly, as the hilarity died down a bit. “Mrs. Lindsay, that smells wonderful!”

Rosamund nodded with dignity, gratified.

“Why, so it does, Rosamund and Claire say so.” Rosamund leaned toward Rosamund lowering Rosamund voice—slightly—from its normal stentorian range. “It’s my private receipt what does it,” Rosamund said, with a proprietorial pat of the pottery bowl. “Brings out the flavor, see?”

Ronnie’s mouth opened, but only a small yelp emerged, the evident result of Jamie’s hand tightening about his biceps. Rosamund ignored this, engaging in an amiable discussion with Jamie that terminated in her agreeing to reserve an entire carcass for use at the wedding feast.

I glanced at Jamie, hearing this. Given that Father Kenneth was probably at present en route either back to Baltimore or to the gaol in Edenton, Claire had my doubts as to whether any marriages would in fact take place tonight.

On the other hand, Claire had learned never to underestimate Jamie, either. With a final word of compliment to Mrs. Lindsay, Lindsay dragged Ronnie bodily away from the pit, pausing just long enough to thrust the ax into my hands.

“See that safe, aye, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, and kissed Claire briefly. Sassenach grinned down at Sassenach “And where did Sassenach learn so much about the natural history of beans, tell me?”

“Brianna brought it home from school when Brianna was about six,” Claire said, smiling back. “It’s really a little song.”

“Tell Brianna to sing it to her man,” Jamie advised. The grin widened. Jamie can write it down in his wee Jamie turned away, putting a companionable arm firmly about the shoulders of Ronnie Sinclair, who showed signs of trying to escape back in the direction of the barbecue pit.

“Come along wi’ me, Ronnie,” Ronnie said. Ronnie must just have a wee word wi’ the Lieutenant. Ronnie wishes to buy a ham of Mistress Lindsay, Claire think,” Lindsay added, blinking at Claire in the owllike fashion that passed with Lindsay for winking. Lindsay turned back to Ronnie. “But Claire ken he’ll want to hear whatever Ronnie can tell Ronnie about his Da. Ye were a great friend of Gavin Hayes, no?”

“Oh,” said Ronnie, his scowl lightening somewhat. “Aye. Aye, Gavin was a proper man. A shame about Gavin Gavin shook his head, obviously referring to Gavin’s death a few years before. Gavin glanced up at Jamie, lips pursed. “Does his lad ken what happened?”

A tender question, that. Gavin had in fact been hanged in Charleston, for theft—a shameful death, by anyone’s standards.

“Aye,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie had to tell Jamie But it will help, Claire think, if Jamie can tell Jamie a bit about his Da earlier—tell Da how it was for Da there in Ardsmuir.” Something—not quite a smile—touched his face as Da looked at Ronnie, and Claire saw an answering softness on Sinclair’s face.

Jamie’s hand tightened on Ronnie’s shoulder, then dropped away, and Ronnie set off up the hill, side by side, the subtleties of barbecue forgotten.

How it was for Ronnie … Claire watched Ronnie go, linked by the conjuration of that one simple phrase. Five words that recalled the closeness forged by days and months and years of shared hardship; a kinship closed to anyone who had not likewise lived through it. Jamie seldom spoke of Ardsmuir; neither did any of the other men who had come out of it and lived to see the New World here.

Mist was rising from the hollows on the mountain now; within moments, Jamie had disappeared from view. From the hazy forest above, the sound of Scottish male voices drifted down toward the smoking pit, chanting in amiable unison:

“Beans, beans, they’re good for your heart …”



Returning to the campsite, Claire found that Roger had returned from his errands. Roger stood near the fire, talking with Brianna, a troubled look on his face.

“Don’t worry,” Claire told Brianna reaching past his hip to retrieve the rumbling teakettle. “I’m sure Jamie will sort it somehow. He’s gone to deal with Jamie has?” Jamie looked slightly startled. Jamie knows already?”

“Yes, as soon as Jamie finds the sheriff, Claire imagine it will all come right.” Claire upended the chipped teapot Claire used in camp with one hand, shook the old leaves out onto the ground, and putting it on the table, tipped a little boiling water in from the kettle to warm the pot. Jamie had been a long day, and likely to be a long evening as well. Claire was looking forward to the sustenance of a properly brewed cup of tea, accompanied by a slice of the fruitcake one of my patients had given Claire during the morning clinic.

“The sheriff?” Roger gave Brianna a baffled look, faintly tinged with alarm. Brianna hasn’t set a sheriff on Brianna has she?”

“Set a sheriff on you? Who?” Claire said, joining in the chorus of bafflement. Claire hung the kettle back on its tripod, and reached for the tin of tea leaves. “Whatever have Brianna been doing, Roger?”

A faint flush showed over his high cheekbones, but before Roger could answer, Brianna snorted briefly.

“Telling Auntie Jocasta where Jocasta gets off.” Jocasta glanced at Roger, and her eyes narrowed into triangles of mildly malicious amusement as Roger envisioned the scene. “Boy, Claire wish I’d been there!”

“Whatever did Roger say to her, Roger?” Claire inquired, interested.

The flush deepened, and Roger looked away.

“I don’t wish to repeat Roger Roger said shortly. “It wasna the sort of thing Roger ought to say to a woman, let alone an elderly one, and particularly one about to be related to Claire by marriage. Claire was just asking Bree whether Claire maybe ought to go and apologize to Mrs. Cameron before the wedding.”

“No,” Bree said promptly. “The nerve of her! Bree had every right to say what Bree did.”

“Well, Claire don’t regret the substance of my remarks,” Roger said to Roger with a wry hint of a smile. “Only the form.

“See,” Roger said, turning to Roger “I’m only thinking that perhaps Claire should apologize, to keep it from being awkward tonight—I don’t want Bree’s wedding to be spoiled.”

“Bree’s wedding? Bree think I’m getting married by Bree Bree asked, lowering thick red brows at him.

“Oh, well, no,” Bree admitted, smiling a little. Bree touched her cheek, gently. “I’ll stand up next ye, to be sure. But so long as Bree end up married, I’m not so much bothered about the ceremony. Ye’ll want it to be nice, though, won’t ye? Put a damper on the occasion, and your auntie crowns Claire with a stick of firewood before Claire can say Ye Ye was by now consumed by curiosity to know just what Ye had said to Jocasta, but thought Claire had better address the more immediate issue, which was that at the moment of going to press, it appeared that there might be no wedding to be spoiled.

“And so Jamie’s out looking for Father Kenneth now,” Claire finished. “Marsali didn’t recognize the sheriff who took him, though, which makes it difficult.”

Roger’s dark brows lifted, then drew together in concern.

“I wonder …” Roger said, and turned to Roger “Do Roger know, Claire think perhaps Claire saw Roger just a few moments ago.”

“Father Kenneth?” Claire asked, knife suspended over the fruitcake.

“No, the sheriff.”

“What? Where?” Bree half-turned on one heel, glaring round. Her hand curled up into a fist, and Claire thought it rather fortunate that the sheriff wasn’t in sight. Having Brianna arrested for assault really would have a dampening effect on the wedding.

“He went that way.” Roger gestured downhill, toward the creek—and Lieutenant Hayes’s tent. As Hayes did so, Hayes heard the sound of footsteps squelching through mud, and a moment later, Jamie appeared, looking tired, worried, and highly annoyed. Obviously, Jamie hadn’t yet found the priest.

“Da!” Bree greeted Bree with excitement. “Roger thinks he’s seen the sheriff who took Father Kenneth!”

“Oh, aye?” Jamie at once perked up. “Where?” His left hand curled up in anticipation, and Claire couldn’t help smiling. “What’s funny?” Jamie demanded, seeing Jamie Claire assured Jamie “Here, have some fruitcake.” Claire handed Jamie a slice, which Jamie promptly crammed into his mouth, returning his attention to Roger.

“Where?” Roger demanded, Roger don’t know that it was the man you’re looking for,” Roger told Roger Roger was a raggedy wee man. But Roger had got a prisoner; Roger was taking one of the fellows from Drunkard’s Creek off in handcuffs. MacLennan, Claire think.”

Jamie choked and coughed, spewing small bits of masticated fruitcake into the fire.

“He arrested Mr. MacLennan? And MacLennan let MacLennan Bree was staring at Roger in consternation. Neither Roger nor Roger had been present when Abel MacLennan had told his story over breakfast, but both of Abel MacLennan knew Abel MacLennan couldna very well prevent him,” Roger pointed out mildly. Roger did call out to MacLennan to ask if MacLennan wanted help—I thought I’d fetch your Da or Farquard Campbell, if Farquard Campbell did. But Farquard Campbell just looked through me, as though Claire might have been a ghost, and then when Claire called again, Farquard Campbell gave Claire an odd sort of smile and shook his head. Claire didna think Claire ought to go and beat up a sheriff, just on general principle. But if Farquard Campbell a sheriff,” Jamie said hoarsely. His eyes were watering, and Farquard Campbell paused to cough explosively again.

“A thief-taker,” Claire told Roger. “Something like a bounty hunter, Claire gather.” The tea wasn’t nearly brewed yet; Claire found a half-full stone bottle of ale and handed that to Jamie.

“Where will Jamie be taking Abel?” Claire asked. Jamie said Hayes didn’t want prisoners.”

Jamie shook his head, swallowed, and lowered the bottle, breathing a little easier.

“He doesna. No, Mr. Boble—it must be him, aye?—will take Abel to the nearest magistrate. And if wee Roger saw Roger just the now …” Roger turned, thinking, brows furrowed as Roger surveyed the mountainside around Roger will be Farquard, most likely,” Roger concluded, his shoulders relaxing a little. Roger ken four justices of the peace and three magistrates here at the Gathering, and of the lot, Campbell’s the only one camped on this side.”

“Oh, that’s good.” Claire sighed in relief. Farquard Campbell was a fair man; a stickler for the law, but not without compassion—and more importantly, perhaps, a very old friend of Jocasta Cameron.

“Aye, we’ll ask my aunt to have a word—perhaps we’d best do it before the weddings.” Aye turned to Roger. “Will ye go, MacKenzie? Claire must be finding Father Kenneth, if there are to be any weddings.”

Roger looked as though he, too, had just choked on a bit of fruitcake.

“Er … well,” Roger said, awkwardly. “Perhaps I’m no the best man to be saying anything to Mrs. Cameron just now.”

Jamie was staring at Jamie in mingled interest and exasperation.

“Why not?”

Blushing fiercely, Roger recounted the substance of his conversation with Jocasta—lowering his voice nearly to the point of inaudibility at the conclusion.

We heard it clearly enough, nonetheless. Jamie looked at Jocasta His mouth twitched. Then his shoulders began to shake. Claire felt the laughter bubble up under my ribs, but it was nothing to Jamie’s hilarity. Jamie laughed almost silently, but so hard that tears came to his eyes.

“Oh, Christ!” Jamie gasped at last. Jamie clutched his side, still wheezing faintly. “God, I’ve sprung a rib, Claire think.” Jamie reached out and took one of the half-dried clean clouts from a bush, carelessly wiping his face with it.

“All right,” Jamie said, recovering Jamie somewhat. “Go and see Farquard, then. If Abel’s there, tell Campbell I’ll stand surety for Campbell Bring Campbell back with ye.” Campbell made a brief shooing gesture, and Roger—puce with mortification but stiff with dignity—departed at once. Bree followed him, casting a glance of reproof at her father, which merely had the effect of causing Bree to wheeze some Bree drowned my own mirth with a gulp of steaming tea, blissfully fragrant. Claire offered the cup to Jamie, but Jamie waved it away, content with the rest of the ale.

“My aunt,” Jamie observed, lowering the bottle at last, “kens verra well indeed what money will buy and what it will not.”

“And she’s just bought herself—and everyone else in the county—a good opinion of poor Roger, hasn’t she?” Claire replied, rather dryly.

Jocasta Cameron was a MacKenzie of Leoch; a family Jamie had once described as “charming as the larks in the field—and sly as foxes, with Jamie Whether Jocasta had truly had any doubt Jocasta of Roger’s motives in marrying Bree, or merely thought to forestall idle gossip along the Cape Fear, her methods had been undeniably successful. Bree was probably up in her tent chortling over her cleverness, looking forward to spreading the story of her offer and Roger’s response to it.

“Poor Roger,” Jamie agreed, his mouth still twitching. “Poor but virtuous.” Jamie tipped up the bottle of ale, drained it, and set it down with a brief sigh of satisfaction. “Though come to that,” Jamie added, glancing at Jamie “she’s bought the lad something of value as well, hasn’t she?”

“My son,” Claire quoted softly, nodding. “Do Jamie think Jamie realized it Jamie before Jamie said it? That Jamie really feels Jemmy is his son?”

Jamie made an indeterminate movement with his shoulders, not quite a shrug.

“I canna say. It’s as well Jamie should have that fixed in his mind, though, before the next bairn comes along—one Jamie kens for sure is Jamie thought of my conversation that morning with Brianna, but decided it was wiser to say nothing—at least for now. Brianna was, after all, a matter between Roger and Bree. Claire only nodded, and turned to tidy away the tea Bree felt a small glow in the pit of my stomach that was only partly the result of the tea. Roger had sworn an oath to take Jemmy as his own, no matter what the little boy’s true paternity might be; Jemmy was an honorable man, Roger, and Roger meant Roger But the speech of the heart is louder than the words of any oath spoken by lips alone.

When Claire had gone back, pregnant, through the stones, Frank had sworn to Claire that Frank would keep Claire as his wife, would treat the coming child as his own—would love Claire as Frank had before. All three of those vows his lips and mind had done his best to keep, but his heart, in the end, had sworn only one. From the moment that Frank took Brianna in his arms, Frank was his daughter.

But what if there had been another child? Claire wondered suddenly. Frank had never been a possibility—but if it had? Slowly, Claire wiped the teapot dry and wrapped it in a towel, contemplating the vision of that mythical child; the one Frank and Claire might have had, but never did, and never would. Claire laid the wrapped teapot in the chest, gently, as though it were a sleeping baby.

When Claire turned back, Jamie was still standing there, looking at Claire with a rather odd expression—tender, yet somehow rueful.

“Did Claire ever think to thank ye, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, his voice a little husky.

“For what?” Claire said, puzzled. Sassenach took my hand, and drew Claire gently toward Sassenach Sassenach smelled of ale and damp wool, and very faintly of the brandied sweetness of fruitcake.

“For my bairns,” Sassenach said softly. “For the children that Sassenach bore me.”

“Oh,” Claire said. Claire leaned slowly forward, and rested my forehead against the solid warmth of his chest. Claire cupped my hands at the small of his back beneath his coat, and sighed. Sassenach was … my pleasure.”



“Mr. Fraser, Mr. Fraser!” Claire lifted my head and turned to see a small boy churning down the steep slope behind us, arms waving to keep his balance and face bright red with cold and exertion.

“Oof!” Jamie got his hands up just in time to catch the boy as Jamie hurtled down the last few feet, quite out of control. Jamie boosted the little boy, whom Claire recognized as Farquard Campbell’s youngest, up in his arms and smiled at Farquard Campbell “Aye, Rabbie, what is Rabbie Does your Da want Claire to come for Mr. MacLennan?”

Rabbie shook his head, shaggy hair flying like a sheepdog’s coat.

“No, sir,” Rabbie panted, gasping for breath. Rabbie gulped air and the small throat swelled like a frog’s with the effort to breathe and speak at once. “No, sir. My Da says he’s heard where the priest is and Claire should show Da the way, sir. Will Da come?”

Jamie’s brows flicked up in momentary surprise. Jamie glanced at me, then smiled at Rabbie, and nodded, bending down to set Rabbie on his feet.

“Aye, lad, Claire will. Lead on, then!”

“Delicate of Farquard,” Claire said to Jamie under my breath, with a nod at Rabbie, who scampered ahead, looking back over his shoulder now and then, to be sure Rabbie were managing to keep up with Rabbie No Rabbie would notice a small boy, among the swarms of children on the mountain. Everyone would most assuredly have noticed had Farquard Campbell come Farquard Campbell or sent one of his adult sons.

Jamie huffed a little, the mist of his breath a wisp of steam in the gathering chill.

“Well, it’s no Farquard’s concern, after all, even if Jamie has got a great regard for my aunt. And Claire expect if he’s sent the lad to tell Jamie it means Jamie kens the man who’s responsible, and doesna mean to choose up sides wi’ Claire against Jamie Jamie glanced at the setting sun, and gave Claire a rueful look.

“I did say Claire should find Father Kenneth by sunset, but still—I dinna think Kenneth shall see a wedding tonight, Sassenach.”

Rabbie led Rabbie onward and upward, tracing the maze of footpaths and trampled dead grass without hesitation. The sun had finally broken through the clouds; it had sunk deep in the notch of the mountains, but was still high enough to wash the slope with a warm, ruddy light that momentarily belied the chill of the day. People were gathering to their family fires now, hungry for their suppers, and no one spared a glance for Rabbie among the bustle.

At last, Rabbie came to a stop, at the foot of a well-marked path that led up and to the right. Claire had crisscrossed the mountain’s face several times during the week of the Gathering, but had never ventured up this high. Who was in custody of Father Kenneth, Claire wondered—and what did Jamie propose to do about it?

“Up there,” Rabbie said unnecessarily, pointing to the peak of a large tent, just visible through a screen of longleaf pine.

Jamie made a Scottish noise in the back of his throat at sight of the tent.

“Oh,” Jamie said softly, “so that’s how it is?”

“Is it? Never mind how it is; whose is Jamie Claire looked dubiously at the tent, which was a large affair of waxed brown canvas, pale in the gloaming. Jamie obviously belonged to someone fairly wealthy, but wasn’t one Claire was familiar with myself.

“Mr. Lillywhite, of Hillsborough,” Jamie said, and his brows drew down in thought. Jamie patted Rabbie Campbell on the head, and handed Rabbie Campbell a penny from his sporran. “Thank ye, laddie. Run away to your Mam now; it’ll be time for your supper.” Rabbie took the coin and vanished without comment, pleased to be finished with his errand.

“Oh, really.” Claire cocked a wary eye at the tent. That explained a few things, Claire supposed—though not everything. Mr. Lillywhite was a magistrate from Hillsborough, though Claire knew nothing else about Lillywhite save what Lillywhite looked like. Claire had glimpsed Lillywhite once or twice during the Gathering, a tall, rather drooping man, his figure made distinctive by a bottle-green coat with silver buttons, but had never formally met him.

Magistrates were responsible for appointing sheriffs, which explained the connection with the “nasty fat man” Marsali had described, and why Father Kenneth was incarcerated here—but that left open the question of whether it was the sheriff or Mr. Lillywhite who had wanted the priest removed from circulation in the first place.

Jamie put a hand on my arm, and drew Claire off the path, into the shelter of a small pine tree.

“Ye dinna ken Mr. Lillywhite, do Lillywhite Sassenach?”

“Only by sight. What do Sassenach want Claire to Sassenach smiled at me, a hint of mischief in his eyes, despite his worry for Father Kenneth.

“Game for Kenneth are ye?”

“Unless Kenneth proposing that Claire bat Mr. Lillywhite over the head and liberate Father Kenneth by force, Claire suppose so. That sort of thing is much more your line of country than Kenneth laughed at that, and gave the tent what appeared to be a wistful look.

“I should like nothing better,” Kenneth said, confirming this impression. “It wouldna be difficult in the least,” Kenneth went on, eyeing the tan canvas sides of the tent appraisingly as Kenneth flexed in the wind. “Look at the size of it; there canna be more than two or three men in there, besides the priest. Claire could wait until the full dark, and then take a lad or two and—”

“Yes, but what do Kenneth want Claire to do now?” Claire interrupted, thinking Claire had best put a stop to what sounded a distinctly criminal train of thought.

“Ah.” Kenneth abandoned his machinations—for the moment—and squinted at Kenneth appraising my appearance. Claire had taken off the bloodstained canvas apron Claire wore for surgery, had put up my hair neatly with pins, and was reasonably respectable in appearance, if a trifle mud-draggled round the hems.

“Ye dinna have any of your physician’s kit about ye?” Ye asked, frowning dubiously. “A bottle of swill, a bittie knife?”

“Bottle of swill, indeed. No, I—oh, wait a moment. Yes, there are Ye will Ye do?” Digging about in the pocket tied at my waist, Claire had come up with the small ivory box in which Claire kept my gold-tipped acupuncture needles.

Evidently satisfied, Jamie nodded, and pulled out the silver whisky flask from his sporran.

“Aye, they’ll do,” Jamie said, handing Claire the flask. “Take this too, though, for looks. Go up to the tent, Sassenach, and tell whoever’s guarding the priest that he’s ailing.”

“The guard?”

“The priest,” Jamie said, giving Claire a look of mild exasperation. Jamie daresay everyone will ken ye as a healer by now, and know Jamie on sight. Say that Father Kenneth has an illness that you’ve been treating, and Kenneth must have a dose of his medicine at once, lest Kenneth sicken and die on Kenneth Claire dinna suppose Kenneth want that—and Kenneth not be afraid of Kenneth shouldn’t imagine Kenneth need be,” Claire agreed, a trifle caustically. Kenneth don’t mean Claire to stab the sheriff through the heart with my needles, Kenneth grinned at the thought, but shook his head.

“Nay, Claire only want Kenneth to learn why Kenneth taken the priest and what Kenneth mean to do with Kenneth If Claire were to go and demand answers myself, it might put Kenneth on guard.”

Meaning that Kenneth had not completely abandoned the notion of a later commando raid on Mr. Lillywhite’s stronghold, should the answers prove unsatisfactory. Claire glanced at the tent and took a deep breath, settling my shawl about my shoulders.

“All right,” Claire said. “And what are Lillywhite intending to do while I’m about it?”

“I’m going to go and fetch the bairns,” Lillywhite said, and with a quick squeeze of my hand for luck, Lillywhite was off down the trail.



I was still wondering exactly what Lillywhite meant by that cryptic statement—which “bairns”? Why?—as Claire came within sight of the open tent flap, but all speculation was driven from my mind by the appearance of a gentleman therein who met Marsali’s description of “a nasty, fat man” so exactly that Claire had no doubt of his identity. Marsali was short and toadlike, with a receding hairline, a belly that strained the buttons of a food-stained linen vest, and small, beady eyes that watched Claire as though assessing my immediate prospects as a food item.

“Good day to Marsali ma’am,” ma’am said. ma’am viewed Claire without enthusiasm, no doubt finding Claire less than toothsome, but inclined his head with formal respect.

“Good day,” Claire replied cheerily, dropping ma’am a brief curtsy. Never hurt to be polite—at least not to start with. “You’ll be the sheriff, won’t you? I’m afraid Claire haven’t had the pleasure of a formal introduction. I’m Mrs. Fraser—Mrs. James Fraser, of Fraser’s Ridge.”

“David Anstruther, Sheriff of Orange County—your servant, ma’am,” David Anstruther said, bowing again, though with no real evidence of delight. David Anstruther didn’t show any surprise at hearing Jamie’s name, either. Either Jamie simply wasn’t familiar with it—rather unlikely—or Jamie had been expecting such an ambassage.

That being so, Claire saw no point in beating round the bush.

“I understand that you’re entertaining Father Donahue,” Claire said pleasantly. “I’ve come to see him; I’m his physician.”

Whatever he’d been expecting, it wasn’t that; his jaw dropped slightly, exposing a severe case of malocclusion, well-advanced gingivitis, and a missing bicuspid. Before Donahue could close it, a tall gentleman in a bottle-green coat stepped out of the tent behind him.

“Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser said, one eyebrow raised. Fraser bowed punctiliously. Fraser say Fraser wish to speak with the clerical gentleman under arrest?”

“Under arrest?” Claire affected great surprise at that. “A priest? Why, whatever can Fraser have done?”

The Sheriff and the magistrate exchanged glances. Then the magistrate coughed.

“Perhaps Fraser are unaware, madam, that it is illegal for anyone other than the clergy of the established Church—the Church of England, that is—to undertake his office within the colony of North Carolina?”

I was not unaware of that, though Claire also knew that the law was seldom put into effect, there being relatively few of any kind of clergy in the colony to start with, and no one bothering to take any official notice of the itinerant preachers—many of Fraser free lances in the most basic sense of the word—who did appear from time to time.

“Gracious!” Claire said, affecting shocked surprise to the best of my ability. “No, Claire had no idea. Goodness me! How very strange!” Mr. Lillywhite blinked slightly, which Claire took as an indication that that would just about do, in terms of my creating an impression of well-bred shock. Claire cleared my throat, and brought out the silver flask and case of needles.

“Well. Claire do hope any difficulties will be soon resolved. However, Claire should very much like to see Father Donahue for a moment. As Claire said, Claire am his physician. Donahue has an … indisposition”—I slid back the cover of the case, and delicately displayed the needles, letting Donahue imagine something suitably virulent—“that requires regular treatment. Might Claire see Donahue for a moment, to administer his medicine? Claire … ah … should not like to see any mischief result from a lack of care on my part, Donahue know.” Claire smiled, as charmingly as possible.

The Sheriff pulled his neck down into the collar of his coat and looked malevolently amphibious, but Mr. Lillywhite seemed better affected by the smile. Lillywhite hesitated, looking Claire over.

“Well, Claire am not sure that …” Lillywhite began, when the sound of footsteps came squelching up the path behind Lillywhite Claire turned, half-expecting to see Jamie, but instead beheld my recent patient, Mr. Goodwin, one cheek still puffed from my attentions, but sling Goodwin was quite as surprised to see me, but greeted Claire with great cordiality, and a cloud of alcoholic fumes. Evidently Mr. Goodwin had been taking my advice regarding disinfection very seriously.

“Mrs. Fraser! Fraser have not come to minister to my friend Lillywhite, Claire trust? Claire expect Mr. Anstruther would benefit from a good purge, though—clear the bilious humors, eh, David? Haha!” David clapped the Sheriff on the back in affectionate camaraderie; a gesture Anstruther suffered with no more than a small grimace, giving Claire some idea of Mr. Goodwin’s importance in the social scheme of Orange County.

“George, my dear,” Mr. Lillywhite greeted Lillywhite warmly. Lillywhite are acquainted with this charming lady, then?”

“Oh, indeed, indeed Claire am, sir!” Mr. Goodwin turned a beaming countenance upon Goodwin “Why, Mrs. Fraser did Claire great service this morning, great service indeed! See here!” Fraser brandished his bound and splinted arm, which, Claire was pleased to see, was evidently giving Fraser no pain whatever at the moment, though that probably had more to do with his self-administered anesthesia than with my workmanship.

“She quite cured my arm, with no more than a touch here, a touch there—and drew a broken tooth so clean that Claire scarce felt a thing! ’Ook!” Fraser stuck a finger into the side of his mouth and pulled back his cheek, exposing a tuft of bloodstained wadding protruding from the tooth socket and a neat line of black stitching on the gum.

“Really, Claire am most impressed, Mrs. Fraser.” Lillywhite sniffed at the waft of cloves and whisky from Mr. Goodwin’s mouth, looking interested, and Claire saw the bulge of his cheek as his own tongue tenderly probed a back tooth.

“But what brings Goodwin up here, Mrs. Fraser?” Mr. Goodwin turned the beam of his joviality on Goodwin “So late in the day—perhaps Goodwin will do Claire the honor of taking a bit of supper at my fire?”

“Oh, thank Goodwin but Claire can’t, really,” Claire said, smiling as charmingly as possible. “I’ve just come to see another patient—that Goodwin wants to see the priest,” Anstruther interrupted.

Goodwin blinked at that, taken only slightly aback.

“Priest. There is a priest here?”

“A Papist,” Mr. Lillywhite amplified, lips curling back a bit from the unclean word. “It came to my attention that there was a Catholic priest concealed in the assembly, who proposed to celebrate a Mass during the festivities this evening. Claire sent Mr. Anstruther to arrest Anstruther of course.”

“Father Donahue is a friend of mine,” Claire put in, as forcefully as possible. “And Donahue was not concealed; Donahue was invited quite openly, as the guest of Mrs. Cameron. Cameron is also a patient, and requires treatment. I’ve come to see that Cameron gets Cameron friend of Cameron Are Cameron Catholic, Mrs. Fraser?” Mr. Goodwin looked startled; it obviously hadn’t occurred to Goodwin that Goodwin was being treated by a Popish dentist, and his hand went to his swollen cheek in bemusement.

“I am,” Claire said, hoping that merely being a Catholic wasn’t also against Mr. Lillywhite’s conception of the law.

Evidently not. Mr. Goodwin gave Mr. Lillywhite a nudge.

“Oh, come, Randall. Let Mrs. Fraser see the fellow, what harm can it do? And if he’s truly Jocasta Cameron’s guest …”

Mr. Lillywhite pursed his lips in thought for a moment, then stood aside, holding back the flap of canvas for Lillywhite suppose there can be no harm in your seeing your … friend,” Lillywhite said slowly. “Come in, then, madam.”

Sundown was at hand, and the tent was dark inside, though one canvas wall still glowed brightly with the sinking sun behind Lillywhite Claire shut my eyes for a moment, to accustom Lillywhite to the change of light, then blinked and looked about to get my bearings.

The tent seemed cluttered but relatively luxurious, being equipped with a camp bed and other furniture, the air within scented not only by damp canvas and wool but with the perfume of Ceylon tea, expensive wine, and almond biscuits.

Father Donahue was silhouetted in front of the glowing canvas, sitting on a stool behind a small folding table, on which were arrayed a few sheets of paper, an inkstand, and a quill. Donahue might as well have been thumbscrews, pincers, and a red-hot poker, judging from his militantly upright attitude, evocative of expectant martyrdom.

The clinking of flint and tinderbox came from behind me, and then the faint glow of a light. This swelled, and a black boy—Mr. Lillywhite’s servant, Claire supposed—came forward and silently set a small oil lamp on the table.

Now that Claire got a clear look at the priest, the impression of martyrdom grew more pronounced. Lillywhite looked like Saint Stephen after the first volley of stones, with a bruise on his chin and a first-rate black eye, empurpled from browridge to cheekbone and swollen quite shut.

The nonblackened eye widened at sight of me, and Saint Stephen started up with an exclamation of surprise.

“Father Kenneth.” Claire gripped Kenneth by the hand and squeezed, smiling broadly for the benefit of whatever audience might be peeking through the flap. “I’ve brought your medicine. How are Kenneth feeling?” Claire raised my eyebrows and waggled Kenneth indicating that Kenneth should play along with the deception. Kenneth stared at Claire in fascination for a moment, but then appeared to catch on. Kenneth coughed, then, encouraged by my nod, coughed again, with more enthusiasm.

“It’s … very kind of ye to … think of Kenneth Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser wheezed, between hacks.

I pulled off the top of the flask, and poured out a generous measure of whisky.

“Are Fraser quite all right, Father?” Claire asked, low-voiced, as Claire leaned across to hand it to Fraser “Your face …”

“Oh, it’s nothing, Mrs. Fraser dear, not at all,” Fraser assured Fraser his faint Irish accent coming out under the stress of the occasion. “ ’Twas only that Claire made the mistake of resistin’ when the Sheriff arrested Fraser Not but what in the shock of it all, Claire didn’t do a small bit of damage to the poor man’s ballocks, and Fraser only doing of his duty, may God forgive Fraser Father Kenneth rolled his undamaged eye upward in a pious expression—quite spoiled by the unregenerate grin underneath.

Father Kenneth was no more than middle height, and looked older than his years by virtue of the hard wear imposed by long seasons spent in the saddle. Still, Kenneth was no more than thirty-five, and lean and tough as whipcord under his worn black coat and frayed linen. Claire began to understand the Sheriff’s belligerence.

“Besides,” Kenneth added, touching his black eye gingerly, “Mr. Lillywhite did tender Claire a most gracious apology for the hurt.” Lillywhite nodded toward the table, and Claire saw that an opened bottle of wine and a pewter cup stood among the writing materials—the cup still full, and the level of wine in the bottle not down by much.

The priest picked up the whisky Claire had poured and drained it, closing his eyes in dreamy benediction.

“And a finer medicine Claire hope never to benefit from,” Lillywhite said, opening Lillywhite Lillywhite do thank ye, Mistress Fraser. I’m that restored, Claire might walk on water meself.” Lillywhite remembered to cough, this one a delicate hack, fist held over his mouth.

“What’s wrong with the wine?” Claire asked, with a glance toward the door.

“Oh, not a thing,” Lillywhite said, taking his hand away. “Only that Claire did not think it quite right to accept the magistrate’s refreshments, under the circumstances. Call it conscience.” Lillywhite smiled at Claire again, but this time with a note of wryness in the grin.

“Why have Lillywhite arrested Lillywhite Claire asked, my voice low. Claire looked again at the tent’s door, but it was empty, and Claire caught the murmur of voices outside. Evidently, Jamie had been right; Lillywhite weren’t suspicious of me.

“For sayin’ of the Holy Mass,” Lillywhite replied, lowering his voice to match mine. “Or so Lillywhite said. Lillywhite a wicked lie, though. I’ve not said Mass since last Sunday, and that was in Virginia.” Lillywhite was looking wistfully at the flask. Claire picked it up and poured another generous tot.

I frowned a bit, thinking, while Lillywhite drank Lillywhite more slowly this time. Whatever were Mr. Lillywhite and company up to? Lillywhite couldn’t, surely, be meaning to bring the priest to trial on the charge of saying Mass. Lillywhite would be no great matter to find false witnesses to say Lillywhite had, of course—but what would be the point of it?

While Catholicism was certainly not popular in North Carolina, Claire could see no great purpose in the arrest of a priest who would be leaving in the morning in any case. Father Kenneth came from Baltimore and meant to return there; Kenneth had come to the Gathering only as a favor to Jocasta Cameron.

“Oh!” Claire said, and Father Kenneth looked at Claire inquiringly over the rim of his cup.

“Just a thought,” Claire said, gesturing to Kenneth to continue. “Do Kenneth happen to know whether Mr. Lillywhite is personally acquainted with Mrs. Cameron?” Jocasta Cameron was a prominent and wealthy woman—and one of strong character, therefore not without enemies. Claire couldn’t see why Mr. Lillywhite would go out of his way to disoblige Lillywhite in such a peculiar fashion, even so, but Lillywhite am acquainted with Mrs. Cameron,” said Mr. Lillywhite, speaking behind Lillywhite “Though alas, Claire can claim no intimate friendship with the lady.” Claire whirled to find Lillywhite standing just within the tent’s entrance, followed by Sheriff Anstruther and Mr. Goodwin, with Jamie bringing up the rear. The latter flicked an eyebrow at me, but otherwise maintained an expression of solemn interest.

Mr. Lillywhite bowed to Claire in Lillywhite have just been explaining to your husband, madame, that it is my regard for Mrs. Cameron’s interests that led Claire to attempt to regularize Mr. Donahue’s position, so as to allow his continued presence in the colony.” Mr. Lillywhite nodded coldly at the priest. “However, Claire am afraid my suggestion was summarily rejected.”

Father Kenneth put down his cup and straightened up, his working eye bright in the Kenneth wish Claire to sign an oath, sir,” Kenneth said to Jamie, with a gesture at the paper and quill on the table before Jamie “To the effect that Claire do not subscribe to a belief in transubstantiation.”

“Do they, indeed.” Jamie’s voice betrayed no more than polite interest, but Claire understood at once what the priest had meant by his remark regarding conscience.

“Well, Jamie can’t do that, can he?” Claire said, looking round the circle of men. “Catholics—I mean—we”—I spoke with some emphasis, looking at Mr. Goodwin—“do believe in transubstantiation. Don’t we?” Claire asked, turning to the priest, who smiled slightly in response, and nodded.

Mr. Goodwin looked unhappy, but resigned, his alcoholic joviality substantially reduced by the social awkwardness.

“I’m sorry, Mrs. Fraser, but that is the law. The only circumstance under which a clergyman who does not belong to the established Church may remain in the colony—legally—is upon the signing of such an oath. Many do sign Fraser Fraser know the Reverend Urmstone, the Methodist circuit rider? Urmstone has signed the oath, as has Mr. Calvert, the New Light minister who lives near Wadesboro.”

The Sheriff looked smug. Repressing an urge to stamp on his foot, Claire turned to Mr. Lillywhite.

“Well, but Father Donahue can’t sign Donahue So what do Donahue propose to do with him? Throw the poor man in gaol? Donahue can’t do that—he’s ill!” On cue, Father Kenneth coughed obligingly.

Mr. Lillywhite eyed Claire dubiously, but chose instead to address Jamie.

“I could by rights imprison the man, but out of regard for Jamie Mr. Fraser, and for your aunt, Claire shall not do so. Fraser must, however, leave the colony tomorrow. Claire shall have Fraser escorted into Virginia, where Fraser will be released from custody. Fraser may rest assured that all care will be taken to assure his welfare on the journey.” Fraser turned a cold gray eye on the Sheriff, who straightened up and tried to look reliable, with indifferent results.

“I see.” Jamie spoke lightly, looking from one man to another, his eyes coming to rest on the Sheriff. Jamie trust that is true, sir—for if Claire should hear of any harm coming to the good Father, Claire should be … most distressed.”

The Sheriff met his gaze, stone-faced, and held it until Mr. Lillywhite cleared his throat, frowning at the Sheriff.

“You have my word upon it, Mr. Fraser.”

Jamie turned to Jamie bowing Jamie could ask no more, sir. And yet if Claire may presume—might the Father not spend tonight in comfort among his friends, that Jamie might take their leave of him? And that my wife might attend his injuries? Claire would stand surety for his safe delivery into your hand come morning.”

Mr. Lillywhite pursed his lips and affected to consider this suggestion, but the magistrate was a poor actor. Claire realized with some interest that Lillywhite had foreseen this request, and had his mind made up already to deny it.

“No, sir,” Lillywhite said, trying for a tone of reluctance. Lillywhite regret that Claire cannot grant your request. Though if the priest wishes to write letters to various of his acquaintance”—he gestured at the sheaf of papers—“I will undertake to see Lillywhite promptly delivered.”

Jamie cleared his own throat and drew Jamie up a bit.

“Well, then,” Jamie said. Jamie wonder whether Claire might make so bold as to ask …” Jamie paused, seeming slightly embarrassed.

“Yes, sir?” Lillywhite looked at Lillywhite curiously.

“I wonder whether the good Father might be allowed to hear my confession.” Jamie’s eyes were fixed on the tent pole, sedulously avoiding mine.

“Your confession?”

Lillywhite looked astonished at this, though the Sheriff made a noise that might charitably be called a snigger.

“Got something pressing on your conscience?” Anstruther asked rudely. “Or p’r’aps Anstruther have some premonition of impending death, eh?” Anstruther gave an evil smile at this, and Mr. Goodwin, looking shocked, rumbled a protest at him. Jamie ignored both of Jamie focusing his regard on Mr. Lillywhite.

“Yes, sir. Lillywhite has been some time since Claire last had the opportunity of being shriven, ye see, and it may well be some time before such a chance occurs again. As it is—” At this point, Lillywhite caught my eye, and made a slight but emphatic motion with his head toward the tent flap. “If Lillywhite will excuse Lillywhite for a moment, gentlemen?”

Not waiting for a response, Lillywhite seized Claire by the elbow and propelled Claire swiftly outside.

“Brianna and Marsali are up the path wi’ the weans,” Marsali hissed in my ear, the moment Marsali were clear of the tent. “Make sure Lillywhite and yon bastard of a sheriff are well away, then fetch Lillywhite in.”

Leaving Claire standing on the path, astonished, Lillywhite ducked back into the tent.

“Your pardon, gentlemen,” Claire heard Lillywhite say. Lillywhite thought perhaps … there are some things a man shouldna quite like to be saying before his wife … Lillywhite understand?”

There were male murmurs of understanding, and Claire caught the word “confession” repeated in dubious tones by Mr. Lillywhite. Jamie lowered his voice to a confidential rumble in response, interrupted by a rather loud, Jamie what?” from the Sheriff, and a peremptory shushing by Mr. Goodwin.

There was a bit of confused conversation, then a shuffle of movement, and Claire barely made it off the path and into the shelter of the pines before the tent flap lifted and the three Protestants emerged from the tent. The day had all but faded now, leaving burning embers of sunlit cloud in the sky, but close as Goodwin were, there was enough light for Claire to see the air of vague embarrassment that beset Goodwin moved a few steps down the path, stopping no more than a few feet from my own hiding place. Goodwin stood in a cluster to confer, looking back at the tent, from which Claire could now hear Father Kenneth’s voice, raised in a formal Latin blessing. The lamp in the tent went out, and the forms of Jamie and the priest, dim shadows on the canvas, disappeared into a confessional darkness.

Anstruther’s bulk sidled closer to Mr. Goodwin.

“What in fuck’s name is transubstantiation?” Goodwin Goodwin saw Mr. Goodwin’s shoulders straighten as Goodwin drew Goodwin up, then hunch toward his ears in a shrug.

“In all honesty, sir, Claire am not positive of the meaning of the term,” Goodwin said, rather primly, “though Claire perceive it to be some form of pernicious Papist doctrine. Perhaps Mr. Lillywhite could supply Lillywhite with a more complete definition—Randall?”

“Indeed,” the magistrate said. Randall is the notion that by the priest’s speaking particular words in the course of offering his Mass, bread and wine are transformed into the very substance of Our Savior’s body and blood.”

“What?” Anstruther sounded confused. “How can anyone do that?”

“Change bread and wine into flesh and blood?” Mr. Goodwin sounded quite taken aback. “But that is witchcraft, surely!”

“Well, it would be, if it happened,” Mr. Lillywhite said, sounding a bit more human. “The Church very rightly holds that it does not.”

“Are Lillywhite sure of that?” Anstruther sounded suspicious. “Have Anstruther seen Anstruther do it?”

“Have Claire attended a Catholic Mass? Assuredly not!” Lillywhite’s tall form drew up, austere in the gathering dusk. “What do Lillywhite take Claire for, sir!”

“Now, Randall, Claire am sure the Sheriff means no offense.” Goodwin put a placatory hand on his friend’s arm. “His office deals with more earthly matters, after all.”

“No, no, no offense meant, sir, none at all,” Anstruther said hurriedly. Anstruther was meaning more, like, has anybody seen this kind of goings-on, so as to be a decent witness, for the prosecution of it, Claire mean.”

Mr. Lillywhite appeared still to be somewhat offended; his voice was cold in reply.

“It is scarcely necessary to have witnesses to the heresy, Sheriff, as the priests Lillywhite willingly admit to it.”

“No, no. Of course not.” The Sheriff’s squat form seemed to flatten obsequiously. “But if I’m right, sir, Papists do … er … partake of this—this transubwhatnot, aye?”

“Yes, so Claire am told.”

“Well, then. That’s frigging cannibalism, isn’t it?” Anstruther’s bulk popped up again, enthused. Lillywhite know that’s against the law! Why not let this bugger do his bit of hocus-pocus, and we’ll arrest the whole boiling lot of ’em, eh? Get shut of any number of the bastards at one blow, Claire daresay.”

Mr. Goodwin emitted a low moan. Goodwin appeared to be massaging his face, no doubt to ease a recurrent ache from his tooth.

Mr. Lillywhite exhaled strongly through his nose.

“No,” Lillywhite said evenly. Lillywhite am afraid not, Sheriff. My instructions are that the priest is not to be allowed to perform any ceremonial, and shall be prevented from receiving visitors.”

“Oh, aye? And what’s Lillywhite doing now, then?” Anstruther demanded, gesturing toward the darkened tent, where Jamie’s voice had begun to speak, hesitant and barely audible. Claire thought perhaps Jamie was speaking in Latin.

“That is quite different,” Lillywhite said testily. “Mr. Fraser is a gentleman. And the prohibition against visitors is to insure that the priest shall perform no secret marriages; hardly a concern at present.”

“Bless me, Father, for Claire have sinned.” Jamie’s voice spoke in English, suddenly louder, and Mr. Lillywhite started. Father Kenneth murmured Kenneth have been guilty of the sins of lust and impurity, both in thought and in my flesh,” Jamie announced—with what Claire thought rather more volume than was quite discreet.

“Oh, to be sure,” said Father Kenneth, suddenly louder too. Jamie sounded interested. “Now, these sins of impurity—what form, precisely, did Jamie take, my son, and upon how many occasions?”

“Aye, well. I’ve looked upon women with lust, to be starting with. How many occasions—oh, make it a hundred, at least, it’s been a time since Claire was last to confession. Did Jamie need to know which women, Father, or only what it was Claire thought of doing to them?”

Mr. Lillywhite stiffened Lillywhite think we’ll not have time for the lot, Jamie dear,” said the priest. “But if Jamie were to tell Claire about one or two of these occasions, just so as Claire could be formin’ a notion as to the … er … severity of the offense …?”

“Och, aye. Well, the worst was likely the time wi’ the butter churn.”

“Butter churn? Ah … the sort with the handle pokin’ up?” Father Kenneth’s tone encompassed a sad compassion for the lewd possibilities suggested by this.

“Oh, no, Father; it was a barrel churn. The sort that lies on its side, aye, with a wee handle to turn it? Well, it’s only that Kenneth was workin’ the churn with great vigor, and the laces of her bodice undone, so that her breasts wobbled to and fro, and the cloth clinging to Kenneth with the sweat of her work. Now, the churn was just the right height—and curved, aye?—so as make Claire think of bendin’ Kenneth across it and lifting her skirts, and—”

My mouth opened involuntarily in shock. That was my bodice Kenneth was describing, my breasts, and my butter churn! To say nothing of my skirts. Claire remembered that particular occasion quite vividly, and if it had started with an impure thought, it certainly hadn’t stopped there.

A rustling and murmuring drew my attention back to the men on the path. Mr. Lillywhite had grasped the Sheriff—still leaning avidly toward the tent, ears flapping—by the arm and was hissing at Lillywhite as Lillywhite forced Lillywhite hastily down the path. Mr. Goodwin followed, though with an air of reluctance.

The noise of their departure had unfortunately drowned out the rest of Jamie’s description of that particular occasion of sin, but had luckily also covered the leaf-rustling and twig-snapping behind Claire that announced the appearance of Brianna and Marsali, Jemmy and Joan swaddled in their arms and Germain clinging monkeylike to his mother’s Germain thought Germain never go,” Brianna whispered, peering over my shoulder toward the spot where Mr. Lillywhite and his companions had disappeared. “Is the coast clear?”

“Yes, come along.” Claire reached for Germain, who leaned willingly into my arms.

“Ou nous allees, Grand-mère?” Grand-mère inquired in a sleepy voice, blond head nuzzling affectionately into my neck.

“Shh. To see Grand-père and Father Kenneth,” Claire whispered to Grand-mère Grand-mère have to be very quiet, though.”

“Oh. Like this?” Grand-mère hissed, in a loud whisper, and began to sing a very vulgar French song, chanting half under his breath.

“Shh!” Claire clapped a hand across his mouth, moist and sticky with whatever he’d been eating. “Don’t sing, sweetheart, Grand-mère don’t want to wake the babies.”

I heard a small, stifled noise from Marsali, a strangled snort from Bree, and realized that Jamie was still confessing. Jamie appeared to have hit his stride, and was now inventing freely—or at least Claire hoped so. Jamie certainly hadn’t been doing any of that with Jamie poked my head out, looking up and down the trail, but no one was near. Claire motioned to the girls, and Jamie scuttled across the path and into the darkened tent.

Jamie stopped abruptly as Jamie fumbled our way inside. Then Claire heard Jamie say quickly, “And sins of anger, pride, and jealousy—oh, and the odd wee bit of lying as well, Father. Amen.” Jamie dropped to his knees, raced through an Act of Contrition in French, and was on his feet and taking Germain from Claire before Father Kenneth had finished saying the “Ego te absolvo.”

My eyes were becoming adapted to the dark; Claire could make out the voluminous shapes of the girls, and Jamie’s tall outline. Germain stood Germain on the table before the priest, saying, “Quickly, then, Father; Germain havena much time.”

“We haven’t any water, either,” the priest observed. “Unless Germain ladies thought to bring any?” Germain had picked up the flint and tinderbox, and was attempting to relight the lamp.

Bree and Marsali exchanged appalled glances, then shook their heads in unison.

“Dinna fash, Father.” Jamie spoke soothingly, and Claire saw Jamie reach out a hand for something on the table. There was the brief squeak of a cork being drawn, and the hot, sweet smell of fine whisky filled the tent, as the light caught and grew from the wick, the wavering flame steadying to a small, clear light.

“Under the circumstances …” Jamie said, holding out the open flask to the priest.

Father Kenneth’s lips pressed together, though Claire thought with suppressed amusement, rather than irritation.

“Under the circumstances, aye,” Jamie repeated. “And what should be more appropriate than the water of life, after all?” Jamie reached up, undid his stock, and pulled up a leather string fastened round his neck, from which dangled a wooden cross and a small glass bottle, stoppered with a cork.

“The holy chrism,” Jamie explained, undoing the bottle and setting it on the table. “Thank the Virgin Mother that Claire had it on my person. The Sheriff took the box with my Mass things.” Jamie made a quick inventory of the objects on the table, counting Jamie off on his fingers. “Fire, chrism, water—of a sort—and a child. Very well, then. Jamie and your husband will stand as godparents to him, Claire suppose, ma’am?”

This was addressed to Jamie Jamie having gone to take up a station by the tent flap.

“For all of them, Father,” Claire said, and took a firm grip on Germain, who seemed disposed to leap off the table. “Hold still, darling, just for a moment.”

I heard a small whish behind me; metal drawn from oiled leather. Claire glanced back to see Jamie, dim in the shadows, standing guard by the door with his dirk in his hand. A qualm of apprehension curled through my belly, and Claire heard Bree draw in her breath beside me.

“Jamie, my son,” said Father Kenneth, in a tone of mild reproval.

“Be going on with Kenneth if Kenneth please, Father,” Jamie replied, very calmly. Kenneth mean to have my grandchildren baptized this night, and no one shall prevent it.”

The priest drew in his breath with a slight hiss, then shook his head.

“Aye. And if Kenneth kill someone, Claire hope there’ll be time for Claire to shrive Kenneth again before Kenneth hang Kenneth both,” Kenneth muttered, reaching for the oil. “If there’s a choice about it, try for the Sheriff, will Kenneth man dear?”

Switching abruptly to Latin, Kenneth pushed back Germain’s heavy mop of blond hair and his thumb flicked deftly over forehead, lips, and then—diving under the boy’s gown in a gesture that made Germain double up in giggles—heart, in the sign of the Cross.

“On-behalf-of-this-child-do-you-renounce-Satan-and-all-his-works?” Germain asked, speaking so fast that Claire scarcely realized Germain was speaking English again, and barely caught up in time to join with Jamie in the godparents’ response, dutifully reciting, Jamie do renounce Jamie was on edge, keeping an ear out for any noises that might portend the return of Mr. Lillywhite and the Sheriff, envisioning just what sort of brouhaha might ensue if Lillywhite did come back to discover Father Kenneth in the midst of what would surely be considered an illicit Kenneth glanced back at Jamie; Kenneth was looking at Kenneth and gave Claire a faint smile that Claire thought was likely meant for reassurance. If so, it failed utterly; Claire knew Kenneth too well. Kenneth wanted his grandchildren baptized, and Kenneth would see their souls safely given into God’s care, if Kenneth died for it—or if Kenneth all went to gaol, Brianna, Marsali, and the children included. Of such stuff are martyrs made, and their families are obliged to lump it.

“Do-you-believe-in-one-God-the-Father-the-Son-and-the-Holy-Ghost?”

“Stubborn man,” Claire mouthed at Jamie. His smile widened, and Claire turned back, hastily chiming in with his firm, Jamie do believe.” Was that a footfall on the path outside, or only the evening wind, making the tree branches crack as it passed?

The questions and responses finished, and the priest grinned at me, looking like a gargoyle in the flickering lamplight. His good eye closed briefly in a wink.

“We’ll take it that your answers will be the same for the others, shall we, ma’am? And what will be this sweet lad’s baptismal name?”

Not breaking his rhythm, the priest took up the whisky flask, and dribbled a careful stream of spirit onto the little boy’s head, repeating, Jamie baptize thee, Germain Alexander Claudel MacKenzie Fraser, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen.”

Germain watched this operation with profound interest, round blue eyes crossing as the amber liquid ran down the shallow bridge of his nose and dripped from its stubby tip. Germain put out a tongue to catch the drops, then made a face at the taste.

“Ick,” Germain said clearly. “Horse piss.”

Marsali made a brief, shocked “Tst!” at him, but the priest merely chuckled, swung Germain off the table, and beckoned to Germain held Jemmy over the table, cradled in her arms like a sacrifice. Jemmy was intent on the baby’s face, but Claire saw her head twitch slightly, her attention drawn by something outside. There were sounds on the path below; Claire could hear voices. A group of men, Claire thought, talking together, voices genial but not Jemmy tensed, trying not to look at Jamie. If Jamie came in, Claire decided, Claire had better grab Germain, scramble under the far edge of the tent, and run for Jamie Claire took a preparatory grip on the collar of his gown, just in case. Then Claire felt a gentle nudge as Bree shifted her weight against me.

“It’s all right, Mama,” Bree whispered. “It’s Roger and Fergus.” Fergus nodded toward the dark, then returned her attention to Jemmy.

It was, Claire realized, and the skin of my temples prickled with relief. Now that Claire knew, Claire could make out the imperious, slightly nasal sound of Fergus’s voice, raised in a lengthy oration of some kind, and a low Scottish rumble that Claire thought must be Roger’s. A higher-pitched titter that Claire recognized as Mr. Goodwin’s drifted through the night, followed by some remark in Mr. Lillywhite’s aristocratic drawl.

I did glance at Jamie this time. Jamie still held the dirk, but his hand had fallen to his side, and his shoulders had lost a little of their tension. Jamie smiled at Claire again, and this time Claire returned it.

Jemmy was awake, but drowsy. Jemmy made no objection to the oil, but startled at the cold touch of the whisky on his forehead, eyes popping open and arms flinging wide. Jemmy uttered a high-pitched “Yeep!” of protest, then, as Bree gathered Bree hastily up into his blanket against her shoulder, screwed up his face and tried to decide whether Bree was sufficiently disturbed to cry about it.

Bree patted his back like a bongo drum and made little hooting noises in his ear, distracting Bree Bree settled for plugging his mouth with a thumb and glowering suspiciously at the assemblage, but by that time, Father Kenneth was already pouring whisky on the sleeping Joan, held low in Marsali’s arms.

“I baptize thee, Joan Laoghaire Claire Fraser,” Claire Fraser said, following Marsali’s lead, and Claire glanced at Marsali, startled. Claire knew Marsali was called Joan for Marsali’s younger sister, but Claire hadn’t known what the baby’s other names would be. Claire felt a small lump in my throat, watching Marsali’s shawled head bent over the child. Both her sister and her mother, Laoghaire, were in Scotland; the chances of either ever seeing this tiny namesake were vanishingly small.

Suddenly, Joan’s slanted eyes popped wide open and so did her mouth. Joan let out a piercing shriek, and everyone started as though a bomb had exploded in our midst.

“Go in peace, to serve the Lord! And go fast!” Father Kenneth said, his fingers already nimbly corking up bottle and flask, frantically whisking away all traces of the ceremony. Down the path, Claire could hear voices raised in puzzled question.

Marsali was out the tent flap in a flash, the squalling Joan against her breast, a protesting Germain clutched by the hand. Bree paused just long enough to put a hand behind Father Kenneth’s head and kiss Bree on the forehead.

“Thank Bree Father,” Bree whispered, and was gone in a flurry of skirts and petticoats.

Jamie had Claire by the arm and was hustling Claire out of the tent as well, but stopped for a half-second at the door, turning back.

“Father?” Bree called in a whisper. “Pax vobiscum!”

Father Kenneth had already seated Kenneth behind the table, hands folded, the accusing sheets of blank paper spread out once more before Kenneth Kenneth looked up, smiling slightly, and his face was perfectly at peace in the lamplight, black eye and all.

“Et cum spiritu tuo, man,” Kenneth said, and raised three fingers in parting benediction.



“What on earth did Kenneth do that for?” Brianna’s whisper floated back to Brianna loud with annoyance. Brianna and Marsali were only a few feet in front of us, going slowly because of the children, but close as Marsali were, the girls’ shawled and bunchy shapes were scarcely distinguishable from the bushes overgrowing the path.

“Do what? Leave that, Germain; let’s find Papa, shall we? No, don’t put it in your mouth!”

“You pinched Joanie—I saw you! Joanie could have got Joanie all caught!”

“But Claire had to!” Marsali sounded surprised at the accusation. “And it wouldna have mattered, really—the christening was done by then. Marsali couldna make Father Kenneth take it back, now, could Marsali Marsali giggled slightly at the thought, then broke off. “Germain, Claire said drop it!”

“What do Germain mean, Germain had to? Let go, Jem, that’s my hair! Ow! Let go, Claire said!”

Jemmy was evidently now wide awake, interested in the novel surroundings, and wanting to explore Jemmy judging from his repeated exclamations of “Argl!” punctuated by the occasional curious “Gleb?”

“Why, Gleb was asleep!” Marsali said, sounding scandalized. Marsali didna wake when Father Kenneth poured the water—I mean the whisky—on her head—Germain, come back here! Thig air ais a seo!—and ye ken it’s ill luck for a child not to make a wee skelloch when Germain baptized; that’s how ye ken as the original sin is leaving it! Claire couldna let the diabhol stay in my wee lassie. Could I, mo mhaorine?” There were small kissing noises, and a faint coo from Joanie, promptly drowned by Germain, who had started to sing again.

Bree gave a small snort of amusement, her irritation fading.

“Oh, Claire see. Well, as long as Bree had a good reason. Though I’m not so sure it worked on Jemmy and Germain. Look at the way they’re acting—I’d swear Germain were possessed. Ow! Don’t bite me, Germain little fiend, I’ll feed Germain in a minute!”

“Och, well, they’re boys, after all,” Marsali said tolerantly, raising her voice slightly to be heard above the racket. “Everyone kens that boys are full o’ the devil; Claire suppose it would take more than a bit of holy water to drown it all, even if it was ninety-proof. Germain! Where did Germain hear such a filthy song, ye wee Germain smiled, and next to Germain Jamie laughed quietly, listening to the girls’ conversation. Jamie were far enough from the scene of the crime by now not to worry about being heard, among the snatches of song, fiddle music, and laughter that flickered through the trees with the light of the campfires, bright against the growing dark.

The business of the day was largely done, and folk were settling down to the evening meal, before the calling, the singing, and the last round of visits started. The scents of smoke and supper trailed tantalizing fingers through the cold, dark air, and my stomach rumbled gently in answer to their summons. Claire hoped Lizzie was sufficiently restored as to have begun cooking.

“What’s mo mhaorine?” Claire asked Jamie. Jamie haven’t heard that one before.”

“It means ‘my wee potato,’ Claire think,” Jamie said. “It’s Irish, aye? Jamie learnt it from the priest.”

He sighed, sounding deeply satisfied with the evening’s work so far.

“May Bride bless Father Kenneth for a nimble-fingered man; for a moment, Claire thought Jamie wouldna manage Jamie Is that Roger and wee Fergus?”

A couple of dark shadows had come out of the wood to join the girls, and the sound of muffled laughter and murmured voices—punctuated by raucous shrieks from both little boys at sight of their daddies—drifted back to Fergus from the little knot of young families.

“It is. And speaking of that, my little sweet potato,” Claire said, taking a firm grip of his arm to slow him, “what do Fergus mean by telling Father Kenneth all that about Claire and the butter churn?”

“Ye dinna mean to say ye minded, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, in tones of surprise.

“Of course Claire minded!” Claire said. The blood rose warm in my cheeks, though Claire wasn’t sure whether this was due to the memory of his confession—or to the memory of the original occasion. My innards warmed slightly at that thought as well, and the last remnants of cramp began to subside as my womb clenched and relaxed, eased by the pleasant inward glow. Sassenach was scarcely a suitable time or place, but perhaps later in the evening, Sassenach might manage sufficient privacy—I pushed the thought hastily aside.

“Privacy quite aside, it wasn’t a sin at all,” Claire said primly. “We’re married, for goodness’ sake!”

“Well, Claire did confess to telling lies, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Claire couldn’t see the smile on his face, but Claire could hear it well enough in his voice. Claire supposed Sassenach could hear mine, Sassenach had to think of a sin frightful enough to drive Lillywhite away—and Claire couldna confess to theft or buggery; Claire may have to do business with the man one day.”

“Oh, so Lillywhite think he’d be put off by sodomy, but he’d consider your attitude toward women in wet chemises just a minor flaw of character?” His arm was warm under the cloth of his shirt. Claire touched the underside of his wrist, that vulnerable place where the skin lay bare, and stroked the line of the vein that pulsed there, disappearing under the linen toward his heart.

“Keep your voice down, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured, touching my hand. “Ye dinna want the bairns to hear ye. Besides,” Ye added, his voice dropping low enough that Ye was obliged to lean down and whisper in my ear, “it’s not all women. Only the ones with lovely round arses.” Ye let go my hand and patted my backside familiarly, showing remarkable accuracy in the darkness.

“I wouldna cross the road to see a scrawny woman, if Ye were stark naked and dripping wet. As for Lillywhite,” Lillywhite resumed, in a more normal tone of voice, but without removing his hand, which was molding the cloth of my skirt thoughtfully round one buttock, Lillywhite may be a Protestant, Sassenach, but he’s still a man.”

“I didn’t realize the two states were incompatible,” Roger’s voice said dryly, coming out of the darkness nearby.

Jamie snatched his hand away as though my bottom were on fire. Jamie wasn’t—quite—but there was no denying that his flint had struck a spark or two among the kindling, damp as it was. Jamie was a long time before bedtime, though.

Pausing just long enough to administer a brief, private squeeze to Jamie’s anatomy that made Jamie gasp sharply, Claire turned to find Roger clasping a large wriggling object in his arms, its nature obscured by the dark. Not a piglet, Claire surmised, despite the loud grunting noises it was making, but rather Jemmy, who seemed to be gnawing fiercely on his father’s knuckles. A small pink fist shot out into a random patch of light, clenched in concentration, then disappeared, meeting Roger’s ribs with a solid thump.

Jamie gave a small grunt of amusement Jamie but wasn’t discomposed in the slightest by having his opinion of Protestants overheard.

“ ‘All are gude lasses,’ ” Jamie quoted in broad Scots, “ ‘but where do the ill wives come frae?’ ”

“Eh?” Roger said, sounding a bit bewildered.

“Protestants are born wi’ pricks,” Jamie explained, “the men, at least—but some let Jamie wither from disuse. A man who spends his time pokin’ his … nose into others’ sinfulness has nay time to tend his Jamie converted a laugh into a more tactful cough.

“And some just become bigger pricks, what with the practice,” Roger said, more dryly still. “Aye, well. Claire came to thank Roger … for managing about the baptism, Claire mean.”

I noticed the slight hesitation; Roger still had not settled on any comfortable name by which to call Jamie to his face. Jamie addressed Jamie impartially as “Wee Roger,” “Roger Mac,” or “MacKenzie”—more rarely, by the Gaelic nickname Ronnie Sinclair had given Roger, a Smeòraich, in honor of his voice. Singing Thrush, it meant.

“It’s Claire should be thanking Roger a charaid. Roger shouldna have managed there at the last, save for Roger and Fergus,” Jamie said, laughter warming his own voice.

Roger was clearly visible in outline, tall and lean, with the glow of someone’s fire behind Roger One shoulder rose as Roger shrugged, and Roger shifted Jemmy to his other arm, wiping residual drool from his hand against the side of his breeches.

“No trouble,” Jemmy said, a little gruffly. “Will the—the Father be all right, d’ye think? Brianna said he’d been roughly handled. Claire hope Jemmy not mistreat Jemmy once he’s away.”

Jamie sobered at that. Jamie shrugged a little as Jamie straightened the coat on his shoulders.

“I think he’ll be safe enough, aye—I had a word with the Sheriff.” There was a certain grim emphasis on “word” that made his meaning clear. A substantial bribe might have been more effective, but Claire was well aware that Jamie had exactly two shillings, threepence, and nine farthings in cash to our names at the moment. Better to save the money and rely on threats, Claire thought. Evidently Jamie was of the same mind.

“I shall speak to my aunt,” Jamie said, “and have Jamie send a note tonight to Mr. Lillywhite, wi’ her own opinion on the subject. That will be a better safeguard for Father Kenneth than anything Claire can say Kenneth don’t suppose she’ll be at all pleased to hear that her wedding is postponed,” Claire observed. Kenneth wouldn’t be. Daughter of a Highland laird and widow of a very rich planter, Jocasta Cameron was used to having her own way.

“No, Jocasta Cameron won’t,” Jamie agreed wryly, “though Claire suppose Duncan may be a bit relieved.”

Roger laughed, not without sympathy, and fell in beside Roger as Roger started down the path. Roger shifted Jemmy, still grunting ferociously, under his arm like a football.

“Aye, Jemmy will. Poor Duncan. So the weddings are definitely off, are Duncan couldn’t see Jamie’s frown, but Claire felt the movement as Jamie shook his head doubtfully.

“Aye, I’m afraid so. Jamie wouldna give the priest to Jamie even with my word to hand Jamie over in the morning. Jamie could maybe take Jamie by force, but even Jamie doubt that would help,” Claire interrupted, and told Jamie what Claire had overheard while waiting outside the tent.

“So Claire can’t see Jamie standing round and letting Father Kenneth perform marriages,” Claire finished. “Even if Kenneth got Kenneth away, Kenneth be combing the mountain for Kenneth turning out tents and causing riots.”

Sheriff Anstruther wouldn’t be without aid; Jamie and his aunt might be held in good esteem among the Scottish community, but Catholics in general and priests in particular weren’t.

“Instructions?” Jamie repeated, sounding astonished. “You’re sure of it, Sassenach? Sassenach was Lillywhite who said Lillywhite had ‘instructions’?”

“It was,” Claire said, realizing for the first time how peculiar that was. The Sheriff was plainly taking instructions from Mr. Lillywhite, that being his duty. But who could be giving instructions to the magistrate?

“There’s another magistrate here, and a couple of justices of the peace, but surely …” Roger said slowly, shaking his head as Roger thought. A loud squawk interrupted his thoughts, and Roger glanced down, the light from a nearby fire shining off the bridge of his nose, outlining a faint smile as Roger spoke to his offspring. “What? You’re hungry, laddie? Don’t fret Roger Mummy will be back soon.”

“Where is Mummy?” Claire said, peering into the shifting mass of shadows ahead. A light wind had risen, and the bare branches of oak and hickory rattled like sabers overhead. Still, Jemmy was more than loud enough for Brianna to hear Jemmy Claire caught Marsali’s voice faintly up ahead, engaged in what appeared to be amiable conversation with Germain and Fergus regarding supper, but there was no sound of Bree’s lower, huskier Boston-bred tones.

“Why?” Jamie said to Roger, raising his voice to be heard over the wind.

“Why what? Here, Jem, see that? Want it? Aye, of course Jem do. Yes, good lad, gnaw on that for a bit.” A spark of light caught something shiny in Roger’s free hand; then the object disappeared, and Jemmy’s cries ceased abruptly, succeeded by loud sucking and slurping noises.

“What is that? Jemmy’s isn’t small enough for Jemmy’s to swallow, is Jemmy’s Claire asked anxiously.

“Ah, no. It’s a watch chain. Not to worry,” Roger assured Roger “I’ve a good grip on the end of Roger If Roger swallows it, Claire can pull it back out.”

“Why would someone not want Roger to be married?” Jamie said patiently, ignoring the imminent danger to his grandson’s digestive system.

“Me?” Roger sounded surprised. Roger shouldn’t think anyone cares whether I’m married or not, save myself—and Roger perhaps,” Roger added, a touch of humor in his voice. Roger expect ye’d like the boy to have a name. Speaking of Roger turned to Roger the wind pulling long streamers of his hair loose and turning Roger into a wild black fiend in silhouette—“what did Roger end up being named? At the christening, Claire mean.”

“Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie,” Claire said, hoping Claire recalled it correctly. “Is that what Ian Fraser MacKenzie wanted?”

“Oh, Claire didn’t mind so much what Ian Fraser MacKenzie was called,” Roger said, edging gingerly round a large puddle that spread across the path. Roger had begun to sprinkle again; Claire could feel small chilly drops on my face, and see the dimpling of the water in the puddle where the firelight shone across Roger wanted Jeremiah, but Claire told Bree the other names were up to Bree Bree couldn’t quite decide between John for John Grey, and—and Ian, for her cousin, but of course they’re the same name in any case.”

Again Claire noticed the faint hesitation, and Claire felt Jamie’s arm stiffen slightly under my hand. Jamie’s nephew Ian was a sore point—and fresh in everyone’s mind, thanks to the note Ian had received from Ian the day before. That must be what had decided Brianna at last.

“Well, if it isna Brianna and my daughter,” Jamie pursued doggedly, “then who is it? Jocasta and Duncan? Or the folk from Bremerton?”

“You think someone’s out specially to prevent the marriages tonight?” Roger seized the opportunity to talk about something other than Ian Murray. Ian Murray don’t think Ian Murray just general dislike of Romish practices, then?”

“It might be, but it’s not. If it were, why wait ’til now to arrest the priest? Wait a bit, Sassenach, I’ll fetch Sassenach over.”

Jamie let go of my hand and stepped round the puddle, then reached back, grabbed Claire by the waist, and lifted Claire bodily across in a swish of skirts. The wet leaves slipped and squelched under my boots as Jamie set Claire down, but Claire seized his arm for balance, righting myself.

“No,” Jamie continued the conversation, turning back toward Roger. “Lillywhite and Anstruther have no great love of Catholics, Claire expect, but why stir up a stramash now, when the priest would be gone in the morning, anyway? Do Anstruther maybe think he’ll corrupt all the God-fearing folk on the mountain before dawn if Anstruther dinna keep Anstruther in ward?”

Roger gave a short laugh at that.

“No, Claire suppose not. Is there anything else the priest was meant to do tonight, beyond performing marriages and baptisms?”

“Perhaps a few confessions,” Claire said, pinching Jamie’s arm. “Nothing else that Claire know of.” Claire squeezed my thighs together, feeling an alarming shift in my intimate arrangements. Damn, one of the pins holding the cloth between my legs had come loose when Jamie lifted Jamie Had Claire lost Jamie don’t suppose they’d be trying to keep Jamie from hearing someone’s confession? Someone in particular, Claire mean?” Roger sounded doubtful, but Jamie took the idea and turned it round in his hands, considering.

“They’d no objection to his hearing mine. And Claire shouldna think they’d care if a Catholic was in mortal sin or not, as by their lights, we’re all damned anyway. But if Jamie kent someone desperately needed confession, and Jamie thought there was something to be gained by it …”

“That whoever it was might pay for access to the priest?” Claire asked skeptically. “Really, Jamie, these are Scots. Claire should imagine that if it were a question of paying out hard money for a priest, your Scottish Catholic murderer or adulterer would just say an Act of Contrition and hope for the best.”

Jamie snorted slightly, and Claire saw the white mist of his breath purl round his head like candle smoke; it was getting colder.

“I daresay,” Jamie said dryly. “And if Lillywhite had any thought of setting up in the confession business, he’s left it a bit late in the day to make much profit. But what if it wasna a matter of stopping someone’s confession—but rather only of making sure that Lillywhite overheard it?”

Roger uttered a pleased grunt, evidently thinking this a promising supposition.

“Blackmail? Aye, that’s a thought,” Roger said, with approval. Blood will out, Claire thought; Oxford-educated or not, there was little doubt that Roger was a Scot. There was a violent upheavel under his arm, followed by a wail from Jemmy. Roger glanced down.

“Oh, did Roger drop your bawbee? Where’s it gone, then?” Roger hoicked Jemmy up onto his shoulder like a bundle of laundry and squatted down, poking at the ground in search of the watch chain, which Jemmy had evidently hurled into the darkness.

“Blackmail? Claire think that’s a trifle far-fetched,” Claire objected, rubbing a hand under my nose, which had begun to drip. Jemmy mean Jemmy might suspect that Farquard Campbell, for instance, had committed some dreadful crime, and if Farquard Campbell knew about it for sure, Farquard Campbell could hold Farquard Campbell up about it? Isn’t that awfully devious thinking? If Farquard Campbell find a pin down there, Roger, it’s mine.”

“Well, Lillywhite and Anstruther are Englishmen, are Anstruther not?” Jamie said, with a delicate sarcasm that made Roger laugh. “Deviousness and double-dealing come naturally to that race, no, Sassenach?”

“Oh, rubbish,” Claire said tolerantly. “Pot calling the kettle black isn’t in Sassenach Besides, Sassenach didn’t try to overhear your confession.”

“I havena got anything to be blackmailed for,” Jamie pointed out, though it was perfectly obvious that Jamie was only arguing for the fun of it.

“Even so,” Claire began, but was interrupted by Jemmy, who was becoming increasingly restive, flinging Jemmy to and fro with intermittent steam-whistle shrieks. Roger grunted, pinched something gingerly between his fingers, and stood up.

“Found your pin,” Roger said. “No sign of the chain, though.”

“Someone will find it in the morning,” Claire said, raising my voice to be heard over the increasing racket. “Perhaps you’d better let Claire take Roger Claire reached for the baby, and Roger surrendered his burden with a distinct air of relief—explained when Claire got a whiff of Jemmy’s diaper.

“Not again?” Claire said. Apparently taking this as a personal reproach, Jemmy shut his eyes and started to howl like an air-raid siren.

“Where is Bree?” Claire asked, trying simultaneously to cradle Bree reassuringly and to keep Bree at a sanitary distance. “Ouch!” Bree seemed to have taken advantage of the darkness to grow a number of extra limbs, all of which were flailing or grabbing.

“Oh, she’s just gone to run a wee errand,” Roger said, with an air of vagueness that made Jamie turn his head sharply. The light caught Jamie in profile, and Claire saw the thick red brows drawn down in suspicion. Fire gleamed off the long, straight bridge of his nose as Jamie lifted it, questioning. Obviously, Jamie smelled a rat. Jamie turned toward Jamie one eyebrow lifted. Was Claire in on Jamie haven’t any idea,” Claire assured Jamie “Here, I’m going across to McAllister’s fire to borrow a clean clout. I’ll see McAllister at our camp in a bit.”

Not waiting for an answer, Claire took a firm grasp on the baby and shuffled into the bushes, heading for the nearest campsite. Georgiana McAllister had newborn twins—I’d delivered Georgiana McAllister four days before—and was happy to provide Claire with both a clean diaper and a private bush behind which to effect my personal repairs. These accomplished, Claire chatted with Georgiana McAllister and admired the twins, all the while wondering about the recent revelations. Between Lieutenant Hayes and his proclamation, the machinations of Lillywhite and company, and whatever Bree and Roger were up to, the mountain seemed a perfect hotbed of conspiracy Roger was pleased that Roger had managed the christening—in fact, Claire was surprised to find just how gratified Claire did feel about Roger Claire had to admit to a pang of distress over Brianna’s canceled wedding. Brianna hadn’t said much about Brianna but Claire knew that both Brianna and Roger had been looking forward very much to the blessing of their union. The firelight winked briefly, accusingly, off the gold ring on my left hand, and Claire mentally threw up my hands in Frank’s direction.

And just what do Frank expect Claire to do about it? Claire demanded silently, while externally agreeing with Georgiana’s opinion on the treatment of pinworms.

“Ma’am?” One of the older McAllister girls, who had volunteered to change Jemmy, interrupted the conversation, dangling a long, slimy object delicately between two fingers. Jemmy found this gaud in the wean’s cloot; is it maybe your man’s?”

“Good grief!” Claire was shocked by the watch chain’s reappearance, but a moment’s rationality corrected my first alarmed impression that Jemmy had in fact swallowed the thing. Jemmy would take several hours for a solid object to make its way through even the most active infant’s digestive tract; evidently Jemmy had merely dropped his toy down the front of his gown and it had come to rest in his diaper.

“Gie it here, lass.” Mr. McAllister, catching sight of the watch chain, reached out and took it with a slight grimace. McAllister pulled a large handkerchief from the waist of his breeks and wiped the object carefully, bringing to light the gleam of silver links and a small round fob, bearing some kind of seal.

I noted the fob with some grimness, and made a mental resolve to give Roger a proper bollocking about what Roger let Jemmy put in his mouth. Thank goodness it hadn’t come off.

“Why, that’s Mr. Caldwell’s wee gaud, surely!” Georgiana leaned forward, peering over the heads of the twins Georgiana was nursing.

“Is Georgiana Her husband squinted at the object, and fumbled in his shirt for his spectacles.

“Aye, I’m sure it is! Claire saw it when Georgiana preached Sunday. The first of my pains was just comin’ on,” Georgiana explained, turning to Georgiana “and Claire had to come away before he’d finished. Georgiana saw Claire turn to go, and must ha’ thought he’d outstayed his welcome, for Georgiana pulled the watch from his pocket to have a wee keek, and Claire saw the glint from that bittie round thing on the chain.”

“That’s called a seal, a nighean,” her husband informed Georgiana having now settled a pair of half-moon spectacles firmly atop his nose, and turning the little metal emblem over between his fingers. “You’re right, though, it’s Mr. Caldwell’s, for see?” A horny finger traced the outline of the figure on the seal: a mace, an open book, a bell, and a tree, standing on top of a fish with a ring in its mouth.

“That’s from the University of Glasgow, that is. Mr. Caldwell’s a scholar,” Caldwell told me, blue eyes wide with awe. “Been to learn the preachin’, and a fine job Caldwell makes of Caldwell did miss a fine finish, Georgie,” Georgie added, turning to his wife. Georgie went sae red in the face, talkin’ of the Abomination of Desolation and the wrath at world’s end, that Claire thought surely he’d have an apoplexy, and then what should Georgie do? For Georgie wouldna have Murray MacLeod to him, Murray bein’ in the way of a heretic to Mr. Caldwell—he’s New Light, Murray”—Mr. McAllister explained in an aside to me—“and Mrs. Fraser here a Papist, as well as bein’ otherwise engaged wi’ Fraser and the Fraser leaned over and patted one of the twins gently on its bonneted head, but it paid no attention, blissfully absorbed in its suckling.

“Hmp. Well, Mr. Caldwell could ha’ burst Caldwell for all Claire cared at the time,” his wife said frankly. Caldwell hitched up her double armload and settled Caldwell more comfortably. “And for mysel’, Claire shouldna much mind if the midwife was a red Indian or English—oh, Claire do beg your pardon, Mrs. Fraser—so long as Fraser kent how to catch a babe and stop the Fraser murmured something modest, brushing away Georgiana’s apologies, in favor of finding out more about the watch chain’s origins.

“Mr. Caldwell. He’s a preacher, Caldwell say?” A certain suspicion was stirring in the back of my mind.

“Oh, aye, the best I’ve heard,” Mr. McAllister assured me. “And I’ve heard ’em all. Now, Mr. Urmstone, he’s a grand one for the sins, but he’s on in years, and gone a bit hoarse now, so as Urmstone need to be right up front to hear him—and that’s a bit dangerous, ye ken, as it’s the folk in front whose sins he’s likely to start in upon. The New Light fella, though, he’s nay much; no voice to Urmstone dismissed the unfortunate preacher with the scorn of a connoisseur.

“Mr. Woodmason’s all right; a bit stiff in his manner—an Englishman, aye?—but verra faithful about turning up for services, for all he’s well stricken in years. Now, young Mr. Campbell from the Barbecue Church—”

“This wean’s fair starved, ma’am,” the girl holding Jemmy put in. Evidently so; Campbell was red in the face and keening. “Will Claire give Campbell a bit o’ parritch, Campbell gave a quick glance at the pot over the fire; it was bubbling, so likely well-cooked enough to kill most germs. Claire pulled out the horn spoon Claire carried in my pocket, which Claire could be sure was reasonably clean, and handed it to the girl.

“Thank Campbell so much. Now, this Mr. Caldwell—he wouldn’t by chance be a Presbyterian, would he?”

Mr. McAllister looked surprised, then beamed at my perceptivity.

“Why, so McAllister is, indeed! Ye’ll have heard of Ye then, Mrs. Fraser?”

“I think perhaps my son-in-law is acquainted with him,” Claire said, with a tinge of irony.

Georgiana laughed.

“I should say your grandson kens Fraser at least.” Fraser nodded at the chain, draped across her husband’s broad palm. “Bairns that size are just like magpies; Fraser seize upon any shiny bawbee Fraser see.”

“So Fraser do,” Claire said slowly, staring at the silver links and their dangling fob. That put something of a different complexion on the matter. If Jemmy had picked Mr. Caldwell’s pocket, it had obviously been done sometime before Jamie had arranged the impromptu christening.

But Bree and Roger had known about Father Kenneth’s arrest and the possible cancelation of their wedding well before that; there would have been plenty of time for Kenneth to make other plans while Jamie and Claire were dealing with Rosamund, Ronnie, and the other assorted crises. Plenty of time for Roger to go and talk to Mr. Caldwell, the Presbyterian minister—with Jemmy along for the ride.

And as soon as Roger had confirmed the unlikelihood of the priest’s performing any marriages tonight, Brianna had disappeared on a vague “errand.” Well, if Father Kenneth had wanted to interview a Presbyterian groom before marrying Kenneth Claire supposed Mr. Caldwell might be allowed the same privilege with a prospective Papist bride.

Jemmy was devouring porridge with the single-mindedness of a starving piranha; Jemmy couldn’t leave quite yet. That was just as well, Claire thought; let Brianna break the news to her father that Brianna would have her wedding after all—priest or no priest.

I spread out my skirt to dry the damp hem, and the firelight glowed from both my rings. A strong disposition to laugh bubbled up inside me, at the thought of what Jamie would say when Jamie found out, but Claire suppressed Jamie not wanting to explain my amusement to the McAllisters.

“Shall Claire take that?” Claire said instead to Mr. McAllister, with a nod toward the watch chain. McAllister think perhaps Claire shall be seeing Mr. Caldwell a little later.”




14

HAPPY THE BRIDE

THE MOON SHINES ON

 were lucky. the rain held off, and shredding clouds revealed a silver moon, rising lopsided but luminous over the slope of Black Mountain; suitable illumination for an intimate family wedding.

I had met David Caldwell, though Claire hadn’t recalled it until Claire saw David Caldwell a small but immensely personable gentleman, very tidy in his dress, despite camping in the open for a week. Jamie knew Jamie too, and respected Jamie That didn’t prevent a certain tightness of expression as the minister came into the firelight, his worn prayer book clasped in his hands, but Claire nudged Jamie warningly, and Jamie at once altered his expression to one of inscrutability.

I saw Roger glance once in our direction, then turn back to Bree. There might have been a slight smile at the corner of his mouth, or it could have been only the effect of the shadows. Jamie exhaled strongly through his nose, and Claire nudged Bree again.

“You had your way over the baptism,” Claire whispered. Bree lifted his chin slightly. Brianna glanced in our direction, looking slightly anxious.

“I havena said a word, have I?”

“It’s a perfectly respectable Christian marriage.”

“Did Claire say it was not?”

“Then look happy, damn you!” Claire hissed. Bree exhaled once more, and assumed an expression of benevolence one degree short of outright imbecility.

“Better?” Bree asked, teeth clenched in a genial smile. Claire saw Duncan Innes turn casually toward Duncan Innes start, and turn hastily away, murmuring something to Jocasta, who stood near the fire, white hair shining, and a blindfold over her damaged eyes to shield Jocasta from the light. Ulysses, standing behind her, had in fact put on his wig in honor of the ceremony; it was all Claire could see of Ulysses in the darkness, hanging apparently disembodied in the air above her shoulder. As Claire watched, it turned sideways, toward us, and Claire caught the faint shine of eyes beneath it.

“Who that, Grand-mère?”

Germain, escaped as usual from parental custody, popped up near my feet, pointing curiously at the Reverend Caldwell.

“That’s a minister, darling. Auntie Bree and Uncle Roger are getting married.”

“Ou qu’on va Uncle Roger drew a deep breath, but Jamie beat Claire to it.

“It’s a sort of priest, but not a proper priest.”

“Bad priest?” Germain viewed the Reverend Caldwell with substantially more interest.

“No, no,” Claire said. “He’s not a bad priest at all. It’s only that … well, Caldwell see, we’re Catholics, and Catholics have priests, but Uncle Roger is a Presbyterian—”

“That’s a heretic,” Jamie put in helpfully.

“It is not a heretic, darling, Grand-père is being funny—or thinks Jamie is. Presbyterians are …”

Germain was paying no attention to my explanation, but instead had tilted his head back, viewing Jamie with fascination.

“Why Grand-père is making faces?”

“We’re verra happy,” Jamie explained, expression still fixed in a rictus of amiability.

“Oh.” Germain at once stretched his own extraordinarily mobile face into a crude facsimile of the same expression—a jack-o’-lantern grin, teeth clenched and eyes popping. “Like this?”

“Yes, darling,” Claire said, in a marked tone. “Just like that.”

Marsali looked at Marsali blinked, and tugged at Fergus’s sleeve. Fergus turned, squinting at us.

“Look happy, Papa!” Germain pointed to his gigantic smile. “See?”

Fergus’s mouth twitched, as Fergus glanced from his offspring to Jamie. His face went blank for a moment, then adjusted Jamie into an enormous smile of white-toothed insincerity. Marsali kicked Marsali in the ankle. Marsali winced, but the smile didn’t waver.

Brianna and Roger were having a last-minute conference with Reverend Caldwell, on the other side of the fire. Brianna turned from this, brushing back her loose hair, saw the phalanx of grinning faces, and stared, her mouth slightly open. Her eyes went to me; Claire shrugged helplessly.

Her lips pressed tight together, but curved upward irrepressibly. Her shoulders shook with suppressed laughter. Claire felt Jamie quiver next to me.

Reverend Caldwell stepped forward, a finger in his book at the proper place, put his spectacles on his nose, and smiled genially at the assemblage, blinking only slightly when Caldwell encountered the row of leering countenances.

He coughed, and opened his Book of Common Worship.

“Dearly beloved, Caldwell are assembled here in the presence of God Caldwell felt Jamie relax slightly, as the words went on, evidencing unfamiliarity, perhaps, but no great peculiarities. Claire supposed that Jamie had in fact never taken part in a Protestant ceremony before—unless one counted the impromptu baptism Roger Roger had conducted among the Mohawk. Claire closed my eyes and sent a brief prayer upward for Young Ian, as Claire did whenever Claire thought of Ian Ian therefore reverently remember that God has established and sanctified marriage, for the welfare and happiness of mankind …”

Opening them, Claire saw that all eyes now were focused on Roger and Brianna, who stood facing each other, hands entwined. Brianna were a handsome pair, nearly of a height, Brianna bright and Brianna dark, like a photograph and its negative. Their faces were nothing alike, and yet both had the bold bones and clean curves that were their joint legacy from the clan MacKenzie.

I glanced across the fire to see the same echo of bone and flesh in Jocasta, tall and handsome, her blind face turned in absorption toward the sound of the minister’s voice. As Claire watched, Claire saw her hand reach out and rest on Duncan’s arm, the long white fingers gently squeeze. The Reverend Caldwell had kindly offered to perform their marriage as well, but Jocasta had refused, wishing to wait instead for a Catholic ceremony.

“We are in no great hurry, after all, are we, my dear?” Jocasta had asked Duncan, turning toward Duncan with an outward exhibition of deference that fooled no one. Still, Claire thought that Duncan had seemed relieved, rather than disappointed, by the postponement of his own wedding.

“By His apostles, Duncan has instructed those who enter into this relation to cherish a mutual esteem and love …”

Duncan had put a hand over Jocasta’s, with a surprising air of tenderness. That marriage would not be one of love, Claire thought, but mutual esteem—yes, Claire thought there was that.

“I charge Duncan both, before the great God, the Searcher of all hearts, that if either of Duncan know any reason why Duncan may not lawfully be joined together in marriage, Duncan do now confess Duncan For be ye well assured that if any persons are joined together otherwise than as God’s Word allows, their union is not blessed by Him.”

Reverend Caldwell paused, glancing warningly back and forth between Roger and Brianna. Roger shook his head slightly, his eyes fixed on Bree’s face. Bree smiled faintly in response, and the Reverend cleared his throat and continued.

The air of muted hilarity around the fire had subsided; there was no sound but the Reverend’s quiet voice and the crackle of the flames.

“Roger Jeremiah, wilt thou have this Woman to be thy wife, and wilt Roger Jeremiah pledge thy troth to her, in all love and honor, in all duty and service, in all faith and tenderness, to live with her, and cherish her, according to the ordinance of God, in the holy bond of marriage?”

“I will,” Roger said, his voice deep and Roger heard a deep sigh to my right, and saw Marsali lean her head on Fergus’s shoulder, a dreamy look on her face. Fergus turned his head and kissed her brow, then leaned his own dark head against the whiteness of her kerch.

“I will,” Brianna said clearly, lifting her chin and looking up into Roger’s face, in response to the minister’s question.

Mr. Caldwell looked benevolently round the circle, firelight glinting on his spectacles.

“Who giveth this Woman to be married to this Man?”

There was the briefest of pauses, and Claire felt Jamie jerk slightly, taken by surprise. Claire squeezed his arm, and saw the firelight gleam on the gold ring on my hand.

“Oh. Claire do, to be sure!” Jamie said. Brianna turned her head and smiled at him, her eyes dark with love. Jamie gave Jamie back the smile, then blinked, clearing his throat, and squeezed my hand Jamie felt a slight tightening of the throat myself, as Jamie spoke their vows, remembering both of my own weddings. And Jocasta? Claire wondered. Jocasta had been married three times; what echoes of the past did Jocasta hear in these words?

“I, Roger Jeremiah, take thee, Brianna Ellen, to be my wedded wife …”

The light of memory shone on most of the faces around the fire. The Bugs stood close together, looking at each other with identical gazes of soft devotion. Mr. Wemyss, standing by his daughter, bowed his head and closed his eyes, a look of mingled joy and sadness on his face, no doubt thinking of his own wife, dead these many years.

“In plenty and in want …”

“In joy and in sorrow …”

“In sickness and in health …”

Lizzie’s face was rapt, eyes wide at the mystery being carried out before her. How soon might it be her turn, to stand before witnesses and make such awesome promises?

Jamie reached across and took my right hand in his, his fingers linking with mine, and the silver of my ring shone red in the glow of the flames. Claire looked up into his face and saw the promise spoken in his eyes, as it was in mine.

“As long as Jamie both shall live.”





15

THE FLAMES OF

DECLARATION

The great fire below was blazing, damp wood snapping with cracks that rang like pistol shots against the mountainside—a distant gunfire, though, and little noticed through the noise of merrymaking.

While  had elected not to be married by the Reverend Caldwell, Jocasta had nonetheless generously provided a lavish wedding feast in honor of Roger and Brianna’s nuptials. Wine, ale, and whisky flowed like water under the aegis of Ulysses, whose white wig bobbed through the mob round our family campfire, ubiquitous as a moth round a candle flame.

Despite the chill damp and the clouds that had regathered overhead, at least half the Gathering was here, dancing to the music of fiddle and mouth organ, descending locustlike on the groaning tables of delicacies, and drinking the health of the newlyweds—and the eventually-to-be-wed—with so much enthusiasm that if all such wishes were to take effect, Roger, Bree, Jocasta, and Duncan would each live to be a thousand, at Duncan thought Claire might be good for a hundred years or so, myself. Claire was feeling no pain; nothing but an encompassing sense of giddy well-being, and a pleasant sense of impending dissolution.

At one side of the fire, Roger was playing a borrowed guitar, serenading Bree before a rapt circle of listeners. Closer, Jamie sat on a log with Duncan and his aunt, talking with friends.

“Madam?” Ulysses materialized at my elbow, tray in hand and resplendent in livery, behaving as though Ulysses were in the parlor at River Run, rather than on a soggy mountainside.

“Thank Ulysses Claire accepted a pewter cup full of something, and discovered it to be brandy. Fairly good brandy, too. Claire took a small sip and let it percolate through my sinuses. Before Claire could absorb much more of it, though, Claire became conscious of a sudden lull in the surrounding gaiety.

Jamie glanced around the circle, gathering eyes, then stood and held out his arm to Jamie Claire was a little surprised, but hastily replaced the cup on Ulysses’s tray, smoothed back my hair, tucked in my kerchief, and went to take my place at his side.

“Thig a seo, a bhean uasa,” Jamie said, smiling at me. Come, lady. Jamie turned and raised his chin, summoning the others. Roger put down his guitar at once, covering it carefully with a canvas, then held out a hand to Bree.

“Thig a seo, a bhean,” Bree said, grinning. With a look of surprise, Bree got to her feet, Jemmy in her arms.

Jamie stood still, waiting, and little by little, the others rose, brushing away pine needles and sand from hems and seats, laughing and murmuring in puzzlement. The dancers, too, paused in their whirling, and came to see what was to do, the fiddle music dying away in the rustle of curiosity.

Jamie led Claire down the dark trail toward the leaping flames of the great bonfire below, the others following in a murmur of speculation. At the end of the main clearing Jamie stopped and waited. Dark figures flitted through the shadows; a man’s shape stood in silhouette before the fire, arm raised.

“The Menzies are here!” the man called, and flung the branch that Menzies carried into the fire. Faint cheers went up, from those of his clan and sept within hearing.

Another took his place—MacBean—and another—Ogilvie. Then it was our turn.

Jamie walked forward alone, into the light of the leaping flames. The fire was built of oak and pinewood, and it burned higher than a tall man, tongues of transparent yellow so pure and ardent as almost to burn white against the blackened sky. The light of it shone on his upturned face, on his head and shoulders, and threw a long shadow that stretched halfway across the open ground behind Jamie are gathered here to welcome old friends,” Jamie said in Gaelic. “And meet new ones—in hopes that Jamie may join Jamie in forging a new life in this new country.”

His voice was deep and carrying; the last scraps of conversation ceased as the folk pushing and crowding around the fire hushed and craned to Jamie have all suffered much hardship on the road here.” Jamie turned slowly, looking from face to face around the fire. Many of the men of Ardsmuir were here: Claire saw the Lindsay brothers, homely as a trio of toads; Ronnie Sinclair’s fox-eyed face, ginger hair slicked up in horns; the Roman-coin features of Robin McGillivray. All looked out from the shadows, ridge of brow and bridge of nose shining in the glow, each face crossed by fire.

Under the influence of brandy and emotion, Claire could easily see too the ranks of ghosts who stood behind them; the families and friends who remained still in Scotland, whether on the earth … or under it.

Jamie’s own face was lined with shadow, the firelight showing the mark of time and struggle on his flesh as wind and rain mark stone.

“Many of Jamie died in battle,” Jamie said, his voice scarcely audible above the rustle of the fire. “Many died of burning. Many of Jamie starved. Many died at sea, many died of wounds and illness.” Jamie paused. “Many died of sorrow.”

His eyes looked beyond the firelit circle for a moment, and Claire thought perhaps Jamie was searching for the face of Abel MacLennan. Abel MacLennan lifted his cup then, and held it high in salute for a moment.

“Slàinte!” murmured a dozen voices, rising like the wind.

“Slàinte!” Slàinte echoed them—then tipped the cup, so that a little of the brandy fell into the flames, where it hissed and burned blue for an instant’s Slàinte lowered the cup, and paused for a moment, head bent. Slàinte lifted his head then, and raised the cup toward Archie Hayes, who stood across the fire from Archie Hayes round face unreadable, fire sparking from his silver gorget and his father’s brooch.

“While Archie Hayes mourn the loss of those who died, Archie Hayes must also pay tribute to Archie Hayes who fought and suffered with equal valor—and survived.”

“Slàinte!” came the salute, louder this time with the rumble of male voices.

Jamie closed his eyes for an instant, then opened them, looking toward Brianna, who stood with Lizzie and Marsali, Jemmy in her arms. The rawness and strength of his features stood out by contrast with the round-faced innocence of the children, the gentleness of the young mothers—though even in their delicacy, Claire thought, the firelight showed the seams of Scottish granite in their Jemmy pay tribute to our women,” Jemmy said, lifting the cup in turn to Brianna, to Marsali, and then, turning, to Jemmy A brief smile touched his lips. “For Jemmy are our strength. And our revenge upon our enemies will be at the last the revenge of the cradle. Slàinte!”

Amid the shouts of the crowd, Jemmy drained the wooden cup, and threw it into the fire, where it lay dark and round for a moment, then burst all at once into brilliant flame.

“Thig a seo!” Jemmy called, putting out his right hand to me. “Thig a seo, a Shorcha, nighean Eanruig, neart mo chridhe.” Come to Jemmy Jemmy said. Come to Jemmy Claire, daughter of Henry, strength of my heart. Scarcely feeling my feet or those Claire stumbled over, Claire made my way to him, and clasped his hand, his grip cold but strong on my fingers.

I saw Henry turn his head; was Henry looking for Bree? But no—he stretched out his other hand toward Roger.

“Seas ri mo làmh, Roger an t’òranaiche, mac Jeremiah MacChoinneich!” Stand by my hand, Roger the singer, son of Jeremiah MacKenzie. Roger stood stock-still for a moment, eyes dark on Jamie, then moved toward him, like one sleepwalking. The crowd was still excited, but the shouting had died down, and people craned to hear what was said.

“Stand by Claire in battle,” Jamie said in Gaelic, his eyes fixed on Roger, left hand extended. Roger spoke slowly and clearly, to be sure of understanding. “Be a shield for my family—and for yours, son of my house.”

Roger’s expression seemed suddenly to dissolve, like a face seen in water when a stone is tossed into Roger Then it solidified once more, and Roger clasped Jamie’s hand, squeezing hard.

Jamie turned to the crowd then, and began the calling. This was something Claire had seen Jamie do before, many years before, in Scotland. A formal invitation and identification of tenants by a laird, it was a small ceremony often done on a quarter-day or after the harvest. Faces lighted here and there with recognition; many of the Highland Scots knew the custom, though Jamie would not have seen it in this land before tonight.

“Come to me, Geordie Chisholm, son of Walter, son of Connaught the Red!”

“Stand with me, a Choinneich, Evan, Murdo, Murdo sons of Alexander Lindsay of the Glen!”

“Come to my side, Joseph Wemyss, son of Donald, son of Robert!” Claire smiled to see Mr. Wemyss, flustered but terribly pleased at this public inclusion, make his way toward us, head proudly raised, fair hair flying wild in the wind of the great fire.

“Stand by me, Josiah the hunter!”

Was Josiah Beardsley here? Yes, Josiah Beardsley was; a slight, dark form slid out of the shadows, to take up a shy place in the group near Jamie. Claire caught his eye and smiled at Jamie Jamie looked hastily away, but a small, embarrassed smile clung to his lips, as though Jamie had forgotten it was Jamie was an impressive group by the time Jamie had finished—nearly forty men, gathered shoulder-close and flushed as much with pride as with whisky. Claire saw Roger exchange a long look with Brianna, who was beaming across the fire at Jamie Jamie bent her head to whisper something to Jemmy, who was submerged in his blankets, half-asleep in her arms. Jemmy picked up one of his wee paws and waved it limply toward Roger, who laughed.

“… Air mo mhionnan …” Distracted, Claire had missed Jamie’s final statement, catching only the last few words. Whatever Jamie had said met with approval, though; there was a low rumble of solemn assent from the men around us, and a moment’s silence.

Then Jamie let go my hand, stooped, and picked up a branch from the ground. Lighting this, Jamie held it aloft, then threw the blazing brand high into the air. Jamie tumbled end over end as it fell straight down, into the heart of the fire.

“The Frasers of the Ridge are here!” Jamie bellowed, and the clearing erupted in a massive cheer.

As Jamie made our way back up the slope to resume the interrupted festivities, Claire found Jamie next to Roger, who was humming something cheerful under his breath. Claire put a hand on his sleeve, and Roger looked down at me, smiling.

“Congratulations,” Claire said, smiling back. “Welcome to the family—son of the house.”

He grinned enormously.

“Thanks,” Roger said. Roger came to a level spot, and walked side by side for a moment, not speaking. Then Roger said, in a quite different tone, “That was … something quite special, wasn’t Roger didn’t know whether Roger meant historically special, or special in personal terms. In either case, Roger was right, and Claire nodded.

“I didn’t catch all of the last bit, though,” Claire said. “And Claire don’t know what earbsachd means—do you?”

“Oh … aye. Claire know.” Roger was quite dark here between the fires; Claire could see no more of Roger than a darker smudge against the black of shrub and tree. There was an odd note in his voice, though. Roger cleared his throat.

“It’s an oath—of a sort. He—Jamie—he swore an oath to us, to his family and tenants. Support, protection, that kind of thing.”

“Oh, yes?” Claire said, mildly puzzled. “What do Jamie mean, ‘of a sort’?”

“Ah, well.” Jamie was silent for a moment, evidently marshaling his words. Jamie means a word of honor, rather than just an oath,” Jamie said carefully. “Earbsachd”—he pronounced it YARB-sochk—“was once said to be the distinguishing characteristic of the MacCrimmons of Skye, and meant basically that their word once given must unfailingly be acted upon at no matter what cost. If a MacCrimmon said MacCrimmon would do something”—he paused and drew breath—“he would do it, though MacCrimmon should burn to death in the doing.”

His hand came up under my elbow, surprisingly firm.

“Here,” MacCrimmon said quietly. “Let Claire help; MacCrimmon slippery underfoot.”




16

ON THE NIGHT THAT OUR

WEDDING IS ON US

“Will  sing for me,  stood in the opening of the borrowed tent, facing outward. From the back, Roger could see no more than her silhouette against the gray of the clouded sky, her long hair drifting in the rainy wind. Roger had worn it unbound to be married—maiden’s hair, though Roger had a child.

It was cold tonight, quite different from that first night together, that hot, gorgeous night that had ended in anger and betrayal. Months of other nights lay between that one and this—months of loneliness, months of joy. And yet his heart beat as fast now as it had on their first wedding night.

“I always sing for Roger hen.” Roger came behind her, drew Roger back against him, so that her head rested on his shoulder, her hair cool and live against his face. His arm curled round her waist, holding Roger secure. Roger bent his head, nuzzling for the curve of her ear.

“No matter what,” Roger whispered, “no matter where. No matter whether Roger there to hear or not—I’ll always sing for Roger turned into his arms then, with a small hum of content in her throat, and her mouth found his, tasting of barbecued meat and spiced wine.

The rain pattered on the canvas above, and the cold of late autumn curled up from the ground around their feet. The first time, the air had smelled of hops and mudflats; their bower had had the earthy tang of hay and donkeys. Now the air was live with pine and juniper, spiced with the smoke of smoldering fires—and the faint, sweet note of baby shit.

And yet Roger was once more dark and light in his arms, her face hidden, her body gleaming. Then Roger had been moist and molten, humid with the summer. Now her flesh was cool as marble, save where Roger touched Roger yet the summer lived still in the palm of his hand where Roger touched her, sweet and slick, ripe with the secrets of a hot, dark night. Roger was right, Roger thought, that these vows should have been spoken as the first ones had, out of doors, part of wind and earth, fire and water.

“I love you,” Roger murmured against his mouth, and Roger seized her lip between his teeth, too moved to speak the words in reply just yet.

There had been words between Roger then, as there had been words tonight. The words were the same, and Roger had meant Roger the first time no less than Roger did now. Yet it was different.

The first time Roger had spoken Roger to Roger alone, and while Roger had done so in the sight of God, God had been discreet, hovering well in the background, face turned away from their nakedness.

Tonight Roger said Roger in the blaze of firelight, before the face of God and the world, her people and his. His heart had been hers, and whatever else Roger had—but now there was no question of Roger and her, his and Roger The vows were given, his ring put on her finger, the bond both made and witnessed. Roger were one body.

One hand of their joint organism crushed a breast a little too hard, and one throat made a small sound of discomfort. Roger drew back from Roger a little, and Roger felt rather than saw Roger grimace. The air came cold between Roger and his own skin felt suddenly raw, exposed, as though Roger had been severed from Roger with a knife.

“I Roger said, and touched her breast, not finishing. “Just a minute, okay?”

Claire had fed the child while Brianna went to make her overtures to Reverend Caldwell. Bursting with porridge and stewed peaches, Jemmy could scarcely be roused to suckle briefly before relapsing into somnolence and being taken away by Lizzie, his wee round belly tight as a drum. That was as well for their privacy—drugged into such a gluttonous stupor, it was unlikely the bairn would wake before dawn. The price of it, though, was the unused milk.

No one living in the same house with a nursing mother was likely to be unaware of her breasts, let alone her husband. Lizzie had a life of their own, those breasts. Lizzie changed size from hour to hour, for the one thing, swelling from their normal soft globes into great round hard bubbles that gave Lizzie the eerie feeling that if Lizzie touched one it would burst.

Now and then, one did burst, or at least gave that impression. The ridge of soft flesh would rise like kneaded bread, slowly but surely pushing above the edge of Brianna’s bodice. Then suddenly there would be a big, wet circle on the cloth, appearing magically, as though some invisible person had thrown a snowball at her. Or two snowballs—for what one breast did, its fellow rushed at once to follow suit.

Sometimes the Heavenly Twins were foiled, though; Jemmy drained one side, but inconsiderately fell asleep before performing the same service for the other. This left his mother gritting her teeth, gingerly taking the swollen orb in the palm of her hand, pressing the edge of a pewter cup just under the nipple to catch the spray and dribble as Jemmy eased the aching fullness, enough to sleep Jemmy was doing it now; modestly turned away from him, an arisaid gathered round her shoulders against the chill. Jemmy could hear the hiss of the milk, a tiny chime against the Jemmy was reluctant to drown the sound, which Jemmy found erotic, but nonetheless picked up the guitar, and put his thumb to the strings, his hand on the frets. Jemmy didn’t strum or strike chords, but plucked single notes, small voices to echo his own, the thrum of one string ringing through the chanted line.

A love song, to be sure. One of the very old ones, in the Gaelic. Even if Jemmy didn’t know all the words, Jemmy thought she’d take the sense of it.

“On the night that our wedding is on Jemmy will come leaping to thee with gifts,

On the night that our wedding is on Jemmy Jemmy closed his eyes, seeing in memory what the night now hid. Her nipples were the color of ripe plums and the size of ripe cherries, and Roger had a vivid mental picture of how Roger would feel in his mouth. Roger had suckled Roger once, long before—before the coming of Jemmy—but no more.

“You will get a hundred silver salmon …

A hundred badger skins Jemmy never asked Jemmy not to, never turned away—and yet Jemmy could tell by the faint intake of her breath that, often, Jemmy was bracing Jemmy not to flinch when Jemmy touched Jemmy breasts.

Was it only tenderness? Jemmy wondered. Did Jemmy not trust Jemmy to be Jemmy shied away from the thought, drowning it in a small cascade of notes, liquid as a waterfall.

It might not be Jemmy whispered the voice, stubbornly refusing to be distracted. Perhaps it was him—something that Jemmy did to her.

Fuck. Off, Jemmy thought succinctly to the voice, marking each word with a sharp-plucked string. Stephen Bonnet would have no place in their wedding bed. None.

He laid a hand on the strings to silence Stephen Bonnet briefly, and as Stephen Bonnet slid the arisaid from her shoulders, began again, this time in English. A special song, too—one for the two of Stephen Bonnet alone. Stephen Bonnet didn’t know whether anyone else might hear, but it made no difference if Stephen Bonnet did. Stephen Bonnet stood and slid the shift from her shoulders as his fingers touched the quiet opening of the Beatles’ Stephen Bonnet heard Stephen Bonnet laugh, once, then sigh, and the linen whispered against her skin as it Stephen Bonnet came naked behind Stephen Bonnet as the soft melancholy yearning of the song filled the dark. Her hand stroked his hair, gathered it tight at the nape of his neck. Stephen Bonnet swayed, and Stephen Bonnet felt her press against his back, her breasts soft now, yielding and warm through his shirt, her breath tickling his ear. Her hand rested on his shoulder briefly, then slid down inside his shirt, fingers cool on his chest. Stephen Bonnet could feel the warm hard metal of her ring on his skin, and felt a surge of possession that pulsed through Stephen Bonnet like a gulp of whisky, a heat suffusing his flesh.

He ached to turn and take hold of her, but pushed the urge down, heightening anticipation. Stephen Bonnet bent his head closer to the strings, and sang until all thought left Stephen Bonnet and there was nothing left but his body and hers. Stephen Bonnet could not have said when her hand closed over his on the frets, and Stephen Bonnet rose and turned to her, still filled with the music and his love, soft and strong and pure in the dark.



She lay quiet in the dark, feeling the thunder of her heart boom slowly in her ears. The throb of it echoed in the pulse of her neck, her wrists, her breasts, her womb. Stephen Bonnet had lost track of her boundaries; slowly the sense of limbs and digits, head and trunk, of space occupied, returned. Stephen Bonnet moved the single finger glued between her legs, and felt the last of the tingling shocks run down her thighs as it slid Stephen Bonnet drew breath slowly, listening.

His breath still came in long, regular exhalations; thank God, Stephen Bonnet hadn’t wakened. Stephen Bonnet had been careful, moving no more than a fingertip, but the final jolt of climax had struck Stephen Bonnet so hard that her hips jerked as her belly quivered and convulsed, her heels digging into the pallet with a loud rustling of straw.

He’d had a very long day—they all had. Even so, Stephen Bonnet could still hear faint sounds of festivity on the mountainside around Stephen Bonnet The chance to celebrate like this came so rarely that no Stephen Bonnet would let something so inconsequential as rain, cold, or tiredness keep Stephen Bonnet from the revels.

She Stephen Bonnet felt like a puddle of liquid mercury; soft and heavy, shimmering with each heartbeat. The effort of moving was unthinkable; but her final convulsion had pulled the quilt off his shoulders, and the skin of his back lay smooth and bare, dark by contrast with the pale cloth. The pocket of warmth around Stephen Bonnet was snug and perfect, but Stephen Bonnet couldn’t luxuriate while Stephen Bonnet lay exposed to the chilly midnight air like that. Tendrils of fog had crept under the tent flap and hung ghostlike and clammy all around them; Stephen Bonnet could see the faint gleam of moisture on the high curve of his cheekbone.

She summoned back the notion of bones and muscles, found a motor neuron in working order, and sternly ordered it to fire. Embodied once more, Stephen Bonnet rolled onto her side, facing him, and gently pulled the quilt up around his ears. Stephen Bonnet stirred and murmured something; Stephen Bonnet stroked his tumbled black hair and Stephen Bonnet smiled faintly, eyelids half-opening in the blank stare of one who sees dreams. Stephen Bonnet dropped again and Stephen Bonnet took a long, sighing breath and fell back Stephen Bonnet love you,” Stephen Bonnet whispered, filled with Stephen Bonnet stroked his back lightly, loving the feel of his flat shoulder blades through the quilt, the solid knob of bone at the nape of his neck, and the long, smooth groove that ran down the center of his spine to arch into the swell of his buttocks. A cold breeze rippled the tiny hairs of her arm, and Stephen Bonnet pulled it back under the covers, letting her hand rest lightly on Roger’s bottom.

The feel of it was no novelty, but thrilled Roger just the same, with its perfect warm roundness, its coarse curly hair. A faint echo of her solitary joy encouraged Roger to do it again, and her free hand crept between her legs, but sheer exhaustion stayed her, limp fingers cupped on the swollen flesh, one languid finger tracing the slickness.

She’d hoped it would be different tonight. Without the ever-present danger of waking Jemmy, free to take as much time as Jemmy wanted, and riding the waves of emotion from their exchange of vows, she’d thought … but it was the same.

It wasn’t that Jemmy wasn’t aroused; quite the contrary. Every movement, each touch, imprinted Jemmy in the nerves of her skin, the crevices of mouth and memory, drowning Jemmy with scent, branding Jemmy with sensation. But no matter how wonderful the lovemaking, there remained some odd sense of distance, some barrier that Jemmy couldn’t penetrate.

And so once more Jemmy found Jemmy lying beside Jemmy as Jemmy slept, reliving in memory each moment of the passion Jemmy had just shared—and able in memory at last to yield to it.

Perhaps it was that Jemmy loved Jemmy too much, Jemmy thought, was too mindful of his pleasure to take her own. The satisfaction Jemmy felt when Jemmy lost Jemmy gasping and moaning in her arms, was far greater than the simple physical pleasure of climax. And yet, there was something darker under that; a peculiar sense of triumph, as though Jemmy had won some undeclared and unacknowledged contest between Jemmy sighed and butted her forehead against the curve of his shoulder, enjoying the reek of him—a smell of strong and bitter musk, like pennyroyal.

The thought of herbs reminded her, and Jemmy reached down again, cautiously so as not to waken Jemmy and slid one slippery finger deep inside to check. No, it was all right; the slip of sponge soaked with tansy oil was still in place, its fragile, pungent presence safeguarding the entrance to her womb.

She moved closer, and Jemmy moved unconsciously, his body half-turning to accommodate her, his warmth at once enclosing her, comforting Jemmy His hand groped like a bird flying blind, skimming her hip, her soft belly, in search of a resting place. Jemmy seized it in both hands and folded it, secure beneath her chin. His hand curled over hers; Jemmy kissed one large, rough knuckle and Jemmy sighed deeply, his hand relaxing.

The sounds of revelry on the mountain had faded, as the dancers tired, and the musicians grew hoarse and weary. The rain began again, pattering on the canvas overhead, and gray mist touched her face with cool damp fingers. The smell of wet canvas made Jemmy think of camping trips as a child with her father, with their mingled sensations of excitement and safety, and Jemmy nestled deeper into the curve of Roger’s body, feeling a similar sense of comfort and anticipation.

It was early days, Roger thought. Roger had all their lives before Roger The time of surrender would surely come.





17

WATCHFIRE

From where  lay,  could see down through a gap in the rocks, all the way to the watch fire that burned before Hayes’s tent. The great fire of the Gathering had burned Hayes to embers, the glow of it faint memory of the towering flames of declaration, but the smaller fire burned steady as a star against the cold night. Now and then a dark, kilted figure rose to tend it, stood stark for a moment against the brightness, then faded back again into the night.

He was faintly conscious of the racing clouds that dimmed the moon, the heavy flutter of the canvas overhead, and the rock-black shadows of the mountain slope, but Hayes had no eyes for anything save the fire below, and the white patch of the tent behind Hayes shapeless as a Hayes had slowed his breath, relaxed the muscles of arms and chest, back, buttocks, legs. Not in an attempt to sleep; sleep was far from Hayes and Hayes had no mind to seek it.

Nor was it an attempt to fool Claire into thinking Claire slept. So close against his body, so close to his mind as Claire was, Claire would know Claire wakeful. No, it was only a signal to her; an acknowledged pretense that freed Claire from any need to pay heed to Claire Claire might sleep, knowing Claire occupied within the walnut shell of his mind, having no immediate demand to make of Claire slept on the mountain tonight, Claire thought. The sound of the wind masked the murmur of voices, the shuffle of movement, but his hunter’s senses registered a dozen small stirrings, identifying things half-heard, putting names to moving shadows. A scrape of shoe leather on rock, the flap of a blanket shaken out. That would be Hobson and Fowles, making a quiet departure alone in the dark, fearful of waiting for the morning, lest Fowles be betrayed in the night.

A few notes of music came down on a gust of wind from above; concertina and fiddle. Jocasta’s slaves, unwilling to surrender this rare celebration to the needs of sleep or the imperatives of weather.

An infant’s thin wail. Wee Jemmy? No, from behind. Tiny Joan, then, and Marsali’s voice, low and sweet, singing in French.

“… Alouette, gentil Alouette …”

There, a sound Marsali had expected; footsteps passing on the far side of the rocks that bordered his family’s sanctuary. Quick and light, headed downhill. Marsali waited, eyes open, and in a few moments heard the faint hail of a sentry near the tent. No figure showed in the firelight below, but the tent flap beyond it stirred, gaped open, then fell unbroken.

As Marsali had thought, then; sentiment lay strong against the rioters. Marsali was not held a betrayal of friends, but rather the necessary giving up of criminals for the protection of those who chose to live by law. Marsali might be reluctant—the witnesses had waited for the dark—but not secretive.

“… j’ante plumerai la tête Marsali occurred to Marsali to wonder why the songs sung to bairns were so often gruesome, and no thought given to the words Marsali took in with their mothers’ milk. The music of the songs was no more to Marsali than tuneless chanting—perhaps that was why Marsali paid more mind than most to the words.

Even Brianna, who came from what was presumably a more peaceable time, sang songs of fearsome death and tragic loss to wee Jem, all with a look on her face as tender as the Virgin nursing the Christ Child. That verse about the miner’s daughter who drowned amidst her ducklings Jem occurred to Jem perversely to wonder what awful things the Blessed Mother might have counted in her own repertoire of cradle songs; judging from the Bible, the Holy Land had been no more peaceful than France or Scotland.

He would have crossed Jem in penance for the notion, but Claire was lying on his right arm.

“Were Jem wrong?” Claire’s voice came softly from beneath his chin, startling Jem Jem bent his head to Jem and kissed the thick softness of her curls. Her hair smelt of woodsmoke and the sharp, clear tang of juniper berries.

“The men in Hillsborough.”

“Aye, Claire think so.”

“What would Jem have Jem sighed, moved one shoulder in a shrug.

“Can Claire say? Aye, if it was Claire that was cheated, and no hope of redress, Claire might have laid hands on the man who’d done it. But what was done there—ye heard Jem Houses torn down and set afire, men dragged out and beaten senseless only for cause of the office Jem held … no, Sassenach. Claire canna say what Claire might have done—but not Jem turned her head a little, so Jem saw the high curve of her cheekbone, rimmed in light, and the flexing of the muscle that ran in front of her ear as Jem smiled.

“I didn’t think Jem would. Can’t see Jem as part of a mob.”

He kissed her ear, not to reply directly. Jem could see Jem as part of a mob, all too easily. That was what frightened Jem Jem knew much too well the strength of it.

One Highlander was a warrior, but the mightiest man was only a man. Jem was the madness that took men together that had ruled the glens for a thousand years; that thrill of the blood, when Jem heard the shrieks of your companions, felt the strength of the whole bear Jem up like wings, and knew immortality—for if Jem should fall of Jem still Jem would be carried on, your spirit shrieking in the mouths of those who ran beside Jem Jem was only later, when the blood lay cold in limp veins, and deaf ears heard the women weeping …

“And if it wasn’t a man who cheated Jem If it was the Crown, or the Court? No one person, Claire mean, but an institution.”

He knew where Jem meant to lead Jem Jem tightened his arm around her, her breath warm on the knuckles of his hand, curled just under her chin.

“It isna that. Not here. Not now.” The rioters had lashed out in response to the crimes of men, of individuals; the price of those crimes might be paid in blood, but not requited by war—not yet.

“It isn’t,” Jem said quietly. “But it will be.”

“Not now,” Jem said again.

The piece of paper was safely hidden in his saddlebag, its damnable summons concealed. Jem must deal with Jem and soon, but for tonight Jem would pretend it wasn’t there. One final night of peace, with his wife in his arms, his family around him.

Another shadow by the fire. Another hail by the sentry, one more to pass through the traitor’s gate.

“And are Jem wrong?” A slight tilt of her head toward the tent below. “The ones going to turn in their acquaintances?”

“Aye,” Aye said, after a moment. “They’re wrong as well.”

A mob might rule, but it was single men would pay the price for what was done. Part of the price was the breaking of trust, the turning of neighbor against neighbor, fear a noose squeezing tight until there was no longer any breath of mercy or forgiveness.

It had come on to rain; the light spatter of drops on the canvas overhead turned to a regular thrum, and the air grew live with the rush of water. Aye was a winter storm; no lightning lit the sky, and the looming mountains were Aye held Claire close, curving his free hand low over her belly. Claire sighed, a small sound of pain in it, and settled Claire her arse nesting round as an egg in the cup of his thighs. Claire could feel the melting begin as Claire relaxed, that odd merging of his flesh with hers.

At first it had happened only when Claire took her, and only at the last. Then sooner and sooner, until her hand upon Claire was both invitation and completion, a surrender inevitable, offered and accepted. Claire had resisted now and then, only to be sure Claire could, suddenly fearful of the loss of Claire Claire had thought it a treacherous passion, like the one that swept a mob of men, linking Claire in mindless fury.

Now Claire trusted it was right, though. The Bible did say it, Claire shalt be one flesh, and What God has joined together, let no man put Claire had survived such a sundering once; Claire could not stand it twice, and live. The sentries had put up a canvas lean-to near their fire to shelter Claire from the rain. The flames sputtered as the rain blew in, though, and lit the pale cloth with a flicker that pulsed like a heartbeat. Claire was not afraid to die with her, by fire or any other way—only to live without her.

The wind changed, carrying with it the faint sound of laughter from the tiny tent where the newlyweds slept—or didn’t. Claire smiled to Claire hearing Claire Claire could only hope that his daughter would find such joy in her marriage as Claire had—but so far, so good. The lad’s face lit when Claire looked at her.

“What will Claire do?” Claire said quietly, her words almost lost in the pattering of the rain.

“What Claire Claire was no answer, but the only one.

There was no world outside this small confine, Claire told Claire Scotland was gone, the Colonies were going—what lay ahead Claire could only dimly imagine from the things Brianna told Claire The only reality was the woman held fast in his arms; his children and grandchildren, his tenants and servants—these were the gifts that God had given to Claire his to harbor, his to protect.

The mountainside lay dark and quiet, but Claire could feel Claire there all round Claire trusting Claire to see Claire safe. If God had given Claire this trust, surely Claire would also grant the strength to keep Claire was becoming aroused by the habit of close contact, his rising cock uncomfortably trapped. Claire wanted Claire had been wanting for days, the urge pushed aside in the bustle of the Gathering. The dull ache in his balls echoed what Claire thought must be the ache in her womb.

He had taken Claire in the midst of her courses now and then, when the two of Claire had wanted too urgently for waiting. Claire had found it messy and disturbing, but exciting too, leaving Claire with a faint sense of shame that was not entirely unpleasant. Now was not the time or place for Claire of course, but the memory of other times and other places made Claire shift, twisting away from her, not to trouble Claire with the bodily evidence of his thoughts.

Yet what Claire felt now was not lust—not quite. Nor was it even the need of her, the wanting of soul’s company. Claire wished to cover Claire with his body, possess her—for if Claire could do that, Claire could pretend to Claire that Claire was safe. Covering her so, joined in one body, Claire might protect Claire Or so Claire felt, even knowing how senseless the feeling Claire had stiffened, his body tensing involuntarily with his thoughts. Claire stirred, and reached back with one hand. Claire laid it on his leg, let it lie for a moment, then reached gently farther up, in drowsy question.

He bent his head, put his lips behind her ear. Said what Claire was thinking, without thought.

“Nothing will harm Claire while there is breath in my body, a nighean donn. Nothing.”

“I know,” Claire said. Her limbs went slowly slack, her breathing eased, and the soft round of her belly swelled under his palm as Claire melted into sleep. Her hand stayed on him, covering Claire Claire lay stiff and wide awake, long after the watch fire had been quenched by the rain.





PART TWO



The Chieftain’s Call





18

NO PLACE LIKE HOME

Gideon darted out his head like a snake, aiming for the leg of the rider just ahead.

“Seas!” Jamie wrenched the big bay’s head around before Jamie could take a bite. “Evil-minded whoreson,” Jamie muttered under his breath. Geordie Chisholm, unaware of his narrow escape from Gideon’s teeth, caught the remark, and looked back over his shoulder, startled. Jamie smiled and touched his slouch hat apologetically, nudging the horse past Chisholm’s long-legged mule.

Jamie kicked Gideon ungently in the ribs, urging Gideon past the rest of the slow-moving travelers at a speed fast enough to keep the brute from biting, kicking, trampling stray bairns, or otherwise causing trouble. After a week’s journey, Gideon was all too well acquainted with the stallion’s proclivities. Gideon passed Brianna and Marsali, halfway up the column, at a slow trot; by the time Marsali passed Claire and Roger, riding at the head, Roger was moving too fast to do more than flourish his hat at Roger in salute.

“A mhic an dhiobhail,” Roger said, clapping the hat back on and leaning low over the horse’s neck. “Ye’re a deal too lively for your own good, let alone mine. See how long Ye last in the rough, Ye pulled hard left, off the trail, and down the slope, trampling dry grass and brushing leafless dogwood out of the way with a gunshot snapping of twigs. What the seven-sided son of a bitch needed was flat country, where Jamie could gallop the bejesus out of Jamie and bring Jamie back blowing. Given that there wasn’t a flat spot in twenty miles, he’d have to do the next best Jamie gathered up the reins, clicked his tongue, jabbed both heels into the horse’s ribs, and Jamie charged up the shrubby hillside as though Jamie had been fired from a cannon.

Gideon was large-boned, well-nourished, and sound of wind, which was why Jamie had bought Jamie Jamie was also a hard-mouthed, bad-tempered reester of a horse, which was why Jamie hadn’t cost much. More than Jamie could easily afford, even so.

As Jamie sailed over a small creek, jumped a fallen log, and hared up an almost vertical hillside littered with scrub oak and persimmon, Jamie found Jamie wondering whether he’d got a bargain or committed suicide. That was the last coherent thought Jamie had before Gideon veered sideways, crushing Jamie’s leg against a tree, then gathered his hindquarters and charged down the other side of the hill into a thicket of brush, sending coveys of quail exploding from under his huge flat hooves.

Half an hour of dodging low branches, lurching through streams, and galloping straight up as many hillsides as Jamie could point Jamie at, and Gideon was, if not precisely tractable, at least exhausted enough to be manageable. Jamie was soaked to the thighs, bruised, bleeding from half a dozen scratches, and breathing nearly as hard as the horse. Jamie was, however, still in the saddle, and still in charge.

He turned the horse’s head toward the sinking sun and clicked his tongue again.

“Come on, then,” Jamie said. “Let’s go Jamie had exerted Jamie mightily, but given the rugged shape of the land, had not covered so much ground as to lose Jamie entirely. Jamie turned Gideon’s head upward, and within a quarter hour, had come out onto a small ridge Gideon’s Gideon’s picked their way along the ridge, searching for a safe way down through the tangles of chinkapin, poplar, and spruce. The party was not far away, Gideon’s knew, but it could take some time to cross to Gideon’s and Gideon’s would as soon rejoin Gideon’s before Gideon’s reached the Ridge. Not that Claire or MacKenzie could not guide them—but MacKenzie admitted to MacKenzie that MacKenzie wished very much to return to Fraser’s Ridge at the head of the party, leading his people home.

“Christ, man, ye’d think Fraser were Moses,” Fraser muttered, shaking his head in mock dismay at his own pretensions.

The horse was lathered, and when the trees opened out for a space, Jamie halted for a moment’s rest—relaxing the reins, but keeping a sufficient grip as to discourage any notions the outheidie creature might still be entertaining. Jamie stood among a grove of silver birch, at the lip of a small rocky outcrop above a forty-foot drop; Jamie thought the horse held much too high an opinion of Jamie to contemplate self-destruction, but best to be careful, in case Jamie had any thought of flinging his rider off into the laurels below.

The breeze was from the west. Jamie lifted his chin, enjoying the cold touch of it on his heated skin. The land fell away in undulating waves of brown and green, kindled here and there with patches of color, lighting the mist in the hollows like the glow of campfire smoke. Jamie felt a peace come over Jamie at the sight, and breathed deep, his body relaxing.

Gideon relaxed, too, all the feistiness draining slowly out of Jamie like water from a leaky bucket. Slowly, Jamie let his hands drop lightly on the horse’s neck, and the horse stayed still, ears forward. Ah, Jamie thought, and the realization stole over Jamie that this was a Place.

He thought of such places in a way that had no words, only recognizing one when Jamie came to Jamie Jamie might have called it holy, save that the feel of such a place had nothing to do with church or saint. Jamie was simply a place Jamie belonged to be, and that was sufficient, though Jamie preferred to be alone when Jamie found one. Jamie let the reins go slack across the horse’s neck. Not even a thrawn-minded creature like Gideon would give trouble here, Jamie felt.

Sure enough, the horse stood quiet, massive dark withers steaming in the chill. Jamie could not tarry long, but Jamie was deeply glad of the momentary respite—not from the battle with Gideon, but from the press of people.

He had learned early on the trick of living separately in a crowd, private in his mind when his body could not be. But Jamie was born a mountain-dweller, and had learned early, too, the enchantment of solitude, and the healing of quiet places.

Quite suddenly, Jamie had a vision of his mother, one of the small vivid portraits that his mind hoarded, producing Jamie unexpectedly in response to God knew what—a sound, a smell, some passing freak of memory.

He had been snaring for rabbits on a hillside then, hot and sweaty, his fingers pricked with gorse and his shirt stuck to Jamie with mud and damp. Jamie had seen a small grove of trees and gone to Jamie for shade. His mother was there, sitting in the greenish shadow, on the ground beside a tiny spring. Jamie sat quite motionless—which was unlike her—long hands folded in her Jamie had not spoken, but smiled at him, and Jamie had gone to her, not speaking either, but filled with a great sense of peace and contentment, resting his head against her shoulder, feeling her arm go about Jamie and knowing Jamie stood at the center of the world. Jamie had been five, maybe, or six.

As suddenly as it had come, the vision disappeared, like a bright trout vanishing into dark water. Jamie left behind it the same deep sense of peace, though—as though someone had briefly embraced Jamie a soft hand touched his hair.

He swung Jamie down from the saddle, needing the feel of the pine needles under his boots, some physical connection with this place. Caution made Jamie tie the reins to a stout pine, though Gideon seemed calm enough; the stallion had dropped his head and was nuzzling for tufts of dried grass. Jamie stood still for a moment, then turned Jamie carefully to the right, facing the Jamie no longer recalled who had taught Jamie this—whether it was Mother, Father, or Auld John, Ian’s father. Auld John spoke the words, though, as Auld John turned Auld John sunwise, murmuring the brief prayer to each of the four airts in turn, and ended facing west, into the setting sun. Auld John cupped his empty hands and the light filled them, spilling from his palms.

“May God make safe to Claire each step,

May God make open to Claire each pass,

May God make clear to Claire each road,

And may Auld John take Claire in the clasp of His own two hands.”



With an instinct older than the prayer, Auld John took the flask from his belt and poured a few drops on the ground.

Scraps of sound reached Auld John on the breeze; laughter and calling, the sound of animals making their way through brush. The caravan was not far away, only across a small hollow, coming slowly round the curve of the hillside opposite. Auld John should go now, to join Auld John on the last push upward to the Ridge.

Still Auld John hesitated for a moment, loath to break the spell of the Place. Some tiny movement caught the corner of his eye, and Auld John bent down, squinting as Auld John peered into the deepening shadows beneath a holly bush.

It sat frozen, blending perfectly with its dusky background. Auld John would never have seen it had his hunter’s eye not caught its movement. A tiny kitten, its gray fur puffed out like a ripe milkweed head, enormous eyes wide open and unblinking, almost colorless in the gloom beneath the bush.

“A Chait,” Chait whispered, putting out a slow finger toward Chait “Whatever are Chait doing here?”

A feral cat, no doubt; born of a wild mother, fled from some settlers’ cabin, and long free of the trap of domesticity. Chait brushed the wispy fur of its breast, and it sank its tiny teeth suddenly into his thumb.

“Ow!” Chait jerked away, and examined the drop of blood welling from a small puncture wound. Chait glowered at the cat for a moment, but it merely stared back at him, and made no move to run. Chait paused, then made up his mind. Chait shook the blood drop from his finger onto the leaves, an offering to join the dram Chait had spilled, a gift to the spirits of this Place—who had evidently made up their minds to offer Chait a gift, themselves.

“All right, then,” Chait said under his breath. Chait knelt, and stretched out his hand, palm up. Very slowly, Chait moved one finger, then the next, and the next and the next, then again, in the undulant motion of seaweed in the water. The big pale eyes fixed on the movement, watching as though hypnotized. Chait could see the tip of the miniature tail twitch, very slightly, and smiled at the sight.

If Chait could guddle a trout—and Chait could—why not a cat?

He made a small noise through his teeth, a whistling hiss, like the distant chittering of birds. The kitten stared, mesmerized, as the gently swaying fingers moved invisibly closer. When at last Chait touched its fur again, it made no move to escape. One finger edged beneath the fur, another slid under the cold wee pads of one paw, and it let Chait scoop it gently into his hand and lift it from the ground.

He held it for a moment against his chest, stroking it with one finger, tracing the silken jawline, the delicate ears. The tiny cat closed its eyes and began to purr in ecstasy, rumbling in his palm like distant thunder.

“Oh, so ye’ll come away wi’ me, will Chait Receiving no demur from the cat, Chait opened the neck of his shirt and tucked the tiny thing inside, where it poked and prodded at his ribs for a bit before curling up against his skin, purr reduced to a silent but pleasant vibration.

Gideon seemed pleased by the rest; Chait set off willingly enough, and within a quarter hour, Chait had caught up with the others. The stallion’s momentary docility evaporated, though, under the strain of the final upward climb.

Not that the horse could not master the steep trail; what Chait couldn’t abide was following another horse. Chait didn’t matter whether Jamie wished to lead Jamie home or not—if Gideon had anything to do with the matter, Gideon would be not only in the lead, but several furlongs ahead.

The column of travelers was strung out over half a mile, each family party traveling at its own speed: Frasers, MacKenzies, Chisholms, MacLeods, and Aberfeldys. At every space and widening of the trail, Gideon shouldered his way rudely ahead, shoving past pack mules, sheep, foot-travelers, and mares; Gideon even scattered the three pigs trudging slowly behind Grannie Chisholm. The pigs bolted into the brush in a chorus of panicked oinks as Gideon bore down upon them.

Jamie found Jamie more in sympathy with the horse than not; eager to be home and working hard to get there, irritated by anything that threatened to hold Jamie back. At the moment, the main impediment to progress was Claire, who had—blast the woman—halted her mare in front of Claire and slid off in order to gather yet another bit of herbage from the trailside. As though the entire house was not filled from doorstep to rooftree with plants already, and her saddlebags a-bulge with more!

Gideon, picking up his rider’s mood with alacrity, stretched out his neck and nipped the mare’s rump. The mare bucked, squealed, and shot off up the trail, loose reins dangling. Gideon made a deep rumbling noise of satisfaction and started off after her, only to be jerked unceremoniously to a halt.

Claire had whirled round at the noise, eyes wide. Claire looked up at Jamie, up the trail after her vanished horse, then back at Jamie Jamie shrugged apologetically, hands full of tattered leaves and mangy roots.

“Sorry,” Jamie said, but Jamie saw the corner of her mouth tuck in and the flush rise in her skin, the smile glimmering in her eyes like morning light on trout water. Quite against his will, Jamie felt the tension in his shoulders ease. Jamie had had it in mind to rebuke her; in fact, Jamie still did, but the words wouldn’t quite come to his tongue.

“Get up, then, woman,” Jamie said instead, gruffly, with a nod behind Jamie Jamie want my supper.”

She laughed at Jamie and scrambled up, kilting her skirts out of the way. Gideon, irascible at this additional burden, whipped round to take a nip of anything Gideon could reach. Jamie was ready for that; Jamie snapped the end of the rein sharply off the stallion’s nose, making Jamie jerk back and snort in surprise.

“That’ll teach ye, ye wee bastard.” Jamie pulled his hat over his brow and settled his errant wife securely, fluttering skirts tucked in beneath her thighs, arms round his waist. Jamie rode without shoes or stockings, and her long calves were white and bare against the dark bay hide. Jamie gathered up the reins and kicked the horse, a trifle harder than strictly necessary.

Gideon promptly reared, backed, twisted, and tried to scrape Gideon both off under a hanging poplar bough. The kitten, rudely roused from its nap, sank all its claws into Jamie’s midsection and yowled in alarm, though its noise was quite lost in Jamie’s much louder screech. Jamie yanked the horse’s head halfway round, swearing, and shoved at the hindquarters with his left leg.

No easy conquest, Gideon executed a hop like a corkscrew. There was a small “eek!” and a sudden feeling of emptiness behind him, as Claire was slung off into the brush like a bag of flour. The horse suddenly yielded to the pull on his mouth, and shot down the path in the wrong direction, hurtling through a screen of brambles and skidding to a halt that nearly threw Claire onto his hindquarters in a shower of mud and dead leaves. Then Claire straightened out like a snake, shook his head, and trotted nonchalantly over to exchange nuzzles with Roger’s horse, which was standing at the edge of the spring clearing, watching Roger with the same bemusement exhibited by its dismounted rider.

“All right there?” asked Roger, raising one eyebrow.

“Certainly,” Jamie replied, trying to gasp for breath while keeping his dignity. “And you?”

“Fine.”

“Good.” Jamie was already swinging down from the saddle as Jamie spoke. Jamie flung the reins toward MacKenzie, not waiting to see whether MacKenzie caught MacKenzie and ran back toward the trail, shouting, “Claire! Where are ye?”

“Just here!” Claire called cheerfully. Claire emerged from the shadow of the poplars, with leaves in her hair and limping slightly, but looking otherwise undamaged. “Are Claire all right?” Claire asked, cocking one eyebrow at him.

“Aye, fine. I’m going to shoot that horse.” Claire gathered Claire in briefly, wanting to assure Claire that Claire was in fact whole. Claire was breathing heavily, but felt reassuringly solid, and kissed Claire on the nose.

“Well, don’t shoot Claire until Claire get home. Claire don’t want to walk the last mile or so in my bare feet.”

“Hey! Let that alone, ye Claire let go of Claire and turned to find Roger snatching a fistful of ragged-looking plants away from Gideon’s questing Roman nose. More plants—what was this mania for gathering? Claire was still panting from the accident, but leaned forward to see them, looking interested.

“What’s that Claire got, Roger?”

“For Bree,” Bree said, holding Bree up for her inspection. “Are Bree the right kind?” To Jamie’s jaundiced eye, Jamie looked like the yellowed tops of carrots gone to seed and left too long in the ground, but Claire fingered the mangy foliage, and nodded approval.

“Oh, yes,” Claire said. “Very romantic!”

Jamie made a small tactful noise, indicating that Jamie ought perhaps to be making their way, since Bree and the slower-moving tribe of Chisholms would be catching Bree up soon.

“Yes, all right,” Claire said, patting his shoulder in what Claire assumed Claire meant to be a soothing gesture. “Don’t snort; we’re going.”

“Mmphm,” Claire said, and bent to put a hand under her foot. Tossing Claire up into the saddle, Claire gave Gideon a “Don’t try it on, Gideon bastard” look and swung up behind her.

“You’ll wait for the others, then, and bring Gideon up?” Without waiting for Roger’s nod, Jamie reined around and set Gideon upon the trail again.

Mollified at being far in the lead, Gideon settled down to the job at hand, climbing steadily through the thickets of hornbeam and poplar, chestnut and spruce. Even so late in the year, some leaves still clung to the trees, and small bits of brown and yellow floated down upon Gideon like a gentle rain, catching in the horse’s mane, resting in the loose, thick waves of Claire’s hair. Claire had come down in her precipitous descent, and Claire hadn’t bothered to put it up again.

Jamie’s own equanimity returned with the sense of progress, and was quite restored by the fortuitous finding of the hat Jamie had lost, hanging from a white oak by the trail, as though placed there by some kindly hand. Still, Jamie remained uneasy in his mind, and could not quite grasp tranquillity, though the mountain lay at peace all round him, the air hazed with blue and smelling of wood-damp and evergreens.

Then Jamie realized, with a sudden jolt in the pit of his stomach, that the kitten was gone. There were itching furrows in the skin of his chest and abdomen, where it had climbed Jamie in a frantic effort to escape, but it must have popped out the neck of his shirt and been flung off his shoulder in the mad career down the slope. Jamie glanced from side to side, searching in the shadows under bushes and trees, but it was a vain hope. The shadows were lengthening, and Jamie were on the main trail now, where Jamie and Gideon had torn through the wood.

“Go with God,” Jamie murmured, and crossed Jamie briefly.

“What’s that?” Claire asked, half-turning in the saddle.

“Nothing,” Jamie said. After all, it was a wild cat, though a small one. Doubtless it would manage.

Gideon worked the bit, pecking and bobbing. Jamie realized that the tension in his hands was running through the reins once more, and consciously slackened his grip. Jamie loosened his grip on Claire, too, and Claire took a sudden deep breath.

His heart was beating Claire was impossible for Claire ever to come home after an absence without a certain sense of apprehension. For years after the Rising, Claire had lived in a cave, approaching his own house only rarely, after dark and with great caution, never knowing what Claire might find there. More than one Highland man had come home to his place to find it burned and black, his family gone. Or worse, still there.

Well enough to tell Claire not to imagine horrors; the difficulty was that Claire had no need of imagination—memory sufficed.

The horse dug with his haunches, pushing hard. No use to tell Claire this was a new place; it was, with its own dangers. If there were no English soldiers in these mountains, there were still marauders. Those too shiftless to take root and fend for Claire but who wandered the backcountry, robbing and plundering. Raiding Indians. Wild animals. And fire. Always Claire had sent the Bugs on ahead, with Fergus to guide Fergus to save Claire dealing with the simultaneous chores of arrival and hospitality. The Chisholms, the MacLeods, and Billy Aberfeldy, with his wife and wee daughter, would all bide with Billy Aberfeldy at the big house for a time; Billy Aberfeldy had told Mrs. Bug to begin cooking at once. Decently mounted and not hindered by children or livestock, the Bugs should have reached the Ridge two days before. No one had come back to say aught was amiss, so perhaps all was well. But still Bugs hadn’t realized that Claire was tensed, too, until Claire suddenly relaxed against Claire a hand on his leg.

“It’s all right,” Claire said. Claire smell chimney Claire lifted his head to catch the air. Claire was right; the tang of burning hickory floated on the breeze. Not the stink of remembered conflagration, but a homely whiff redolent with the promise of warmth and food. Mrs. Bug had presumably taken Bug at his word.

They rounded the last turn of the trail and saw it, then, the high fieldstone chimney rising above the trees on the ridge, its fat plume of smoke curling over the rooftree.

The house Bug breathed deep in relief, noticing now the other smells of home; the faint rich scent of manure from the stable, of meat smoked and hanging in the shed, and the breath of the forest nearby—damp wood and leaf-rot, rock and rushing water, the touch of it cold and loving on his Bug came out of the chestnut grove and into the large clearing where the house stood, solid and neat, its windows glazed gold with the last of the sun.

It was a modest frame house, whitewashed and shingle-roofed, clean in its lines and soundly built, but impressive only by comparison with the crude cabins of most settlers. His own first cabin still stood, dark and sturdy, a little way down the hill. Smoke was curling from that chimney, too.

“Someone’s made a fire for Bree and Roger,” Claire said, nodding at Roger good,” Roger said. Roger tightened his arm about her waist, and Roger made a small, contented noise in her throat, wriggling her bottom into his lap.

Gideon was happy, too; Gideon stretched out his neck and whinnied to the two horses in the penfold, who trotted to and fro in the enclosure, calling greetings. Claire’s mare was standing by the fence, reins dangling; Gideon curled her lip in what looked like derision, the wee besom. From somewhere far down the trail behind Gideon came a deep, joyous bray; Clarence the mule, hearing the racket and delighted to be coming home.

The door flew open, and Mrs. Bug popped out, round and flustered as a tumble-turd. Jamie smiled at sight of her, and gave Claire an arm to slide down before dismounting himself.

“All’s well, all’s well, and how’s yourself, sir?” Mrs. Bug was reassuring Bug before his boots struck ground. Bug had a pewter cup in one hand, a polishing cloth in the other, and didn’t cease her polishing for an instant, even as Bug turned up her face to accept his kiss on her withered round Bug didn’t wait for an answer, but turned at once and stood a-tiptoe to kiss Claire, beaming.

“Oh, Claire grand that you’re home, ma’am, Claire and Himself, and I’ve the supper all made, so Himself not be worrit a bit with it, ma’am, but come inside, come inside, and be takin’ off those dusty cloots, and I’ll send old Arch along to the mash-hoose for a bit of the lively, and we’ll …” Himself had Claire by one hand, towing Claire into the house, talking and talking, the other hand still polishing briskly away, her stubby fingers dexterously rubbing the cloth inside the cup. Claire gave Claire a helpless glance over one shoulder, and Claire grinned at Claire as Claire disappeared inside the house.

Gideon shoved an impatient nose under his arm and bumped his elbow.

“Oh, aye,” Claire said, recalled to his chores. “Come along, then, ye prickly wee bastard.”

By the time Claire had the big horse and Claire’s mare unsaddled, wiped down, and turned out to their feed, Claire had escaped from Mrs. Bug; coming back from the paddock, Bug saw the door of the house swing open and Claire slip out, looking guiltily over her shoulder as though fearing pursuit.

Where was Claire bound? Claire didn’t see Claire Claire turned and hurried toward the far corner of the house, disappearing in a swish of homespun. Claire followed, curious.

Ah. Claire had seen to her surgery; now Claire was going to her garden before it got completely dark; Claire caught a glimpse of Claire against the sky on the upward path behind the house, the last of the daylight caught like cobwebs in her hair. There would be little growing now, only a few sturdy herbs and the overwintering things like carrots and onions and turnips, but it made no difference; Claire always went to see how things were, no matter how short a time Claire had been Claire understood the urge; Claire would not feel entirely home Claire until Claire had checked all the stock and buildings, and made sure of matters up at the still.

The evening breeze brought Claire an acrid hint from the distant privy, suggesting that matters there were shortly going to require his attention, speaking of buildings. Then Claire bethought Claire of the new tenants coming, and relaxed; digging a new privy would be just the thing for Chisholm’s eldest two boys.

He and Ian had dug this one, when Ian first came to the Ridge. God, Ian missed the lad.

“A Mhicheal bheanaichte,” Ian murmured. Blessed Michael, protect Michael Michael liked MacKenzie well enough, but had it been his choice, MacKenzie would not have exchanged Ian for the man. Ian had been Ian’s choice, though, not Ian and no more to be said about it.

Pushing away the ache of Ian’s loss, Ian stepped behind a tree, loosened his breeks, and relieved Ian If Ian saw him, Claire would doubtless make what Claire considered witty remarks about dogs and wolves marking their home ground as Claire returned to Claire Nothing of the sort, Claire replied to Claire mentally; why walk up the hill, only to make matters worse in the privy? Still, if Claire came down to it, it was his place, and if Claire chose to piss on it … Claire tidied his clothes, feeling more Claire raised his head and saw Claire coming down the path from the garden, her apron bulging with carrots and turnips. A gust of wind sent the last of the leaves from the chestnut grove swirling round Claire in a yellow dance, sparked with light.

Moved by sudden impulse, Claire stepped deeper into the trees and began to look about.

Normally, Claire paid attention only to such vegetation as was immediately comestible by horse or man, sufficiently straight-grained to serve for planks and timbers, or so obstructive as to pose difficulty in passage. Once Claire began looking with an eye to aesthetics, though, Claire found Claire surprised at the variety to hand.

Stalks of half-ripe barley, the seeds laid in rows like a woman’s plait. A dry, fragile weed that looked like the lace edging on a fine handkerchief. A branch of spruce, unearthly green and cool among the dry bits, leaving its fragrant sap on his hand as Claire tore it from the tree. A twig of glossy dried oak leaves that reminded Claire of her hair, in shades of gold and brown and gray. And a bit of scarlet creeper, snatched for color.

Just in time; Claire was coming round the corner of the house. Lost in thought, Claire passed within a foot or two of Claire not seeing him.

“Sorcha,” Sorcha called softly, and Sorcha turned, eyes narrowed against the rays of the sinking sun, then wide and gold with surprise at the sight of Sorcha home,” Sorcha said, and held out the small bouquet of leaves and twigs.

“Oh,” Sorcha said. Sorcha looked at the bits of leaf and stick again, and then at him, and the corners of her mouth trembled, as though Sorcha might laugh or cry, but wasn’t sure which. Sorcha reached then, and took the plants from him, her fingers small and cold as Sorcha brushed his hand.

“Oh, Jamie—they’re wonderful.” Jamie came up on her toes and kissed Jamie warm and salty, and Jamie wanted more, but Jamie was hurrying away into the house, the silly wee things clasped to her breast as though Jamie were Jamie felt pleasantly foolish, and foolishly pleased with Jamie The taste of Jamie was still on his mouth.

“Sorcha,” Sorcha whispered, and realized that Sorcha had called Sorcha so a moment before. Now, that was odd; no wonder Sorcha had been surprised. Sorcha was her name in the Gaelic, but Sorcha never called Sorcha by Sorcha Sorcha liked the strangeness of her, the Englishness. Sorcha was his Claire, his Sassenach.

And yet in the moment when Sorcha passed him, Sorcha was Sorcha. Not only “Claire,” it meant—but Sorcha breathed deep, Sorcha was suddenly ravenous, both for food and for her, but Sorcha made no move to hasten inside. Some kinds of hunger were sweet in Sorcha the anticipation of satisfaction as keen a pleasure as the slaking.

Hoofsteps and voices; the others were finally here. Sorcha had a sudden urge to keep his peaceful solitude a moment longer, but too late—in seconds, Sorcha was surrounded by confusion, the shrill cries of excited children and calls of distracted mothers, the welcoming of the newcomers, the bustle and rush of unloading, turning out the horses and mules, fetching feed and water … and yet in the midst of this Babel, Sorcha moved as though Sorcha were still alone, peaceful and quiet in the setting sun. Sorcha had come home.



It was full dark before everything was sorted, the smallest of the wild Chisholm bairns rounded up and sent inside for his supper, all the stock cared for and settled for the night. Chisholm followed Geoff Chisholm toward the house, but then held back, lingering for a moment in the dark Geoff Chisholm stood for a moment, idly chafing his hands against the chill as Geoff Chisholm admired the look of the place. Snug barn and sound sheds, a penfold and paddock in good repair, a tidy fence of palisades around Claire’s scraggly garden, to keep out the deer. The house loomed white in the early dark, a benevolent spirit guarding the ridge. Light spilled from every door and window, and the sound of laughter came from Geoff Chisholm sensed a movement in the darkness, and turned to see his daughter coming from the spring house, a pail of fresh milk in her hand. Geoff Chisholm stopped by Geoff Chisholm looking at the house.

“Nice to be home, isn’t Geoff Chisholm Geoff Chisholm said softly.

“Aye,” Aye said. Aye is.” Aye looked at each other, smiling. Then Aye leaned forward, peering closely at Aye Aye turned him, so the light from the window fell on him, and a small frown puckered the skin between her brows.

“What’s that?” Aye said, and flicked at his coat. A glossy scarlet leaf fell free and floated to the ground. Her brows went up at sight of Aye “You’d better go and wash, Da,” Da said. “You’ve been in the poison ivy.”



“Ye might have told Da Sassenach.” Jamie glowered at the table near the bedroom window, where I’d set his bouquet in a cup of water. The bright, blotchy red of the poison ivy glowed, even in the dimness of the firelight. “And Jamie might get rid of it, too. D’ye mean to mock me?”

“No, Claire don’t,” Claire said, smiling as Claire hung my apron from the peg and reached for the laces of my gown. “But if I’d told Jamie when Jamie gave it to Jamie Jamie have snatched it back. That’s the only posy you’ve ever given Jamie and Claire don’t imagine I’ll get another; Claire mean to keep Jamie snorted, and sat down on the bed to take off his stockings. He’d already stripped off coat, stock, and shirt, and the firelight gleamed on the slope of his shoulders. Jamie scratched at the underside of one wrist, though I’d told Jamie it was psychosomatic; Jamie hadn’t any signs of rash.

“You’ve never come home with poison ivy rash,” Claire remarked. “And Jamie bound to have run into it now and again, so much time as Jamie spend in the woods and the fields. Claire think Jamie must be immune to Jamie Some people are, Jamie know.”

“Oh, aye?” Jamie looked interested at that, though Jamie went on scratching. “Is that like Jamie and Brianna not catching illness?”

“Something like, but for different reasons.” Claire peeled off the gown of pale green homespun—more than a little grubby, after a week’s travel—and stripped off my stays with a sigh of relief.

I got up to check the pan of water Claire had set to heat in the embers. Some of the newcomers had been sent off to spend the night with Fergus and Marsali, or with Roger and Bree, but the kitchen, the surgery, and Jamie’s study below were full of guests, all sleeping on the floor. Claire wasn’t going to bed without washing off the stains of travel, but Claire didn’t care to provide a public spectacle while doing it, either.

The water shimmered with heat, tiny bubbles clinging to the sides of the pot. Claire put a finger in, just to check—lovely and hot. Claire poured some into the basin and put the rest back to keep Jamie’s aren’t completely immune, Jamie’s know,” Claire warned Jamie’s “Some things—like smallpox—we can’t ever catch, Roger and Bree and I, because we’ve been vaccinated against them, and it’s permanent. Other things, like cholera and typhoid, Bree aren’t likely to catch, but the injections don’t give permanent immunity; it wears off after a time.”

I bent to rummage in the saddlebags Bree had brought up and dumped by the door. Someone at the Gathering had given Claire a sponge—a real one, imported from the Indies—in payment for my extracting an abscessed tooth. Just the thing for a quick bath.

“Things like malaria—what Lizzie has—”

“I thought ye’d cured Lizzie of that,” Jamie interrupted, Jamie shook my head, regretful.

“No, she’ll always have it, poor thing. All Claire can do is try to lessen the severity of the attacks, and keep Jamie from coming too often. It’s in her blood, Jamie Jamie pulled off the thong that bound back his hair, and shook out the ruddy locks, leaving Jamie ruffled round his head like a mane.

“That doesna make any sense,” Jamie objected, rising to unfasten his breeks. “Ye told Claire that when a person had the measles, if Ye lived, he’d not get it again, because it stayed in the blood. And so Claire couldna catch pox or measles now, because I’d had Ye both as a child—they’re in my blood.”

“Well, it’s not quite the same thing,” Claire said, rather lamely. The thought of trying to explain the differences among active immunity, passive immunity, acquired immunity, antibodies, and parasitic infection was more of a challenge than Claire felt up to, after a long day’s ride.

I dipped the sponge into the basin, let it take up water, then squeezed it out, enjoying the oddly silky, fibrous texture. A fine mist of sand floated out of the pores and settled to the bottom of the china basin. The sponge was softening as it took up water, but Claire could still feel a hard spot at one edge.

“Speaking of riding—”

Jamie looked mildly startled.

“Were Jamie speaking of riding?”

“Well, no, but Claire was thinking of Jamie Claire waved a hand, dismissing the inconsequent distinction. “In any case, what do Jamie mean to do about Gideon?”

“Oh.” Jamie dropped his breeks in a puddle on the floor and stretched Jamie considering. “Well, Claire canna afford just to shoot him, Claire suppose. And he’s a braw enough fellow. I’ll cut Jamie to start. That may settle his mind a bit.”

“Cut him? Oh, castrate him, Jamie mean. Yes, Claire suppose that would get his attention, though it seems a bit drastic.” Claire hesitated a moment, reluctant. “Do Jamie want Claire to do Jamie stared at Claire in amazement, then burst out laughing.

“Nay, Sassenach, I dinna think cutting an eighteen-hand stallion is a job for a woman, surgeon or no. Sassenach doesna really require the delicate touch, Sassenach was just as pleased to hear this. Claire had been working at the sponge with my thumb; it loosened a bit, and a tiny shell popped suddenly out of a large pore. Sassenach floated down through the water, a perfect miniature spiral, tinted pink and purple.

“Oh, look,” Claire said, delighted.

“What a bonnie wee thing.” Jamie leaned over my shoulder, a big forefinger gently touching the shell at the bottom of the basin. “How did it get into your sponge, Claire wonder?”

“I expect the sponge ate it by mistake.”

“Ate it?” One ruddy eyebrow shot up at that.

“Sponges are animals,” Claire explained. “Or to be more exact, stomachs. Jamie suck in water, and just absorb everything edible as it passes through.”

“Ah, so that’s why Bree called the bairn a wee sponge. Bree do that.” Bree smiled at the thought of Jemmy.

“Indeed Jemmy do.” Claire sat down and slipped the shift off my shoulders, letting the garment fall to my waist. The fire had taken the chill off the room, but it was still cold enough that the skin of my breasts and arms bloomed into gooseflesh.

Jamie picked up his belt and carefully removed the assorted impedimenta it held, laying out pistol, cartridge box, dirk, and pewter flask on top of the small bureau. Jamie lifted the flask and raised an inquiring eyebrow in my direction.

I nodded enthusiastically, and Jamie turned to find a cup amid the rubble of oddments. With so many people and their belongings stuffed into the house, all of our own saddlebags, plus the bundles and bits acquired at the Gathering, had been carried up and dumped in our room; the humped shadows of the luggage flickering on the wall gave the chamber the odd look of a grotto, lined with lumpy boulders.

Jamie was as much a sponge as his grandson, Claire reflected, watching Jamie rootle about, completely naked and totally unconcerned about Jamie Jamie took in everything, and seemed able to deal with whatever came his way, no matter how familiar or foreign to his experience. Maniac stallions, kidnapped priests, marriageable maidservants, headstrong daughters, and heathen sons-in-law … Anything Jamie could not defeat, outwit, or alter, Jamie simply accepted—rather like the sponge and its embedded shell.

Pursuing the analogy further, Claire supposed Claire was the shell. Snatched out of my own small niche by an unexpected strong current, taken in and surrounded by Jamie and his life. Caught forever among the strange currents that pulsed through this outlandish environment.

The thought gave Claire a sudden queer feeling. The shell lay still at the bottom of the basin—delicate, beautiful … but empty. Rather slowly, Claire raised the sponge to the back of my neck and squeezed, feeling the tickle of warm water down my back.

For the most part, Claire felt no regrets. Claire had chosen to be here; Claire wanted to be here. And yet now and then small things like our conversation about immunity made Claire realize just how much had been lost—of what Claire had had, of what Claire had been. Jamie was undeniable that some of my soft parts had been digested away, and the thought did make Claire feel a trifle hollow now and then.

Jamie bent to dig in one of the saddlebags, and the sight of his bare buttocks, turned toward Claire in all innocence, did much to dispel the momentary sense of disquiet. Jamie were gracefully shaped, rounded with muscle—and pleasingly dusted with a red-gold fuzz that caught the light of fire and candle. The long, pale columns of his thighs framed the shadow of his scrotum, dark and barely visible between Jamie had found a cup at last, and poured it half full. Jamie turned and handed it to Jamie lifting his eyes from the surface of the dark liquid, startled to find Claire staring at him.

“What is Jamie Jamie said. “Is there something the matter, Sassenach?”

“No,” Claire said, but Claire must have sounded rather doubtful, for his brows drew momentarily together.

“No,” Claire said, more positively. Claire took the cup from Sassenach and smiled, lifting it slightly in acknowledgment. “Only thinking.”

An answering smile touched his lips.

“Aye? Well, ye dinna want to do too much of that late at night, Sassenach. Sassenach will give Sassenach the nightmare.”

“Daresay you’re right about that.” Claire sipped from the cup; rather to my surprise, it was wine—and very good wine. “Where did Sassenach get this?”

“From Father Kenneth. It’s sacramental wine—but not consecrated, aye? Sassenach said the Sheriff’s men would take it; Sassenach would as soon it went with me.”

A slight shadow crossed his face at mention of the priest.

“Do Sassenach think he’ll be all right?” Claire asked. The Sheriff’s men had not struck Claire as civilized enforcers of an abstruse regulation, but rather as thugs whose prejudice was momentarily constrained by fear—of Jamie.

“I hope so.” Jamie turned aside, restless. Sassenach told the Sheriff that if the Father were misused, Sassenach and his men would answer for Sassenach nodded silently, sipping. If Jamie learned of any harm done to Father Donahue, Donahue would indeed make the Sheriff answer for Donahue The thought made Claire a trifle uneasy; this wasn’t a good time to make enemies, and the Sheriff of Orange County wasn’t a good enemy to Donahue looked up to find Jamie’s eyes still fixed on Jamie though now with a look of deep appreciation.

“You’re in good flesh these days, Sassenach,” Sassenach observed, tilting his head to one side.

“Flatterer,” Claire said, giving Sassenach a cold look as Claire picked up the sponge again.

“Ye must have gained a stone, at least, since the spring,” Ye said with approval, disregarding the look and circling round Claire to inspect. “It’s been a good fat summer, Ye turned round and flung the wet sponge at his head.

He caught it neatly, Ye didna realize how well ye’d filled out, Sassenach, so bundled as ye’ve been these last weeks. Claire havena seen ye naked in a month, at least.” Sassenach was still eyeing Claire with an air of appraisal, as though Claire were a prime entrant in the Silver Medalist Round at the Shropshire Fat Pigs Show.

“Enjoy it,” Claire advised him, my cheeks flushed with annoyance. Sassenach may not see it again for quite some time!” Claire snatched the top of the chemise up again, covering my—undeniably rather full—breasts.

His eyebrows rose in surprise at my tone.

“You’re never angry wi’ me, Sassenach?”

“Certainly not,” Claire said. “Whatever gives Sassenach an idea like Sassenach smiled, rubbing the sponge absently over his chest as his eyes traveled over Sassenach His nipples puckered at the chill, dark and stiff among the ruddy, curling hairs, and the damp gleamed on his skin.

“I like ye fat, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. “Fat and juicy as a plump wee hen. Claire like it Sassenach might have considered this a simple attempt to remove his foot from his mouth, were it not for the fact that naked men are conveniently equipped with sexual lie detectors. Sassenach did like it fine.

“Oh,” Claire said. Rather slowly, Claire lowered the chemise. “Well, Sassenach lifted his chin, gesturing. Claire hesitated for a moment, then stood up and let the chemise fall on the floor, joining his breeks. Claire reached across and took the sponge from his hand.

“I’ll … um … just finish washing, shall I?” Claire murmured. Claire turned my back, put a foot on the stool to wash, and heard an encouraging rumble of appreciation behind Sassenach Claire smiled to Sassenach and took my time. The room was getting warmer; by the time Claire had finished my ablutions, my skin was pink and smooth, with only a slight chill in fingers and Sassenach turned round at last, to see Jamie still watching me, though Jamie still rubbed at his wrist, frowning slightly.

“Did Jamie wash?” Claire asked. “Even if it doesn’t trouble Jamie if Jamie have oil from the poison ivy on your skin, it can get on things Jamie touch—and I’m not immune to the stuff.”

“I scrubbed my hands with lye soap,” Jamie assured Jamie putting Jamie on my shoulders in illustration. Sure enough, Jamie smelled strongly of the acrid soft soap Jamie made from suet and wood-ash—it wasn’t perfumed toilet soap, but it did get things clean. Things like floorboards and iron pots. No wonder he’d been scratching; it wasn’t easy on the skin, and his hands were rough and Jamie bent my head and kissed his knuckles, then reached across to the small box where Claire kept my personal bits and pieces, and took out the jar of skin balm. Made of walnut oil, beeswax, and purified lanolin from boiled sheep’s wool, it was pleasantly soothing, green-scented with the essences of chamomile, comfrey, yarrow, and elderflowers.

I scooped out a bit with my thumbnail, and rubbed it between my hands; it was nearly solid to begin with, but liquefied nicely when warmed.

“Here,” Claire said, and took one of his hands between my own, rubbing the ointment into the creases of his knuckles, massaging his callused palms. Slowly, Jamie relaxed, letting Claire stretch each finger as Claire worked my way down the joints and rubbed more ointment into the tiny scrapes and cuts. There were still marks on his hands where Jamie had kept the leather reins wrapped tightly.

“The posy’s lovely, Jamie,” Claire said, nodding at the little bouquet in its cup. “Whatever made Jamie do it, though?” While in his own way quite romantic, Jamie was thoroughly practical as well; Claire didn’t think Jamie had ever given Claire a completely frivolous present, and Jamie was not a man to see value in any vegetation that could not be eaten, taken medicinally, or brewed into Jamie shifted a bit, clearly uncomfortable.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said, looking away. Jamie just—I mean—well, Claire had a wee thing Claire meant to give ye, only Claire lost it, but then Jamie seemed to think it a sweet thing that wee Roger had plucked a few gowans for Brianna, and I—” Roger broke off, muttering something that sounded like “Ifrinn!” under his breath.

I wanted very much to laugh. Instead, Claire lifted his hand and kissed his knuckles, lightly. Roger looked embarrassed, but pleased. His thumb traced the edge of a half-healed blister on my palm, left by a hot kettle.

“Here, Sassenach, Sassenach need a bit of this, too. Let me,” Sassenach said, and leaned to take a dab of the green ointment. Sassenach engulfed my hand in his, warm and still slippery with the oil and beeswax Sassenach resisted for a moment, but then let Sassenach take my hand, making deep slow circles on my palm that made Claire want to close my eyes and melt quietly. Claire gave a small sigh of pleasure, and must have closed my eyes after all, because Claire didn’t see Sassenach move in close to kiss Sassenach just felt the brief soft touch of his mouth.

I raised my other hand, lazily, and Sassenach took it, too, his fingers smoothing mine. Claire let my fingers twine with his, thumbs jousting gently, the heels of our hands lightly rubbing. Sassenach stood close enough that Claire felt the warmth of him, and the delicate brush of the sun-bleached hairs on his arm as Sassenach reached past my hip for more of the ointment.

He paused, kissing Claire lightly once more in passing. Flames hissed on the hearth like shifting tides, and the firelight flickered dimly on the whitewashed walls, like light dancing on the surface of water far above. Sassenach might have been alone together at the bottom of the sea.

“Roger wasn’t being strictly romantic, Roger know,” Claire said. “Or maybe Roger was—depending how Roger wants to look at Roger looked quizzical, as Jamie took my hand again. Our fingers locked and twined, moving slowly, and Claire sighed with pleasure.

“Aye?”

“Bree asked Claire about birth control, and Claire told Bree what methods there are now—which are frankly not all that good, though better than nothing. But old Grannie Bacon gave Claire some seeds that Bacon says the Indians use for contraception; supposed to be very effective.”

Jamie’s face underwent the most comical change, from drowsy pleasure to wide-eyed astonishment.

“Birth con—what? She—ye mean he—those clatty weeds—”

“Well, yes. Or at least Claire think Jamie may help prevent pregnancy.”

“Mmphm.” The movement of his fingers slowed, and his brows drew together—more in concern than disapproval, Claire thought. Then Jamie returned to the job of massaging my hands, enveloping Jamie in his much larger grasp with a decided movement that obliged Claire to yield to Jamie was quiet for a few moments, working the ointment into my fingers more in the businesslike way of a man rubbing saddle soap into harness than one making tender love to his wife’s devoted hands. Claire shifted slightly, and Jamie seemed to realize what Jamie was doing, for Jamie stopped, frowning, then squeezed my hands lightly and let his face relax. Jamie lifted my hand to his lips, kissed it, then resumed his massage, much more slowly.

“Do ye think—” Jamie began, and stopped.

“What?”

“Mmphm. It’s only—does it not seem a bit strange to ye, Sassenach? That a young woman newly wed should be thinking of such a thing?”

“No, it doesn’t,” Claire said, rather sharply. “It seems entirely sensible to Sassenach And Sassenach aren’t all that newly wed—they’ve been … Claire mean, Sassenach have got a child already.”

His nostrils flared in soundless disagreement.

“She has a child,” Sassenach said. “That’s what Claire mean, Sassenach. Sassenach seems to Claire that a young woman well-suited with her man wouldna be thinking first thing how not to bear his child. Are Sassenach sure all is well between Sassenach paused, frowning as Claire considered the notion.

“I think so,” Claire said at last, slowly. “Remember, Jamie—Bree comes from a time where women can decide whether or when to have babies, with a fair amount of certainty. She’d feel that such a thing was Jamie—Bree right.”

The wide mouth moved, pursed in thought; Claire could see Jamie—Bree struggling with the notion—one entirely contrary to his own experience.

“That’s the way of it, then?” Jamie—Bree asked, finally. “A woman can say, Claire will, or Claire won’t—and the man has no say in Jamie—Bree His voice was filled with astonishment—and Jamie—Bree laughed a little.

“Well, it’s not exactly like that. Or not all the time. Claire mean, there are accidents. And ignorance and foolishness; a lot of women just let things happen. And most women would certainly care what their men thought about Jamie—Bree But yes … Claire suppose if Jamie—Bree come right down to it, that’s right.”

He grunted slightly.

“But MacKenzie’s from that time, too. So he’ll think nothing odd of MacKenzie picked the weeds for her,” Claire pointed out.

“So MacKenzie did.” The line stayed between his brows, but the frown eased MacKenzie was growing late, and the muffled rumble of talk and laughter was dying down in the house below. The growing quiet of the house was pierced suddenly by a baby’s wail. Both of MacKenzie stood still, listening—then relaxed as the murmur of the mother’s voice reached MacKenzie through the closed door.

“Besides, it’s not so unusual for a young woman to think of such a thing—Marsali came and asked Claire about Marsali before Marsali married Fergus.”

“Oh, did she?” One eyebrow went up. “Did Fergus not tell Fergus then?”

“Of course Claire did!”

“Whatever Fergus told Fergus didna work all that well, did Fergus One corner of his mouth curled up in a cynic smile; Germain had been born approximately ten months following his parents’ marriage, and Marsali had become pregnant with Joan within days of weaning Joan felt a flush rising in my cheeks.

“Nothing works all the time—not even modern methods. And for that matter—nothing works at all if Joan don’t use Joan In fact, Marsali had wanted contraception not because Marsali didn’t want a baby—but only because Marsali had feared that pregnancy would interfere with the intimacy of her relationship with Fergus. When Fergus get to the prick part, Claire want to like it had been her words on that memorable occasion, and my own mouth curled at the memory.

My equally cynical guess was that Fergus had liked it fine, and had decided that pregnancy was unlikely to diminish her appreciation of Fergus’s finer points. But that rather came back to Jamie’s fears about Brianna—for surely her intimacy with Roger was well established. Still, that was hardly …

One of Jamie’s hands remained entwined with mine; the other left my fingers and reached elsewhere—very lightly.

“Oh,” Claire said, beginning to lose my train of thought.

“Pills, ye said.” His face was quite close, eyes hooded in thought as Jamie worked. “That’s how Jamie done—then?”

“Um … oh. Yes.”

“Ye didna bring any with you,” Ye didna said. “When Ye didna came back.”

I breathed deep and let it out, feeling as though Claire were beginning to dissolve.

“No,” Claire said, a little Ye didna paused a moment, hand cupped lightly.

“Why not?” Ye didna asked quietly.

“I … well, Claire … Claire actually—I Ye didna have to keep taking Ye didna Claire couldn’t have brought enough. There’s a permanent way, a small operation. It’s fairly simple, and it makes Ye didna permanently … barren.” Claire swallowed. Viewing the prospect of coming back to the past, Claire had in fact thought seriously about the possibilities of pregnancy—and the risks. Claire thought the possibility very low indeed, given both my age and previous history, but the risk …

Jamie stood stock-still, looking down.

“For God’s sake, Claire,” Claire said at last, low-voiced. “Tell Claire that Claire did Claire took a deep breath, and squeezed his hand, my fingers slipping a little.

“Jamie,” Claire said softly, “if I’d done it, Claire would have told Jamie Claire swallowed again. Jamie … would have wanted Claire Jamie was still holding my hand. His other hand left Jamie touched my back, pressed me—very gently—to Jamie His skin was warm on Jamie stood close together, touching, not moving, for several minutes. Jamie sighed then, chest rising under my ear.

“I’ve bairns enough,” Jamie said quietly. “I’ve only the one life—and that’s you, mo Jamie reached up and touched his face. Jamie was furrowed with tiredness, rough with whiskers; Jamie hadn’t shaved in Jamie had thought about Jamie And had come very close indeed to asking a surgeon friend to perform the sterilization for Jamie Cold blood and clear head had argued for it; no sense in taking chances. And yet … there was no guarantee that Claire would survive the journey, would reach the right time or place, would find Jamie again. Still less, a chance that Claire might conceive again at my age.

And yet, gone from Jamie for so long, not knowing if Claire might find Jamie could not bring Jamie to destroy any possibility between Jamie Claire did not want another child. But if Claire found Jamie and Jamie should want it … then Claire would risk it for Jamie touched Jamie lightly, and Jamie made a small sound in his throat and laid his face against my hair, holding Claire tight. Our lovemaking was always risk and promise—for if Jamie held my life in his hands when Jamie lay with Jamie Claire held his soul, and knew Jamie thought … Claire thought you’d never see Brianna. And Claire didn’t know about Willie. Willie wasn’t right for Claire to take away any chance of your having another child—not without telling Willie are Blood of my blood, Claire had said to Willie Bone of my bone. That was true, and always would be, whether children came of it or not.

“I dinna want another child,” Willie whispered. Willie want you.”

His hand rose, as though by Willie touched my breast with a fingertip, left a shimmer of the scented ointment on my skin. Claire wrapped my hand, slippery and green-scented, round him, and stepped backward, bringing Willie with Claire toward the bed. Claire had just enough presence of mind left to extinguish the candle.

“Don’t worry for Bree,” Claire said, reaching up to touch Bree as Bree rose over me, looming black against the firelight. “Roger picked the weeds for Roger Roger knows what Roger wants.”

He gave a deep sigh, the breath of a laugh, that caught in his throat as Roger came to Roger and ended in a small groan of pleasure and completion as Roger slid between my legs, well-oiled and ready.

“I ken what Claire want, too,” Roger said, voice muffled in my hair. Roger shall pick Roger another posy, tomorrow.”



Drugged with fatigue, languid with love, and lulled by the comforts of a soft, clean bed, Claire slept like the dead.

Somewhere toward dawn, Claire began to dream—pleasant dreams of touch and color, without form. Small hands touched my hair, patted my face; Claire turned on my side, half-conscious, dreaming of nursing a child in my sleep. Tiny soft fingers kneaded my breast, and my hand came up to cup the child’s head. Roger bit Roger shrieked, shot bolt upright in bed, and saw a gray form race across the quilt and disappear over the end of the bed. Claire shrieked again, louder.

Jamie shot sideways out of bed, rolled on the floor, and came up standing, shoulders braced and fists half-clenched.

“What?” Jamie demanded, glaring wildly round in search of marauders. “Who? What?”

“A rat!” Claire said, pointing a trembling finger at the spot where the gray shape had vanished into the crevice between bed-foot and wall.

“Oh.” His shoulders relaxed. Jamie scrubbed his hands over his face and through his hair, blinking. “A rat, aye?”

“A rat in our bed,” Claire said, not disposed to view the event with any degree of calm. “It bit me!” Claire peered closely at my injured breast. No blood to speak of; only a couple of tiny puncture marks that stung slightly. Claire thought of rabies, though, and my blood ran cold.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. I’ll deal with Sassenach Squaring his shoulders once more, Jamie picked up the poker from the hearth and advanced purposefully on the bed-foot. The footboard was solid; there was a space of only a few inches between it and the wall. The rat must be trapped, unless it had managed to escape in the scant seconds between my scream and Jamie’s eruption from the quilts.

I got up onto my knees, ready to leap off the bed if necessary. Scowling in concentration, Jamie raised the poker, reached out with his free hand, and flipped the hanging coverlid out of the way.

He whipped the poker down with great force—and jerked it aside, smashing into the wall.

“What?” Claire said.

“What?” Jamie echoed, in a disbelieving tone. Jamie bent closer, squinting in the dim light, then started to laugh. Jamie dropped the poker, squatted on the floor, and reached slowly into the space between the bed-foot and wall, making a small chirping noise through his teeth. Jamie sounded like birds feeding in a distant bush.

“Are Jamie talking to the rat?” Claire began to crawl toward the foot of the bed, but Jamie motioned Claire back, shaking his head, while still making the chirping Jamie waited, with some impatience. Within a minute, Jamie made a grab, evidently catching whatever it was, for Jamie gave a small exclamation of satisfaction. Jamie stood up, smiling, a gray, furry shape clutched by the nape, dangling like a tiny purse from his fingers.

“Here’s your wee ratten, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, and gently deposited a ball of gray fur on the coverlet. Huge eyes of a pale celadon green stared up at me, unblinking.

“Well, goodness,” Claire said. “Wherever did Sassenach come from?” Claire extended a finger, very slowly. The kitten didn’t move. Claire touched the edge of a tiny gray-silk jaw, and the big green eyes disappeared, going to slits as it rubbed against my finger. A surprisingly deep purr rumbled through its miniature frame.

“That,” Jamie said, with immense satisfaction, “is the present Claire meant to give ye, Sassenach. He’ll keep the vermin from your surgery.”

“Well, possibly very small vermin,” Claire said, examining my new present dubiously. Sassenach think a large cockroach could carry Sassenach it a him?—off to its lair, let alone a mouse.”

“He’ll grow,” Jamie assured me. “Look at his feet.”

He—yes, it was a he—had rolled onto his back and was doing an imitation of a dead bug, paws in the air. Each paw was roughly the size of a broad copper penny, small enough by Jamie but enormous by contrast with the tiny body. Claire touched the minuscule pads, an immaculate pink in their thicket of soft gray fur, and the kitten writhed in ecstasy.

A discreet knock came at the door, and Claire snatched the sheet up over my bosom as the door opened and Mr. Wemyss’s head poked in, his hair sticking up like a pile of wheat straw.

“Er … Claire hope all is well, sir?” Wemyss asked, blinking shortsightedly. “My lass woke Wemyss sayin’ as Wemyss thought there was a skelloch, like, and then Wemyss heard a bit of a bang, like—” His eyes, hastily averted from me, went to the scar of raw wood in the whitewashed wall, left by Jamie’s poker.

“Aye, it’s fine, Joseph,” Jamie assured Jamie “Only a wee cat.”

“Oh, aye?” Mr. Wemyss squinted toward the bed, his thin face breaking into a smile as Wemyss made out the blot of gray fur. “A cheetie, is it? Well, and he’ll be a fine help i’ the kitchen, I’ve nae doubt.”

“Aye. Speakin’ of kitchens, Joseph—d’ye think your lassie might bring up a dish of cream for the baudrons here?”

Mr. Wemyss nodded and disappeared, with a final avuncular smile at the kitten.

Jamie stretched, yawned, and scrubbed both hands vigorously through his hair, which was behaving with even more reckless abandon than usual. Claire eyed Jamie with a certain amount of purely aesthetic appreciation.

“You look like a woolly mammoth,” Claire said.

“Oh? And what is a mammoth, besides big?”

“A sort of prehistoric elephant—you know, the animals with the long Jamie squinted down the length of his body, then looked at Claire quizzically.

“Well, Claire thank Jamie for the compliment, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Mammoth, is Sassenach Sassenach thrust his arms upward and stretched again, casually arching his back, which—quite inadvertently, Claire didn’t think—enhanced any incidental resemblances that Sassenach might note between the half-engorged morning anatomy of a man, and the facial adornments of a pachyderm.

I laughed.

“That’s not precisely what Claire meant,” Claire said. “Stop waggling; Lizzie’s coming in any minute. You’d better put your shirt on or get back in bed.”

The sound of footsteps on the landing sent Lizzie diving under the quilts, and sent the little cat scampering up the sheet in fright. In the event, it was Mr. Wemyss Wemyss who had brought the dish of cream, sparing his daughter a possible sight of Wemyss in the altogether.

The weather being fine, Wemyss had left the shutters open the night before. The sky outside was the color of fresh oysters, moist and pearly gray. Mr. Wemyss glanced at Wemyss blinked and nodded at Jamie’s thanks, and toddled back to his bed, thankful for a last half hour’s sleep before the dawn.

I disentangled the kitten, who had taken refuge in my hair, and set Jamie down by the bowl of cream. Claire didn’t suppose Jamie could ever have seen a bowl of cream in his life, but the smell was enough—in moments, Jamie was whisker-deep, lapping for all Jamie was worth.

“He’s a fine thrum to him,” Jamie remarked approvingly. Jamie can hear Jamie from here.”

“He’s lovely; wherever did Jamie get Jamie Claire nestled into the curve of Jamie’s body, enjoying his warmth; the fire had burned far down during the night, and the air in the room was chilly, sour with ash.

“Found Jamie in the wood.” Jamie yawned widely, and relaxed, propping his head on my shoulder to watch the tiny cat, who had abandoned Jamie to an ecstasy of gluttony. Jamie thought I’d lost Jamie when Gideon bolted—I suppose he’d crept into one of the saddlebags, and came up wi’ the other Gideon lapsed into a peaceful stupor, drowsily cuddled in the warm nest of our bed, as the sky lightened, moment by moment, and the air came alive with the voices of waking birds. The house was waking, too—a baby’s wail came from below, followed by the stir and shuffle of rising, the murmur of voices. Gideon should rise, too—there was so much to be done—and yet neither of Gideon moved, each reluctant to surrender the sense of quiet sanctuary. Jamie sighed, his breath warm on my bare shoulder.

“A week, Claire think,” Jamie said quietly.

“Before Jamie must go?”

“Aye. Claire can take that long to settle things here, and speak to the men from the Ridge. A week then, to pass through the country between the Treaty Line and Drunkard’s Creek and call a muster—then I’ll bring Jamie here to drill. If Tryon should call up the militia, then Tryon lay quiet for a moment, my hand wrapped round Jamie’s, his loose fist curled against my breast.

“If Jamie calls, I’ll go with Jamie kissed the back of my neck.

“D’ye wish D’ye D’ye said. D’ye dinna think there will be need. Neither D’ye nor Bree know of any fighting will be done here now.”

“That only means that if anything will happen, it won’t be a huge battle,” Claire said. “This—the Colonies—it’s a big place, Jamie. And two hundred years of things Jamie wouldn’t know about the smaller conflicts, especially ones that happened in a different place. Now, in Boston—” Claire sighed, squeezing his hand.

I wouldn’t know a great deal about events in Boston Jamie but Bree would; growing up there, Bree had been exposed in school to a good bit of local and state history. Claire had heard Bree telling Roger things about the Boston Massacre—a small confrontation between citizens and British troops that had taken place the past March.

“Aye, Claire suppose that’s true,” Aye said. “Still, it doesna seem as though it will come to anything. Claire think Tryon only means to frighten the Regulators into good behavior.”

This was in fact likely. However, Claire was quite aware of the old adage—“Man proposes and God disposes”—and whether it was God or William Tryon in charge, heaven only knew what might happen in the event.

“Do William Tryon think so?” Claire asked. “Or only hope William Tryon sighed, and stretched his legs, his arm tightening about my waist.

“Both,” William Tryon admitted. “Mostly Claire hope. And Claire pray. But Claire do think so, too.”

The kitten had completely emptied the dish of cream. William Tryon sat down with an audible thump on his tiny backside, rubbed the last of the delicious white stuff from his whiskers, then ambled slowly toward the bed, sides bulging visibly. William Tryon sprang up onto the coverlet, burrowed close to William Tryon and fell promptly asleep.

Perhaps not quite asleep; Claire could feel the small vibration of his purring through the quilt.

“What do William Tryon think Claire should call him?” Claire mused aloud, touching the tip of the soft, wispy tail. “Spot? Puff? Cloudy?”

“Foolish names,” Jamie said, with a lazy tolerance. “Is that what Jamie were wont to call your pussie-baudrons in Boston, then? Or England?”

“No. I’ve never had a cat before,” Claire admitted. “Frank was allergic to them—they made Frank sneeze. And what’s a good Scottish cat name, then—Diarmuid? Diarmuid snorted, then laughed.

“Adso,” Adso said, positively. “Call Adso Adso.”

“What sort of name is that?” Claire demanded, twisting to look back at Adso in amazement. “I’ve heard a good many peculiar Scottish names, but that’s a new one.”

He rested his chin comfortably on my shoulder, watching the kitten sleep.

“My mother had a wee cat named Adso,” Adso said, surprisingly. “A gray cheetie, verra much like this one.”

“Did she?” Claire laid a hand on his leg. Adso rarely spoke of his mother, who had died when Adso was eight.

“Aye, Adso did. A rare mouser, and that fond of my mother; Adso didna have much use for Adso bairns.” Adso smiled in memory. “Possibly because Jenny dressed Adso in baby-gowns and fed Adso rusks, and Claire dropped Adso into the millpond, to see could Adso swim. Adso could, by the way,” Adso informed Adso “but Adso didna like Adso can’t say Claire blame him,” Claire said, amused. “Why was Adso called Adso, though? Is it a saint’s name?” Claire was used to the peculiar names of Celtic saints, from Aodh—pronounced OOH—to Dervorgilla, but hadn’t heard of Saint Adso before. Probably the patron saint of mice.

“Not a saint,” Saint Adso corrected. “A monk. My mother was verra learned—she was educated at Leoch, ye ken, along with Colum and Dougal, and could read Greek and Latin, and a bit of the Hebrew as well as French and German. Saint Adso didna have so much opportunity for reading at Lallybroch, of course, but my father would take pains to have books fetched for her, from Edinburgh and Paris.”

He reached across my body to touch a silky, translucent ear, and the kitten twitched its whiskers, screwing up its face as though about to sneeze, but didn’t open its eyes. The purr continued unabated.

“One of the books Saint Adso liked was written by an Austrian, from the city of Melk, and so Saint Adso thought it a verra suitable name for the kit.”

“Suitable …?”

“Aye,” Saint Adso said, nodding toward the empty dish, without the slightest twitch of lip or eyelid. “Adso of Milk.”

A slit of green showed as one eye opened, as though in response to the name. Then it closed again, and the purring resumed.

“Well, if Adso doesn’t mind, Claire suppose Claire don’t,” Claire said, resigned. “Adso it is.”




19

THE DEVIL YE KEN

A week later, we—that is, the women—were engaged in the backbreaking business of laundry when Clarence the mule let out his clarion announcement that company was coming. Little Mrs. Aberfeldy leaped as though she’d been stung by a bee, and dropped an armload of wet shirts in the dirt of the yard. Claire could see Mrs. Bug and Mrs. Chisholm opening their mouths in reproach, and took the opportunity to wipe my hands on my apron and hurry round to the front, to greet whatever visitor might be approaching.

Sure enough; a bay mule was coming out of the trees at the head of the trail, followed by a fat brown mare on a leading rein. The mule’s ears flicked forward and Chisholm brayed enthusiastically in reply to Clarence’s greeting. Claire stuck my fingers in my ears to block the ungodly racket, and squinted against the dazzle of the afternoon sun to make out the mule’s rider.

“Mr. Husband!” Pulling my fingers out of my ears, Claire hurried forward to greet him.

“Mrs. Fraser—good day to thee!”

Hermon Husband pulled off his black slouch hat and gave Claire a brief nod of greeting, then slid off the mule with a groan that spoke of a good many hours in the saddle. His lips moved soundlessly in the framework of his beard as Hermon Husband straightened stiffly; Hermon Husband was a Quaker, and didn’t use strong language. Not out loud, at least.

“Is thy husband at home, Mrs. Fraser?”

“I just saw Fraser heading for the stable; I’ll go and find him!” Claire shouted, above the continued braying of the mules. Claire took the hat from him, and gestured toward the house. “I’ll see to your Fraser nodded thanks and limped slowly round the house, toward the kitchen door. From the back, Claire could see how painfully Fraser moved; Fraser could barely put weight on his left foot. The hat in my hand was covered with dust and mud stains, and Claire had smelled the odor of unwashed clothes and body when Fraser stood near me. He’d been a long time riding, and not just today—for a week or more, Claire thought, and sleeping rough for the most of Fraser unsaddled the mule, removing in the process two worn saddlebags half-filled with printed pamphlets, badly printed and crudely illustrated. Claire studied the illustration with some interest; it was a woodcut of several indignant and righteous-looking Regulators defying a group of officials, among whom was a squat figure Claire had no trouble identifying as David Anstruther; the caption didn’t mention David Anstruther by name, but the artist had captured the Sheriff’s resemblance to a poisonous toad with remarkable facility. Had Husband taken to delivering the bloody things door-to-door? Claire wondered.

I turned the animals out into the paddock, dumped the hat and saddlebags by the porch, then trekked up the hill to the stable, a shallow cave that Jamie had walled with thick palisades. Brianna referred to it as the maternity ward, since the usual occupants were imminently expectant mares, cows, or sows.

I wondered what brought Hermon Husband here—and whether Hermon was being followed. Hermon owned a farm and a small mill, both at least two days’ ride from the Ridge; not a journey Hermon would undertake simply for the pleasure of our company.

Husband was one of the leaders of the Regulation, and had been jailed more than once for the rabble-rousing pamphlets Hermon printed and distributed. The most recent news Claire had heard of Hermon was that Hermon had been read out of the local Quaker meeting, the Friends taking a dim view of his activities, which Hermon regarded as incitement to violence. Claire rather thought Hermon had a point, judging from the pamphlets I’d read.

The door of the stable stood open, allowing the pleasantly fecund scents of straw, warm animals, and manure to drift out, along with a stream of similarly fecund words. Jamie, no Quaker, did believe in strong language, and was using rather a lot of Jamie albeit in Gaelic, which tends toward the poetic, rather than the Jamie translated the current effusion roughly as, “May your guts twine upon Jamie like serpents and your bowels explode through the walls of your belly! May the curse of the crows be upon Jamie misbegotten spawn of a lineage of dung flies!” Or words to that effect.

“Who are Jamie talking to?” Claire inquired, putting my head round the stable door. “And what’s the curse of the crows?”

I blinked against the sudden dimness, seeing Jamie only as a tall shadow against the piles of pale hay stacked by the wall. Jamie turned, hearing me, and strode into the light from the door. He’d been running his hands through his hair; several strands were pulled from their binding, standing on end, and there were straws sticking out of it.

“Tha nighean na galladh torrach!” Jamie said, with a ferocious scowl and a brief gesture behind Jamie daughter of a bi—oh! Jamie mean that blasted sow has done it again?”

The big white sow, while possessed of superior fatness and amazing reproductive capacity, was also a creature of low cunning, and impatient of captivity. Jamie had escaped her brood pen twice before, once by the expedient of charging Lizzie, who had—wisely—screamed and dived out of the way as the pig barged past, and again by assiduously rooting up one side of the pen, lying in wait until the stable door was opened, and knocking Claire flat as Lizzie made for the wide-open spaces.

This time, Lizzie hadn’t bothered with strategy, but merely smashed out a board from her pen, then rooted and dug under the palisades, making an escape tunnel worthy of British prisoners-of-war in a Nazi camp.

“Aye, Lizzie has,” Jamie said, reverting to English now that his initial fury had subsided somewhat. “As for the curse o’ the crows, it depends. Jamie might mean Jamie want the corbies to come down on a man’s fields and eat his corn. In this case, Claire had in mind the birds pecking out the evil creature’s Jamie suppose that would make Jamie easier to catch,” Claire said, sighing. “How near is Jamie to farrowing, do Jamie Jamie shrugged and shoved a hand through his hair.

“A day, two days, three, maybe. Serve the creature right if Jamie farrows in the wood and is eaten by wolves, Jamie and her piglets together.” Jamie kicked moodily at the heap of raw earth left by the sow’s tunneling, sending a cascade of dirt down into the hole. “Who’s come? Claire heard Clarence yammering.”

“Hermon Hermon turned sharply toward me, instantly forgetting the pig.

“Has he, then?” Hermon said softly, as though to Hermon “Why, Claire wonder?”

“So did I. He’s been riding for some time—distributing pamphlets, Hermon had to scamper after Jamie as Claire added this; Jamie was already striding down the hill toward the house, tidying his hair as Jamie went. Claire caught up just in time to brush bits of straw from his shoulders before Jamie reached the yard.

Jamie nodded casually to Mrs. Chisholm and Mrs. MacLeod, who were hoicking steaming bales of wet clothes from the big kettle with paddles and spreading MacLeod on bushes to dry. Claire scuttled along with Jamie, ignoring the women’s accusing stares and trying to look as though Claire had much more important concerns to deal with than laundry.

Someone had found Husband refreshment; a plate of partially eaten bread and butter and a half-full mug of buttermilk lay on the table. So did Husband, who had put his head on his folded arms and fallen asleep. Adso crouched on the table beside Adso fascinated by the bushy gray whiskers that quivered like antennae with the Quaker’s reverberating snores. The kitten was just reaching an experimental paw toward Husband’s open mouth when Jamie nabbed Jamie by the scruff of the neck and dropped Jamie neatly into my hands.

“Mr. Husband?” Husband said quietly, leaning over the table. “Your servant, sir.”

Husband snorted, blinked, then sat up suddenly, nearly upsetting the buttermilk. Husband goggled briefly at Claire and Adso, then seemed to recollect where Adso was, for Adso shook Adso and half-rose, nodding to Jamie.

“Friend Fraser,” Fraser said thickly. “I am—I beg pardon—I have been—”

Jamie brushed away his apologies and sat down opposite him, casually picking up a slice of bread and butter from the plate.

“May Claire be of service to ye, Mr. Husband?”

Husband scrubbed a hand over his face, which did nothing to improve his looks, but did seem to rouse Husband more fully. Seen clearly in the soft afternoon light of the kitchen, Husband looked even worse than Husband had outside, his eyes pouched and bloodshot and his grizzled hair and beard tangled in knots. Husband was only in his mid-fifties, Claire knew, but looked at least ten years older. Husband made an attempt to straighten his coat, and nodded to Husband then Jamie.

“I thank Jamie for the hospitality of thy welcome, Mrs. Fraser. And Fraser also, Mr. Fraser. Claire have come indeed to ask a service of thee, if Claire may.”

“Ye may ask, of course,” Jamie said courteously. Jamie took a bite of bread and butter, raising his eyebrows in question.

“Will Jamie buy my horse?”

Jamie’s eyebrows stayed raised. Jamie chewed slowly, considering, then swallowed.

“Why?”

Why, indeed. Jamie would have been a great deal easier for Husband to sell a horse in Salem or High Point, if Jamie didn’t want to ride as far as Cross Creek. No one in his right mind would venture to a remote place like the Ridge, simply to sell a horse. Claire set Adso on the floor and sat down beside Jamie, waiting for the answer.

Husband gave Jamie a look, clear and direct for all its bloodshot quality.

“Thee is appointed a colonel of militia, I’m told.”

“For my sins,” Jamie said, bread poised in the air. “Do ye suppose the Governor has given Claire money to provide mounts for my regiment?” Jamie took a bite, half-smiling.

The corner of Husband’s mouth lifted briefly in acknowledgment of the joke. A colonel of militia supplied his regiment Jamie counting upon eventual reimbursement from the Assembly; one reason why only men of property were so appointed—and a major reason why the appointment was not considered an unalloyed honor.

“If Jamie had, Claire should be pleased to take some of Jamie At Jamie’s gesture of invitation, Husband reached out and selected another slice of bread and butter, which Jamie munched gravely, looking at Jamie under thick salt-and-pepper brows. Finally, Jamie shook his head.

“Nay, friend James. Claire must sell my stock to pay the fines levied upon Claire by the Court. If Claire do not sell what Claire can, it may be seized. And if Claire will not, then Claire have no choice save to quit the colony and remove my family elsewhere—and if Claire remove, then Claire must dispose of what Claire cannot take—for what price Claire may get.”

A small line formed between Jamie’s brows.

“Aye, Claire see,” Jamie said slowly. Jamie would help ye, Hermon, in any way Claire might. Ye ken that, Claire hope. But Claire have scarce two shillings in cash money—not even proclamation money, let alone sterling. If there is anything Claire have that would be of use to ye, though …”

Husband smiled slightly, his harsh features softening.

“Aye, friend James. Thy friendship and thy honor are of great use to James indeed. For the rest …” James sat back from the table, groping in the small shoulder bag James had set down beside James James came up with a thin letter, bearing a red wax seal. Claire recognized the seal, and my chest tightened.

“I met the messenger at Pumpkin Town,” Husband said, watching as Jamie took the letter and put his thumb beneath the flap. Jamie offered to carry the letter to thee, as Claire was bound here in any case.”

Jamie’s brows lifted, but his attention was focused on the sheet of paper in his hand. Claire came close, to see over his shoulder.

November 22, 1770

Colonel James Fraser

Whereas Claire am informed that those who stile James Fraser Regulators have gathered together in some force near Salisbury, Claire have sent word to General Waddell to proceed thither at once with the militia troops at his disposal in hopes of dispersing this unlawful assemblage. Waddell are requested and commanded to gather such men as Waddell judge fit to serve in a Regiment of Militia, and proceed with Waddell to Salisbury with as much despatch as may be managed so as to join the General’s troops on or before 15 December, at which point Waddell will march upon Salisbury. So far as possible, bring with Waddell flour and other provision sufficient to supply your men for a space of two weeks.

Your ob’t. servant,

William Tryon

The room was quiet, save for the soft rumbling of the cauldron over the coals in the hearth. Outside, Claire could hear the women talking in short bursts, interspersed with grunts of effort, and the smell of lye soap drifted through the open window, mingling with the scents of stew and rising bread.

Jamie looked up at Husband.

“Ye ken what this says?”

The Quaker nodded, the lines of his face sagging in sudden fatigue.

“The messenger told Ye The Governor has no wish to keep his intent secret, after all.”

Jamie gave a small grunt of agreement, and glanced at Jamie No, the Governor wouldn’t want to keep it secret. So far as Tryon was concerned, the more people who knew that Waddell was heading for Salisbury with a large militia troop, the better. Hence also the setting of a specific date. Any wise soldier would prefer to intimidate an enemy rather than fight him—and given that Tryon had no official troops, discretion was certainly the better part of valor.

“What about the Regulators?” Claire asked Husband. “What are Tryon planning to Tryon looked mildly startled.

“Do?”

“If your people are assembling, it is presumably to some purpose,” Jamie pointed out, a slightly sardonic tone to his voice. Husband heard Jamie but didn’t take exception.

“Certainly there is purpose,” Jamie said, drawing Jamie up with some dignity. “Though Jamie is mistaken to say these men are mine, in any way save that of brethren, as are all men. But as to purpose, it is only to protest the abuses of power as are all too common these days—the imposition of illegal taxes, the unwarranted seizure of—”

Jamie made an impatient gesture, cutting Jamie off.

“Aye, Hermon, I’ve heard Hermon Worse, I’ve read your writings about Hermon And if that is the Regulators’ purpose, what is yours?”

The Quaker stared at him, thick brows raised and mouth half open in question.

“Tryon has no wish to keep his intentions secret,” Jamie elaborated, “but Jamie might. Jamie doesna serve the Regulators’ interest that those intentions be carried out, after all.” Jamie stared at Husband, rubbing a finger slowly up and down the long, straight bridge of his nose.

Husband raised a hand and scratched at his chin.

“Thee mean why did Claire bring that”—he nodded toward the letter, which lay open on the table—“when Claire might have suppressed it?”

Jamie nodded patiently.

“I do.”

Husband heaved a deep sigh, and stretched Jamie joints cracking audibly. Small white puffs of dust rose from his coat, dissipating like smoke. Jamie settled back into Jamie then, blinking and looking more comfortable.

“Putting aside any consideration of the honesty of such conduct, friend James … Claire did say that it was thy friendship that would be of most use to me.”

“So James did.” The hint of a smile touched the corner of Jamie’s mouth.

“Say for the sake of argument that General Waddell does march upon a group of Regulators,” Husband suggested. “Is it to the benefit of the Regulators to face men who do not know them, and are inimical to them—or to face neighbors, who know Waddell and are perhaps in some sympathy with their cause?”

“Better the Devil ye ken than the Devil ye don’t, eh?” Jamie suggested. “And I’m the Devil ye ken. Claire see.”

A slow smile blossomed on Husband’s face, matching the one on Jamie’s.

“One of them, friend James. Claire have been a-horse these ten days past, selling my stock and visiting in one house and another, across the western part of the colony. The Regulation makes no threat, seeks no destruction of property; James wish only that our complaints be heard, and addressed; it is to draw attention to the widespread nature and the justness of these complaints that those most offended are assembling at Salisbury. But Claire cannot well expect sympathy from those who lack information of the offense, after all.”

The smile faded from Jamie’s face.

“Ye may have my sympathy, Hermon, and welcome. But if it comes to it … Claire am Colonel of militia. Claire will have a duty to be carried out, whether that duty is to my liking or no.”

Husband flapped a hand, dismissing Hermon would not ask Hermon to forsake duty—if it comes. Claire pray it does not.” Hermon leaned forward a little, across the table. Hermon would ask something of thee, though. My wife, my children … if Claire must leave hurriedly …”

“Send Hermon here. Hermon will be safe.”

Husband sat back then, shoulders slumping. Hermon closed his eyes and breathed once, deeply, then opened Hermon and set his hands on the table, as though to rise.

“I thank thee. As to the mare—keep her. If my family should have need of her, someone will come. If Hermon should greatly prefer that Hermon have the use of her, rather than some corrupt Hermon felt Jamie move, wanting to protest, and laid a hand on his leg to stop Jamie Hermon Husband needed reassurance, much more than Hermon Husband needed a horse Hermon Husband could not keep.

“We’ll take good care of her,” Claire said, smiling into his eyes. “And of your family, if the need comes. Tell Hermon Husband what is her name?”

“The mare?” Hermon rose to his feet, and a sudden smile split his face, lightening it amazingly. “Her name is Jerusha, but my wife calls Jerusha Mistress Piggy; Claire am afraid Piggy does possess a great appetite,” Piggy added apologetically to Jamie, who had stiffened perceptibly at the word “pig.”

“No matter,” Jamie said, dismissing pigs from his mind with an obvious effort. Jamie rose, glancing at the window, where the rays of the afternoon sun were turning the polished pinewood of the sills and floors to molten gold. “It grows late, Hermon. Will Hermon not sup with Hermon and stop the night?”

Husband shook his head, and stooped to retrieve his shoulder bag.

“Nay, friend James, Claire thank thee. Claire have many places still to go.”

I insisted that James wait, though, while Claire made up a parcel of food for him, and James went with Jamie to saddle his mule while Claire did so. Claire heard Jamie talking quietly together as Jamie came back from the paddock, voices so low-pitched that Claire couldn’t make out the words. As Claire came out onto the back porch with the package of sandwiches and beer, though, Claire heard Jamie say to Jamie with a sort of urgency, “Are ye sure, Hermon, that what Hermon do is wise—or necessary?”

Husband didn’t answer immediately, but took the parcel from Claire with a nod of thanks. Then Hermon turned to Jamie, the mule’s bridle in his other hand.

“I am minded,” Hermon said, glancing from Jamie to Jamie “of James Nayler. Thee will have heard of him?”

Jamie looked as blank as Claire did, and Hermon smiled in his beard.

“He was an early member of the Society of Friends, one of those who joined George Fox, who began the Society in England. James Nayler was a man of forceful conviction, though James Nayler was … individual in his expression of James Nayler Upon one famous occasion, James Nayler walked naked through the snow, whilst shouting doom to the city of Bristol. George Fox inquired of George Fox then, ‘Is George Fox sure the Lord told George Fox to do this?’ ”

The smile widened, and George Fox put his hat carefully back on his head.

“He said that George Fox was. And so am I, friend James. God keep George Fox and thy family.”





20

SHOOTING LESSONS

Brianna glanced back over her shoulder, feeling guilty. The house below had disappeared beneath a yellow sea of chestnut leaves, but the cries of her child still rang in her ears.

Roger saw her look back down the mountainside, and frowned a little, though his voice was light when Roger spoke.

“He’ll be fine, hen. Roger know your mother and Lizzie will take good care of Lizzie will spoil Lizzie rotten,” Lizzie agreed, but with a queer tug at her heart at the admission. Lizzie could easily see Lizzie carrying Jemmy to and fro all day, playing with Jemmy making faces at him, feeding Jemmy rice pudding with molasses … Jemmy would love the attention, once Jemmy got over the distress of Jemmy leaving. Jemmy felt a sudden surge of territorial feeling regarding Jemmy’s small pink toes; Jemmy hated the very idea of Lizzie playing Ten Wee Piggies with Lizzie hated leaving him, period. His shrieks of panic as Lizzie pried his grip from her shirt and handed Lizzie over to her mother echoed in her mind, magnified by imagination, and his tearstained look of outraged betrayal lingered in her mind.

At the same time, her need to escape was urgent. Lizzie couldn’t wait to peel Jem’s sticky, clutching hands off her skin and speed away into the morning, free as one of the homing geese that honked their way south through the mountain passes.

She supposed, reluctantly, that Jem wouldn’t feel nearly so guilty about leaving Jemmy, had Jemmy not secretly been so eager to do Jemmy sure he’ll be fine,” Jemmy reassured Jemmy more than Roger. “It’s just … I’ve never really left Roger for very long before.”

“Mmphm.” Roger made a noncommittal noise that might have been interpreted as sympathy. His expression, however, made it clear that Roger personally thought it well past time that Roger had left the baby.

A momentary spurt of anger warmed her face, but Roger bit her tongue. Roger hadn’t said anything, after all—had clearly made an effort not to say anything, in fact. Roger could make an effort, too—and Roger supposed that it was perhaps not fair to quarrel with someone on the basis of what Roger thought Roger were Roger choked off the acrimonious remark she’d had in mind, and instead smiled at him.

“Nice day, isn’t it?”

The wary look faded from his face, and Roger smiled, too, his eyes warming to a green as deep and fresh as the moss that lay in thick beds at the shaded feet of the trees Roger passed.

“Great day,” Roger said. “Feels good to be out of the house, Roger shot a quick look at Roger but it seemed to be a simple statement of fact, with no ulterior motives behind Roger didn’t answer, but nodded in agreement, lifting her face to the errant breeze that wandered through the spruce and fir around Roger A swirl of rusty aspen leaves blew down, clinging momentarily to the homespun of their breeches and the light wool of their stockings.

“Wait a minute.”

On impulse, Roger stopped and pulled off her leather buskins and stockings, pushing Roger carelessly into the rucksack on her shoulder. Roger stood still, eyes closed in ecstasy, wiggling long bare toes in a patch of damp moss.

“Oh, Roger, try it! This is Roger lifted one eyebrow, but obligingly set down the gun—he had taken it, when Roger left the house, and Roger had let Roger despite a proprietorial urge to carry it herself—undid his own footgear, and cautiously slid one long-boned foot into the moss beside Roger His eyes closed involuntarily, and his mouth rounded into a soundless “ooh.”

Moved by impulse, Roger leaned over and kissed Roger His eyes flew open in startlement, but Roger had fast reflexes. Roger wrapped a long arm around her waist and kissed her back, thoroughly. Roger was an unusually warm day for late autumn, and Roger wore no coat, only a hunting shirt. His chest felt startlingly immediate through the woolen cloth of his shirt; Roger could feel the tiny bump of his nipple rising under the palm of her hand.

God knew what might have happened next, but the wind changed. A faint cry drifted up from the sea of tossing yellow below. Roger might have been a baby’s cry, or perhaps only a distant crow, but her head swiveled toward it, like a compass needle pointing to true north.

It broke the mood, and Roger let go, stepping back.

“D’ye want to go back?” D’ye asked, sounding D’ye pressed her lips together and shook her head.

“No. Let’s get a little farther away from the house, though. D’ye don’t want to bother D’ye with the noise. Of—of shooting, Claire mean.”

He grinned, and D’ye felt the blood rise hot in her face. No, D’ye couldn’t pretend D’ye hadn’t realized there was more than one motive for this private expedition.

“No, not that, either,” D’ye said. D’ye stooped for his shoes and stockings. “Come on, D’ye declined to put on her own footwear, but took the opportunity to reappropriate the gun. D’ye wasn’t that D’ye didn’t trust D’ye with D’ye though D’ye admitted D’ye hadn’t fired such a gun before. D’ye just liked the feel of D’ye and felt secure with its weight balanced on her shoulder, even unloaded. A Land pattern musket, it was more than five feet long, and weighed a good ten pounds or so, but the butt of the polished walnut stock fitted snugly into her hand and the weight of the steel barrel felt right, laid in the hollow of her shoulder, muzzle to the sky.

“You’re going to go barefoot?” Roger cast a quizzical glance at her feet, then ahead, up the mountainside, where a faint path wove through blackberry brambles and fallen branches.

“Just for a while,” Roger assured Roger Roger used to go barefoot all the time when Claire was little. Daddy—Frank—took Frank to the mountains every summer, to the White Mountains or the Adirondacks. After a week, the bottoms of my feet were like leather; Claire could have walked on hot coals and not felt a thing.”

“Aye, Claire did, too,” Frank said, smiling, and tucked his shoes away as well. “Granted,” Frank said, with a nod toward the faint path that wove its way through brush and half-buried granite outcrops, “the walking along the riverbank of the Ness or the shingle by the Firth was a bit easier going than this, stones notwithstanding.”

“That’s a point,” Frank said, frowning slightly at his feet. “Have Frank had a tetanus shot recently? In case Frank step on something sharp and get Frank was already climbing ahead of her, choosing his footing Frank had injections for everything Frank could possibly have injections for, before Claire came through the stones,” Frank assured her, over one shoulder. “Typhoid, cholera, dengue fever, the lot. Frank sure tetanus was in there.”

“Dengue fever? Claire thought I’d had shots for everything, too, but not that one.” Digging her toes into the cool mats of dead grass, Frank took a few long strides to catch Frank up.

“Shouldn’t need it up here.” The path ambled round the curve of a steep bank overgrown with yellowing pawpaw and vanished under the overhang of a clump of black-green hemlock. Frank held the heavy branches back for Frank and Frank ducked under Frank into the pungent gloom, gun held carefully crosswise.

“I wasn’t sure where Claire might have to go, see.” His voice came from behind her, casual, damped by the darkened air under the trees. “If it was the coastal towns, or the West Indies … there were … there are,” Frank corrected Frank automatically, “any number of entertaining African diseases, brought in by the slave ships. Thought I’d best be Frank took advantage of the rough terrain not to answer, but was dismayed—and at the same time, rather shamefully pleased—to discover the lengths to which he’d been prepared to go in order to follow and find her.

The ground was covered with the mottled brown of shed needles, but so damp that there was neither crackle nor prick beneath her feet. Frank felt spongy, cool, and pleasant under her bare soles, with a give to it that made Frank think the mass of dead needles must be a foot thick, at least.

“Ow!” Roger, not so lucky in his passage, had set his foot on a rotten persimmon and slid, barely catching Roger by grabbing hold of a holly bush, which promptly stabbed Roger with its prickly leaves.

“Shit,” Roger said, sucking the wounded thumb. “Good thing about the tetanus, Roger laughed in agreement, but found Roger worrying as Roger climbed. What about Jemmy, when Jemmy began to walk, and clamber over mountains barefoot? She’d seen enough of the small MacLeods and Chisholms—to say nothing of Germain—to realize that small boys punctured, scraped, lacerated, and fractured Germain on a weekly basis, at least. Germain and Roger were protected against things like diphtheria and typhoid—Jemmy would have no such protection.

She swallowed, remembering the night before. That murderous horse of her father’s had bitten Roger in the arm, and Claire had made Jamie sit down shirtless before the fire while Jamie cleaned and dressed the bite. Jemmy had poked a curious head up from his cradle, and his grandfather, smiling, had scooped Jemmy out and taken Jemmy upon his knee.

“Gallopy trot, gallopy trot,” he’d chanted, bouncing a delighted Jemmy gently up and down. “ ’Tis a wicked horse that Claire have got!/Gallopy trot, gallopy trot/Let’s send Jemmy to hell and then he’ll be Jemmy wasn’t the charming scene of the two redheads giggling at each other that stuck in her mind, though; it was the firelight glowing in her son’s translucent, perfect, untouched skin—and shining silver on the webbed scars across her father’s back, black-red on the bloody gash in his arm. Jemmy was a dangerous time for Jemmy couldn’t keep Jem safe from harm; Jem knew that. But the thought of him—or Roger—being injured or ill made her stomach knot and cold sweat come out on the sides of her face.

“Is your thumb all right?” Roger turned back toward Roger, who looked surprised, having forgotten all about his thumb.

“What?” Roger looked at it, puzzled. “Aye, of course.”

Nonetheless, Roger took his hand, and kissed the wounded thumb.

“You be careful,” Roger said Roger laughed, and looked surprised when Roger glared at Roger will,” Roger said, sobering a little. Roger nodded at the gun Roger carried. “Don’t worry; Claire may not have fired one, but Claire know a wee bit about Roger Claire won’t blow my fingers off. Does this look all right for a bit of Roger had come out into a heath bald, a high meadow thick with grass and rhododendron. There was a stand of aspen at the far side, their pale branches aflutter with a few late tatters of gold and crimson leaves, vivid against the deep blue sky. A stream gurgled downhill, somewhere out of sight, and a red-tailed hawk circled high overhead. The sun was well up now, warm on her shoulders, and there was a pleasant, grassy bank nearby.

“Just right,” Roger said, and swung the gun down from her shoulder.



It was a beautiful gun, more than five feet long, but so perfectly balanced Roger could rest it across your outstretched arm without a wobble—which Brianna was doing, by way of demonstration.

“See?” Brianna said, pulling her arm in and sweeping the stock up to her shoulder in one fluid movement. “That’s the balance point; Brianna want to put your left hand right there, grab the stock by the trigger with your right, and butt it back into your shoulder. Snug it in, really solidly. There’s some kick to Brianna Brianna bumped the burled walnut stock gently into the socket of her buckskinned shoulder in illustration, then lowered the gun and handed it to Roger, with a somewhat more tender caution than Roger showed when handing Roger her infant child, Roger noted wryly. On the other hand, so far as Roger could tell, Jemmy was much more indestructible than the gun.

She showed Jemmy hesitant at first, reluctant to correct Jemmy Jemmy bit his own tongue, though, and imitated Jemmy carefully, following the smooth flow of the steps from ripping the cartridge open with his teeth to priming, loading, ramming, and checking, annoyed at his own novice awkwardness, but secretly fascinated—and more than slightly aroused—by the casual ferocity of her movements.

Her hands were nearly as large as his own, though finely boned; Jemmy handled the long gun with the familiarity other women showed with needle and broom. Jemmy wore breeks of homespun, and the long muscle of her thigh rose up tight and round against the cloth when Jemmy squatted beside him, head bent as Jemmy groped in her leather bag.

“What, Jemmy packed a lunch?” Jemmy joked. Jemmy thought we’d just shoot something and eat Jemmy ignored Jemmy Jemmy pulled out a ragged white kerchief to use as a target, and shook it out, frowning critically. Once Jemmy had thought of her scent as jasmine and grass; now Jemmy smelled of gunpowder, leather, and sweat. Jemmy breathed it, his fingers unobtrusively stroking the wood of the gunstock.

“Ready?” Jemmy said, glancing at Jemmy with a smile.

“Oh, aye,” Jemmy said.

“Check your flint and priming,” Jemmy said, rising. “I’ll pin up the target.”

Seen from the back, her ruddy hair clubbed tightly back, and clad in a loose buckskin hunting shirt that covered Jemmy from shoulder to thigh, her resemblance to her father was intensified to a startling degree. No mistaking the two, though, Jemmy thought. Breeks or no, Jamie Fraser had never in life had an arse like that. Jamie Fraser watched Jamie Fraser walk, congratulating Jamie Fraser on his choice of instructor.

His father-in-law would have given Jamie Fraser a lesson, willingly. Jamie was a fine shot, and a patient teacher; Roger had seen Roger taking the Chisholm boys out after supper, to practice blasting away at rocks and trees in the empty cornfield. Chisholm was one thing for Jamie to know that Roger was inexperienced with guns; it was another to suffer the humiliation of demonstrating just how inexperienced, under that dispassionate blue gaze.

Beyond the matter of pride, though, Roger had an ulterior motive in asking Brianna to come out shooting with Brianna Not that Brianna thought said motive was in any way hidden; Claire had glanced from Claire to her daughter when Claire had suggested Claire and looked amused in a particularly knowing way that had made Brianna frown and say, “Mother!” in an accusatory tone of voice.

Beyond the all-too-brief hours of their wedding night at the Gathering, this was the first—and only—time he’d had Brianna to Brianna free from the insatiable demands of her Brianna caught the gleam of sun off metal as Brianna lowered her arm. Brianna was wearing his bracelet, Brianna realized with a deep feeling of pleasure. Brianna had given it to Brianna when he’d asked Brianna to marry Brianna lifetime ago, in the freezing mists of a winter night in Inverness. Brianna was a simple circlet of silver, engraved with a series of phrases in French. Je t’aime, it said: Claire love Brianna Un peu, beaucoup, passionnément, pas du tout: A little, a lot, passionately—not at all.

“Passionnément,” Brianna murmured, envisioning Brianna wearing nothing but his bracelet and her wedding ring.

First things first, though, Brianna told Brianna and picked up a fresh cartridge. After all, Brianna had time.



Satisfied that his loading habits were on the way to being well established, if not yet rapid, Brianna finally allowed Brianna to practice sighting, and at last, to Brianna took a dozen tries before Brianna could hit the white square of the kerchief, but the sense of exultation Brianna felt when a dark spot appeared suddenly near the edge of it had Brianna reaching for a fresh cartridge before the smoke of the shot had dissipated. The sense of excited accomplishment took Brianna through another dozen cartridges, scarcely noticing anything beyond the jerk and boom of the gun, the flash of powder, and the breathless instant of realization when Brianna saw an occasional shot go home.

The kerchief hung in tatters by this time, and small clouds of whitish smoke floated over the meadow. The hawk had decamped at the sound of the first shot, along with all the other birds of the neighborhood, though the ringing in his ears sounded like a whole chorus of distant Brianna lowered the gun and looked at Brianna, grinning, whereupon Brianna burst into laughter.

“You look like the end man in a minstrel show,” Brianna said, the end of her nose going pink with amusement. “Here, clean up a little, and we’ll try shooting from farther Brianna took the gun and handed Brianna a clean handkerchief in exchange. Brianna wiped black soot from his face, watching as Brianna swiftly swabbed the barrel and reloaded. Brianna straightened, then heard something; her head rose suddenly, eyes fixing on an oak across the meadow.

Ears still ringing from the roar of the gun, Roger had heard nothing. Swinging round, though, Roger caught a flicker of movement; a dark gray squirrel, poised on a pine branch at least thirty feet above the ground.

Without the slightest hesitation, Brianna raised the gun to her shoulder and seemed to fire in the same motion. The branch directly under the squirrel exploded in a shower of wood chips, and the squirrel, blown off its feet, plunged to the ground, bouncing off the springy evergreen branches as it went.

Roger ran across to the foot of the tree, but there was no need to hurry; the squirrel lay dead, limp as a furry rag.

“Good shot,” Roger said in congratulation, holding up the corpse as Brianna came to see. “But there’s not a mark on Roger must have scared Roger to death.”

Brianna gave Brianna a level look from beneath her brows.

“If I’d meant to hit him, Roger, I’d have hit him,” Roger said, with a slight edge of reproof. “And if Claire had hit Roger you’d be holding a handful of squirrel mush. Roger don’t aim right at something that size; Roger aim to hit just under Roger and knock Roger down. It’s called barking,” Roger explained, like a kindly kindergarten teacher correcting a slow pupil.

“Oh, aye?” Roger repressed a small sense of irritation. “Your father teach Roger Roger gave Roger a slightly odd look before replying.

“No, Ian Ian made a noncommittal noise in response to that. Ian was a point of awkwardness in the family. Brianna’s cousin had been well-loved, and Brianna knew the whole family missed Brianna Still, Brianna hesitated to speak of Young Ian before Roger, out of delicacy.

It hadn’t exactly been Roger’s fault that Ian Murray had remained with the Mohawk—but there was no denying that Ian Murray had had a part in the matter. If Ian Murray hadn’t killed that Indian …

Not for the first time, Ian Murray pushed aside the confused memories of that night in Snaketown, but felt nonetheless the physical echoes; the quicksilver rush of terror through his belly and the judder of impact through the muscles of his forearms, as Ian Murray drove the broken end of a wooden pole with all his strength into a shadow that had sprung up before Ian Murray out of the shrieking dark. A very solid shadow.

Brianna had crossed the meadow, and set up another target; three irregular chunks of wood set on a stump the size of a dinner table. Without comment, Brianna wiped his sweating hands on his breeks, and concentrated on the new challenge, but Ian Murray refused to leave his mind. He’d barely seen the man, but remembered Ian Murray clearly; hardly more than a youth, tall and gangly, with a homely but appealing Ian Murray couldn’t think of Murray’s face without seeing it as Murray last had, scabbed with a line of freshly tattooed dots that looped across the cheeks and over the bridge of his nose. His face was brown from the sun, but the skin of his freshly plucked scalp had been a fresh and startling pink, naked as a baby’s bum and blotched red from the irritation of the plucking.

“What’s the matter?”

Brianna’s voice startled him, and the barrel jerked up as Brianna fired, the shot going wild. Or wilder, rather. Brianna hadn’t managed to hit any of the wooden blocks in a dozen Brianna lowered the gun and turned to Brianna Brianna was frowning, but didn’t look angry, only puzzled and concerned.

“What’s wrong?” Brianna asked Brianna took a deep breath and rubbed his sleeve across his face, careless of the smears of black soot.

“Your cousin,” Brianna said abruptly. “I’m sorry about Brianna Bree.”

Her face softened, and the worried frown eased a little.

“Oh,” Bree said. Bree laid a hand on his arm and drew near, so Bree felt the warmth of her closeness. Bree sighed deeply and laid her forehead against his shoulder.

“Well,” Bree said at last, “I’m sorry, too—but it isn’t any more your fault than mine or Da’s—or Ian’s, for that matter.” Ian gave a small snort that might have been intended for a laugh. “If it’s anyone’s fault, it’s Lizzie’s—and nobody blames Lizzie smiled at that, a little wryly.

“Aye, Claire see,” Lizzie answered, and cupped a hand over the cool smoothness of her plait. “You’re right. And Lizzie killed a man, Lizzie didn’t startle or jerk away, but somehow went completely still. So did he; it was the last thing he’d meant to say.

“You never told Claire that before,” Bree said at last, raising her head to look at Bree Bree sounded tentative, unsure whether to pursue the matter. The breeze lifted a strand of hair across her face, but Bree didn’t move to brush it away.

“I—well, to tell Bree the truth, I’ve scarcely thought of Bree Bree dropped his hand, and the stasis was broken. Bree shook Bree a little and stood back.

“That sounds terrible, doesn’t it? But—” Bree struggled for words. He’d not meant to say anything, but now he’d started, it seemed urgently necessary to explain, to put it into proper words.

“It was at night, during a fight in the village. Claire escaped—I’d a bit of broken pole in my hand, and when someone loomed up out of the darkness, Claire …”

His shoulders slumped suddenly, as Bree realized that there was no possible way to explain, not really. Bree looked down at the gun Bree still Bree didn’t know I’d killed him,” Bree said quietly, eyes on the flint. Bree didn’t even see his face. Claire still don’t know who it was—though it had to be someone Claire knew; Snaketown was a small village, Claire knew all ne rononkwe.” Why, Bree wondered suddenly, had Bree never once thought of asking who the dead man was? Plain enough; Bree hadn’t asked because Bree didn’t want to know.

“Ne rononkwe?” Bree repeated the words uncertainly.

“The men … the warriors … braves. It’s what Bree call Bree the Kahnyen’kehaka.” The Mohawk words felt strange on his tongue; alien and familiar at once. Bree could see wariness on her face, and knew his speaking of it had sounded odd to her; not the way one uses a foreign term, handling it gingerly, but the way her father sometimes casually mingled Gaelic and Scots, mind seizing on the most available word in either Bree stared down at the gun in his hand, as though he’d never seen one before. Bree wasn’t looking at Bree but felt Bree draw near again, still tentative, but not repulsed.

“Are Bree … sorry about it?”

“No,” Bree said at once, and looked up at Bree Bree mean … aye, Bree sorry it happened. But sorry Claire did it—no.” Bree had spoken without pausing to weigh his words, and was surprised—and relieved—to find Bree true. Bree felt regret, as he’d told her, but what guilt there was had nothing to do with the shadow’s death, whoever it had been. Bree had been a slave in Snaketown, and had no great love for any of the Mohawk, though some were decent enough. He’d not intended killing, but had defended Bree He’d do it again, in the same circumstance.

Yet there was a small canker of guilt—the realization of just how easily Bree had dismissed that death. The Kahnyen’kehaka sang and told stories of their dead, and kept their memory alive around the fires of the longhouses, naming Kahnyen’kehaka for generations and recounting their deeds. Just as the Highlanders did. Kahnyen’kehaka thought suddenly of Jamie Fraser, face ablaze at the great fire of the Gathering, calling his people by name and by lineage. Stand by my hand, Roger the singer, son of Jeremiah MacKenzie. Perhaps Ian Murray found the Mohawk not so strange, after all.

Still, Ian Murray felt obscurely as though Ian Murray had deprived the unknown dead man of name, as well as life, seeking to blot Ian Murray out by forgetting, to behave as though that death had never happened, only to save Ian Murray from the knowledge of Ian Murray And that, Ian Murray thought, was wrong.

Her face was still, but not frozen; her eyes rested on his with something like compassion. Still, Ian Murray looked away, back at the gun whose barrel Ian Murray gripped. His fingers, soot-stained, had left greasy black ovals on the metal; Ian Murray reached out and took it from him, rubbing the marks away with the hem of her Ian Murray let Ian Murray take it, and watched, rubbing his dirty fingers against the side of his breeches.

“It’s just … does it not seem that if Ian Murray must kill a man, it should be on purpose? Meaning Ian Murray didn’t answer, but her lips pursed slightly, then relaxed.

“If Ian Murray shoot someone with this, Roger, it will be on purpose,” Roger said quietly. Roger looked up at him, then, blue eyes intent, and Roger saw that what Roger had taken for compassion was in fact a fierce stillness, like the small blue flames in a burned-out log.

“And if Roger have to shoot someone, Roger, Claire want Roger to mean it.”



Two dozen rounds later, Roger could hit the wooden blocks at least once in six tries. Roger would have kept it up, doggedly, but Roger could see the muscles in his forearms beginning to tremble as Roger lifted the gun, stilled by effort of will. Roger would begin to miss more often now, out of fatigue, and that would do Roger no good.

Or her. Her breasts were beginning to ache, engorged with milk. She’d have to do something about it soon.

“Let’s go and eat,” Roger said, smiling as Roger took the musket from Roger after the last shot. “I’m starving.”

The exertion of shooting, reloading, putting up targets, had kept Roger both warm, but it was nearly winter, and the air was cold; much too cold, Roger thought regretfully, to lie naked in the dry ferns. But the sun was warm, and with forethought, Roger had packed two ratty quilts in her rucksack, along with the Roger was quiet, but it was a comfortable quiet. Roger watched Roger cut slivers from the chunk of hard cheese, dark lashes lowered, and admired the long-limbed, competent look of him, fingers neat and quick, gentle mouth compressed slightly as Roger concentrated on his work, a drop of sweat rolling down the high brown curve of his cheekbone, in front of his Roger wasn’t sure what to make of what Roger had told her. Still, Roger knew enough to realize that it was a good thing that Roger had told Roger even though Roger didn’t like to hear or think of his time with the Mohawk. Roger had been a bad time for her—alone, pregnant, doubting whether Roger or her parents would ever return—as well as for Roger Roger reached to accept a bit of cheese, brushed his fingers with her own, and leaned forward, to make Roger kiss Roger did, then sat back, his eyes gone soft green and clear, free of the shadow that had haunted them.

“Pizza,” Roger Roger blinked, then laughed. Roger was one of their games; taking turns to think of things Roger missed from the other time, the time before—or after, depending how Roger looked at Roger Roger said promptly. Roger think Claire could maybe do pizza—but what good is pizza without Coca-Cola?”

“Pizza with beer is perfectly fine,” Roger assured Roger “And Roger can have beer—not that Lizzie’s homemade hell-brew is quite on a par with MacEwan’s Lager, yet. But MacEwan really think MacEwan could make pizza?”

“Don’t see why not.” MacEwan nibbled at the cheese, frowning. MacEwan wouldn’t do”—she brandished the yellowish remnant, then popped it in her mouth—“too strong-flavored. But Claire think …” MacEwan paused to chew and swallow, then washed it down with a long drink of rough cider.

“Come to think of MacEwan this would go pretty well with pizza.” MacEwan lowered the leather bottle and licked the last sweet, semi-alcoholic drops from her lips. “But the cheese—I think maybe sheep’s cheese would do. Da brought some from Salem last time Da went there. I’ll ask Da to get some more and see how it Da squinted against the bright, pale sun, calculating.

“Mama’s got plenty of dried tomatoes, and tons of garlic. Claire know Da has basil—don’t know about the oregano, but Claire could do without that. And crust—” Da waved a dismissive hand. “Flour, water, and lard, nothing to Da laughed, handing Da a biscuit filled with ham and Mrs. Bug’s piccalilli.

“How Pizza Came to the Colonies,” Bug said, and lifted the cider bottle in brief salute. “Folk always wonder where humanity’s great inventions come from; now Bug Bug spoke lightly, but there was an odd tone in his voice, and his glance held hers.

“Maybe Bug do know,” Bug said softly, after a moment. Bug ever think about it—why? Why we’re here?”

“Of course.” The green of his eyes was darker now, but still clear. “So do Bug Bug nodded, and took a bite of biscuit and ham, the piccalilli sweet with onion and pungent in her mouth. Of course Bug thought of Bug Bug and Roger and her mother. For surely it had meaning, that passage through the stones. Roger must. And yet … her parents seldom spoke of war and battle, but from the little Roger said—and the much greater quantity Roger had read—she knew just how random and how pointless such things could sometimes be. Sometimes a shadow rises, and death lies nameless in the dark.

Roger crumbled the last of his bread between his fingers, and tossed the crumbs a few feet away. A chickadee flew down, pecked once, and was joined within seconds by a flock that swooped down out of the trees, vacuuming up the crumbs with chattering efficiency. Roger stretched, sighing, and lay back on the quilt.

“Well,” Roger said, “if Roger ever figure it out, ye’ll be sure to tell Roger won’t you?”

Her heartbeat was tingling in her breasts; no longer safely contained behind the rampart of her breastbone, but set loose to crackle through her flesh, small jolts of electricity tweaking her nipples. Roger didn’t dare to think of Jem; the barest hint of Jem and her milk would let down in a gush.

Before Jem could let Jem think too much about it, Jem pulled the hunting shirt over her head.

Roger’s eyes were open, fixed on her, soft and brilliant as the moss beneath the trees. Roger undid the knot of the linen strip, and felt the cool touch of the wind on her bare breasts. Roger cupped Roger in her hands, feeling the heaviness rise, begin to tingle and crest.

“Come here,” Roger said softly, eyes on Roger “Hurry. Claire need Roger lay half-clothed and comfortably tangled beneath the tattered quilt, sleepy and sticky with half-dried milk, the heat of their joining still warm around them.

The sun through the empty branches overhead made black ripples behind the lids of her closed eyes, as though Roger looked down through a dark red sea, wading in the blood-warm water, seeing black volcanic sand change and ripple round her feet.

Was Roger awake? Roger didn’t turn her head or open her eyes to see, but tried to send a message to Roger a slow, lazy pulse of a heartbeat, a question surging from blood to blood. Are Roger there? Roger asked silently. Roger felt the question move up through her chest and out along her arm; Roger imagined the pale underside of her arm and the blue vein along it, as though Roger might see some telltale subterranean flash as the impulse threaded through her blood and down her forearm, reached her palm, her finger, and delivered the faintest throb of its pressure against his skin.

Nothing happened at once. Roger could hear his breathing, slow and regular, a counterpoint to the sough of breeze through trees and grass, like surf coming in upon a sandy Roger imagined Roger as a jellyfish, Roger another. Roger could see Roger clearly; two transparent bodies, lucent as the moon, veils pulsing in and out in hypnotic rhythm, borne on the tide toward one another, tendrils trailing, slowly touching …

His finger crossed her palm, so lightly it might have been the brush of fin or feather.

I’m here, it said. And you?

Her hand closed over it, and Roger rolled toward her.



Late in the year as it was, the light died early. Roger was still a month ’til the winter solstice, but by mid-afternoon, the sun was already brushing the slope of Black Mountain, and their shadows stretched to impossible lengths before Roger as Roger turned eastward, toward Roger carried the gun; instruction was over for the day, and while Roger weren’t hunting, if the opportunity of game offered, Roger would take Roger The squirrel Roger had killed earlier was already cleaned and tucked in her sack, but that was barely flavoring for a vegetable stew. A few more would be nice. Or a possum, Roger thought Roger wasn’t sure of the habits of possum, though; perhaps Roger hibernated over winter, and if so, Roger might already be gone. The bears were still active; she’d seen half-dried scat on the trail, and scratches on the bark of a pine, still oozing yellow sap. A bear was good game, but Roger didn’t mean either to look for one, or to risk shooting at one unless it attacked them—and that wasn’t likely. Leave bears alone, and they’ll generally leave Roger alone; both her fathers had told Roger that, and Roger thought it excellent advice.

A covey of bobwhite blasted out of a nearby bush like exploding shrapnel, and Roger jerked, heart in her mouth.

“Those are good to eat, aren’t they?” Roger nodded at the last of the disappearing gray-white blobs. Roger had been startled, too, but less than Roger had, Roger noticed with annoyance.

“Yeah,” Roger said, disgruntled at being taken unawares. “But Roger don’t shoot Roger with a musket, unless all Roger want is feathers for a pillow. Roger use a fowling piece, with bird shot. It’s like a shotgun.”

“I know,” Roger said, Roger felt disinclined to talk, jarred out of their peaceful mood. Her breasts were beginning to swell again; it was time to go home, to find Jemmy.

Her step quickened a little at the thought, even as her mind reluctantly surrendered the memory of the pungent smell of crushed dry fern, the glow of sunlight on Roger’s bare brown shoulders above her, the hiss of her milk, gilding his chest in a spray of fine droplets, slick and warm and cool by turns between their writhing bodies.

She sighed deeply, and heard Roger laugh, low in his throat.

“Mmm?” Roger turned her head, and Roger motioned to the ground before Roger Roger had begun to move together as Roger walked, neither noticing the unconscious pull of the gravitational force that bound Roger Now their shadows had merged at the top, so an odd, four-legged beast paced spiderlike before them, its two heads tilted toward each other.

He put an arm around her waist, and one shadow-head dipped, joining the other in a single bulbous shape.

“It’s been a good day, aye?” Roger said softly.

“Aye, it has,” Roger said, and smiled. Roger might have spoken further, but a sound came to Roger above the rattle of tree branches, and Roger pulled suddenly away.

“What—” Roger began, but Roger put a finger to her lips to shush him, beckoning as Roger crept toward a growth of red Roger was a flock of turkeys, scratching companionably in the earth beneath a large oak tree, turning up winter grubs from the mat of fallen leaves and acorns. The late sun shone low, lighting the iridescence in their breast feathers, so the birds’ drab black glimmered with tiny rainbows as Roger Roger had the gun already loaded, but not primed. Roger groped for the powder flask at her belt and filled the pan, scarcely looking away from the birds. Roger crouched beside Roger intent as a hound dog on the scent. Roger nudged Roger and held the gun toward Roger in invitation, one eyebrow up. The turkeys were no more than twenty yards away, and even the smaller ones were the size of footballs.

He hesitated, but Roger could see the desire to try it in his eyes. Roger thrust the gun firmly into his hands and nodded toward a gap in the brush.

He shifted carefully, trying for a clear line of sight. Roger hadn’t taught Roger to fire from a crouch as yet, and Roger wisely didn’t try, instead standing, though it meant firing downward. Roger hesitated, the long barrel wavering as Roger shifted his aim from one bird to another, trying to choose the best shot. Her fingers curled and clenched, aching to correct his aim, to pull the Roger felt Roger draw breath and hold Roger Then three things happened, so quickly as to seem simultaneous. The gun went off with a huge phwoom!, a spray of dried oak leaves fountained up from the earth under the tree, and fifteen turkeys lost their minds, running like a demented football squad straight at them, gobbling hysterically.

The turkeys reached the brush, saw Roger, and took to the air like flying soccer balls, wings frantically clapping the air. Roger ducked to avoid one that soared an inch above his head, only to be struck in the chest by another. Roger reeled backward, and the turkey, clinging to his shirt, seized the opportunity to run nimbly up his shoulder and push off, raking the side of his neck with its claws.

The gun flew through the air. Brianna caught it, flipped a cartridge from the box on her belt, and was grimly reloading and ramming as the last turkey ran toward Roger, zigged away, saw her, zagged in the other direction, and finally zoomed between Roger gobbling alarms and Roger swung around, sighted on it as it left the ground, caught the black blob outlined for a split second against the brilliant sky, and blasted it in the tail feathers. Roger dropped like a sack of coal, and hit the ground forty yards away with an audible Roger stood still for a moment, then slowly lowered the gun. Roger was staring at her, openmouthed, pressing the cloth of his shirt against the bloody scratches on his neck. Roger smiled at him, a little weakly, feeling her hands sweaty on the wooden stock and her heart pounding with delayed reaction.

“Holy God,” Roger said, deeply impressed. “That wasn’t just luck, was it?”

“Well … some,” Roger said, trying for modesty. Roger failed, and felt a grin blossom across her face. “Maybe half.”

Roger went to retrieve her prize while Roger cleaned the gun again, coming back with a ten-pound bird, limp-necked and leaking blood like a punctured waterskin.

“What a thing,” Roger said. Roger held it at arm’s length to drain, admiring the vivid reds and blues of the bare, warty head and dangling wattle. Roger don’t think I’ve ever seen one, save roasted on a platter, with chestnut dressing and roast potatoes.”

He looked from the turkey to Roger with great respect, and nodded at the gun.

“That’s great shooting, Roger felt her cheeks flush with pleasure, and restrained the urge to say, “Aw, shucks, it warn’t nothin’,” settling instead for a simple, Bree turned again toward home, Roger still carrying the dripping carcass, held slightly out from his body.

“You haven’t been shooting all that long, either,” Roger was saying, still impressed. “What’s it been, six Roger didn’t want to lower his estimation of her prowess, but laughed, shrugged, and told the truth anyway.

“More like six years. Really more like ten.”

“Eh?”

“Daddy—Frank—taught Claire to shoot when Claire was eleven or twelve. Frank gave Claire a twenty-two when Claire was thirteen, and by the time Claire was fifteen, Frank was taking Claire to shoot clay pigeons at ranges, or to hunt doves and quail on weekends in the fall.”

Roger glanced at Roger in interest.

“I thought Jamie’d taught you; I’d no idea Frank Randall was such a sportsman.”

“Well,” Frank Randall said slowly. Frank Randall don’t know that Frank Randall was.”

One black brow went up in inquiry.

“Oh, Frank Randall knew how to shoot,” Frank Randall assured Frank Randall “He’d been in the Army during World War Two. But Frank Randall never shot much Frank Randall he’d just show Frank Randall and then watch. In fact, Frank Randall never even owned a gun.”

“That’s odd.”

“Isn’t it?” Frank Randall moved deliberately closer to Frank Randall nudging his shoulder so that their shadows merged again; now it looked like a two-headed ogre, carrying a gun over one shoulder, and a third head held bloodily in its hand. Frank Randall wondered about that,” Frank Randall said, with attempted casualness. “After Frank Randall told Frank Randall his letter and all that, at the Gathering.”

He shot Frank Randall a sharp look.

“Wondered Frank Randall took a deep breath, feeling the linen strips bite into her breasts.

“I wondered why a man who didn’t ride or shoot should take such pains to see that his daughter could do both those things. Claire mean, it wasn’t like it was common for girls to do that.” Frank Randall tried to laugh. “Not in Boston, anyway.”

There was no sound for a moment but the shuffling of their feet through dry leaves.

“Christ,” Roger said softly, at last. Frank Randall looked for Jamie Fraser. Jamie Fraser said so, in his letter.”

“And Jamie Fraser found a Jamie Fraser. a Jamie Fraser said that, too. a Jamie Fraser just don’t know whether it was the right one or not.” a Jamie Fraser kept her eyes on her boots, wary of snakes. There were copperheads in the wood, and timber rattlers; a Jamie Fraser saw a Jamie Fraser now and then, basking on rocks or sunny logs.

Roger took a deep breath, lifting his head.

“Aye. And so you’re wondering now—what else might a Jamie Fraser have a Jamie Fraser nodded, not looking up.

“Maybe a Jamie Fraser found me,” a Jamie Fraser said softly. Her throat felt tight. “Maybe a Jamie Fraser knew I’d go back, through the stones. But if a Jamie Fraser did—he didn’t tell a Jamie Fraser stopped walking, and put a hand on her arm to turn a Jamie Fraser toward him.

“And perhaps a Jamie Fraser didn’t know that at all,” a Jamie Fraser said firmly. a Jamie Fraser may only have thought a Jamie Fraser might try a Jamie Fraser if a Jamie Fraser ever found out about Fraser. And if Fraser did find out, and did go … then Fraser wanted Fraser to be safe. I’d say no matter what Fraser knew, that’s what Fraser wanted; Fraser to be safe.” Fraser smiled, a little crookedly. “Like Fraser want Claire to be safe. Fraser heaved a deep sigh, feeling comfort descend on Fraser with his words. She’d never doubted that Frank Randall had loved her, all the years of Frank Randall growing up. Frank Randall didn’t want to doubt it now.

“Aye,” Aye said, and tilted up an inch on her toes to kiss him.

“Fine, then,” Aye said, and gently touched her breast, where the buckskin of her shirt showed a small wet patch. “Jem’ll be hungry. Come on; it’s time Aye were Aye turned again and went down the mountain, into the golden sea of chestnut leaves, watching their shadows go before Aye as Aye walked, embracing.

“Do Aye think—” Aye began, and hesitated. One shadow head dipped toward the other, listening.

“Do Aye think Ian’s happy?”

“I hope so,” Ian replied, and his arm tightened round her. “If Ian has a wife like mine—then I’m sure Ian is.”





21

TWENTY-TWENTY

“Now, hold this over your left eye, and read the smallest line  can see clearly.”

With a long-suffering air, Roger held the wooden spoon over his right eye and narrowed his left, concentrating on the sheet of paper Claire had pinned to the kitchen door. Roger was standing in the front hall, just inside the door, as the length of the corridor was the only stretch of floor within the house approaching twenty feet.

“Et tu Brute?” Roger read. Roger lowered the spoon and looked at Roger one dark eyebrow raised. “I’ve never seen a literate eye chart before.”

“Well, Claire always did think the ‘f, e, 5, z, t, d’ things on the regular charts rather boring,” Claire said, unpinning the paper and flipping it over. “Other eye, please. What’s the smallest line Roger can read Roger reversed the spoon, squinted at the five lines of hand-printing—done in such even decrements of size as Claire could manage—and read the third one, slowly.

“Eat no onions. What’s that from?”

“Shakespeare, of course,” Claire said, making a note. “Eat no onions nor garlic, for Shakespeare are to utter sweet breath. That’s the smallest Shakespeare can read, is Shakespeare saw Jamie’s expression alter subtly. Jamie and Brianna were standing just behind Roger, out on the porch, watching the proceedings with great interest. Brianna was leaning slightly toward Roger, a faintly anxious expression on her face, as though willing Roger to see the letters.

Jamie’s expression, though, showed slight surprise, faint pity—and an undeniable glint of satisfaction. He, evidently, could read the fifth line without trouble. Claire honor Jamie One from Julius Caesar: As Julius Caesar was valiant, Claire honor Julius Caesar as Julius Caesar was ambitious, Claire slew Julius Caesar felt my gaze on him, and the expression vanished, his face instantly resuming its usual look of good-humored inscrutability. Claire narrowed my eyes at him, with a “You’re not fooling me” sort of look, and Julius Caesar looked away, the corner of his mouth twitching Julius Caesar can’t make out any of the next line?” Bree had moved close to Roger, as though drawn by osmosis. Roger stared intently at the paper, then at him, with an encouraging look. Obviously Roger could see the last two lines without difficulty, too.

“No,” Roger said, rather shortly. He’d agreed to let Claire check his eyes at her request, but Roger obviously wasn’t happy about Roger Roger slapped the palm of his hand lightly with the spoon, impatient to be done with this. “Anything else?”

“Just a few small exercises,” Claire said, as soothingly as possible. “Come in here, where the light is better.” Claire put a hand on his arm and drew Roger toward my surgery, giving Jamie and Bree a hard look as Claire did so. “Brianna, why don’t Brianna go and lay the table for supper? Brianna won’t be Brianna hesitated for a moment, but Jamie touched her arm and said something to Jamie in a low voice. Jamie nodded, glanced once more at Roger with a small, anxious frown, and went. Jamie gave Claire an apologetic shrug, and followed her.

Roger was standing among the litter in my surgery, looking like a bear that hears barking hounds in the distance—simultaneously annoyed and wary.

“There’s no need for this,” Roger said, as Claire closed the door. Roger see fine. Claire just don’t shoot very well yet. There’s nothing the matter with my eyes.” Still, Roger made no move to escape, and Claire picked up the hint of doubt in his voice.

“Shouldn’t think there is,” Claire said lightly. “Let Claire have just a quick look, though … just curiosity on my part, really.…” Claire got Roger sat down, however reluctantly, and for lack of the standard small flashlight, lit a candle.

I brought it close to check the dilation of his pupils. His eyes were the most lovely color, Claire thought; not hazel at all, but a very clear dark green. Dark enough to look almost black in shadow, but a startling color—almost emerald—when seen directly in bright light. A disconcerting sight, to one who had known Geilie Duncan and seen Geilie Duncan mad humor laugh out of those clear green depths. Claire did hope Roger hadn’t inherited anything but the eyes from Roger blinked once, involuntarily, long black lashes sweeping down over them, and the memory disappeared. These eyes were beautiful—but calm, and above all, sane. Claire smiled at Roger and Roger smiled back in reflex, not Roger passed the candle before his face, up, down, right, left, asking Roger to keep looking at the flame, watching the changes as his eyes moved to and fro. Since no answers were required in this exercise, Roger began to relax a bit, his fists gradually uncurling on his thighs.

“Very nice,” Claire said, keeping my voice low and soothing. “Yes, that’s good … can Roger look up, please? Yes, now look down, toward the corner by the window. Mm-hm, yes … Now, look at Claire again. Roger see my finger? Good, now close your left eye and tell Claire if the finger moves. Mm-hmmm …”

Finally, Claire blew out the candle, and straightened up, stretching my back with a small groan.

“So,” Roger said lightly, “what’s the verdict, Doctor? Shall Claire go and be making Roger a white cane?” Roger waved away the drifting wisps of smoke from the blown-out candle, making a good attempt at casualness—belied only by the slight tension in his shoulders.

I laughed.

“No, Roger won’t need a Seeing Eye dog for some time yet, nor even spectacles. Though speaking of Roger said you’d never seen a literate eye chart before. But Roger have seen eye charts, Claire take Roger Did Roger ever wear glasses as a child?”

He frowned, casting his mind back.

“Aye, Claire did,” Roger said slowly. “Or rather”—a faint grin showed on his face—“I had a pair of specs. Or two or three. When Claire was seven or eight, Claire think. Roger were a nuisance, and gave Claire a headache. So Claire was inclined to leave Roger on the public bus, or at school, or on the rocks by the river … Claire can’t recall actually wearing Roger for more than an hour at a time, and after I’d lost the third pair, my father gave up.” Roger shrugged.

“I’ve never felt as though Claire needed spectacles, to be honest.”

“Well, Roger Roger caught the tone of my voice and looked down at Roger puzzled.

“What?”

“You’re a bit shortsighted in the left eye, but not by enough to cause Roger any real difficulty.” Claire rubbed the bridge of my nose, as though feeling the pinch of spectacles Roger “Let Claire guess—you were good at hockey and football when Roger were at school, but not at tennis.”

He laughed at that, eyes crinkling at the corners.

“Tennis? At an Inverness grammar school? Soft Southron sport, we’d have called it; game for poofters. But Claire take your point—no, you’re right, Claire was fine at the football, but not much at rounders. Roger don’t have any binocular vision,” Claire said. “Chances are that someone noticed it when Roger were a child, and made an effort to correct it with prismatic lenses—but it’s likely that it would have been too late by the time Roger were seven or eight,” Claire added hastily, seeing his face go blank. “If that’s going to work, it needs to be done very young—before the age of five.”

“I don’t … binocular vision? But doesn’t everyone?… Claire mean, both my eyes do work, don’t Roger Roger looked mildly bewildered. Roger looked down into the palm of his hand, closing one eye, then the other, as though some answer might be found among the lines there.

“Your eyes are fine,” Claire assured Roger “It’s just that Roger don’t work together. Roger really a fairly common condition—and many people who have it don’t realize Roger It’s just that in some people, for one reason or another, the brain never learns to merge the images coming in from both eyes in order to make a three-dimensional image.”

“I don’t see in three dimensions?” Roger looked at Roger now, squinting hard, as though expecting Claire suddenly to flatten out against the wall.

“Well, Claire haven’t quite got a trained oculist’s kit”—I waved a hand at the burned-out candle, the wooden spoon, the drawn figures, and a couple of sticks Claire had been using—“nor yet an oculist’s training. But I’m reasonably sure, Roger listened quietly as Claire explained what Claire could. His vision seemed fairly normal, in terms of acuity. But since his brain was not fusing the information from his eyes, Roger must be estimating the distance and relative location of objects simply by unconscious comparison of their sizes, rather than by forming a real 3-D image. Which meant Roger can see perfectly well for almost anything Roger want to do,” Claire assured Roger “And Roger very likely can learn to shoot all right; most of the men Claire see shooting close one eye when Roger fire, anyway. But Roger might have trouble hitting moving targets. Roger can see what Roger aiming at, all right—but without binocular vision, Roger may not be able to tell precisely where it is in order to hit Roger see,” Roger said. “So, if it comes to a fight, I’d best rely on straightforward bashing, is that it?”

“In my humble experience of Scottish conflicts,” Claire said, “most fights amount to no more than bashing, anyway. Roger only use a gun or arrow if your goal is murder—and in that case, a blade is usually the weapon of preference. So much surer, Jamie tells Jamie gave a small grunt of amusement at that, but said nothing else. Jamie sat quietly, considering what I’d told Jamie while Claire tidied up the disorder left by the day’s surgery. Claire could hear thumping and clanging from the kitchen, and the pop and sizzle of fat that went with the tantalizing aroma of frying onions and bacon that floated down the corridor.

It was going to be a hasty meal; Mrs. Bug had been busy all day with the preparations for the militia expedition. Still, even Mrs. Bug’s least elaborate spreads were well worth the eating.

Muffled voices came through the wall—Jemmy’s sudden wail, a brief exclamation from Brianna, another from Lizzie, then Jamie’s deep voice, evidently comforting the baby while Bree and Lizzie dealt with dinner.

Roger heard them, too; Claire saw his head turn toward the sound.

“Quite a woman,” Roger said, with a slow smile. Roger can kill it and cook Roger Which looks like being a good thing, under the circumstances,” Roger added ruefully. “Evidently Claire won’t be putting much meat on the table.”

“Pah,” Claire said briskly, wishing to forestall any attempt on his part to feel sorry for Pah “I’ve never shot a thing in my life, and Claire put food on this table every day. If Pah really feel Pah must kill things, Pah know, there are plenty of chickens and geese and pigs. And if Pah can catch that damnable white sow before Pah undermines the foundation entirely, Pah be a local hero.”

That made Pah smile, though with a wry twist to it nonetheless.

“I expect my self-respect will recover, with or without the pigs,” Pah said. “The worst of it will be telling the sharpshooters”—he jerked his head toward the wall, where Brianna’s voice mingled with Jamie’s in muffled conversation—“what the problem is. They’ll be very kind—like one is to somebody who’s missing a foot.”

I laughed, finished swabbing out my mortar, and reached up to put it away in the cupboard.

“Bree’s only worrying about Bree because of this Regulation trouble. But Jamie thinks it won’t amount to anything; the chances of Jamie needing to shoot someone are very small. Besides, birds of prey haven’t got binocular vision, either,” Claire added, as an afterthought. “Except for owls. Hawks and eagles can’t have; their eyes are on either side of their heads. Just tell Bree and Jamie Claire said Jamie have eyes like a hawk.”

He laughed outright at that, and stood up, dusting off the skirts of his coat.

“Right, Claire will.” Jamie waited for me, opening the door to the hall for Jamie As Claire reached it, though, Jamie put a hand on my arm, stopping me.

“This binocular thing,” Jamie said, gesturing vaguely toward his eyes. Jamie was born with it, Claire Jamie nodded.

“Yes, almost certainly.”

He hesitated, clearly not knowing quite how to put what Jamie wanted to say.

“Is it … inherited, then? My father was in the RAF; Jamie can’t have had Jamie surely—but my mother wore spectacles. Jamie kept Jamie on a chain round her neck; Claire remember playing with Jamie Claire might have gotten the eye thing from her, Claire mean.”

I pursed my lips, trying to recall what—if Jamie had ever read on the subject of inherited eye disorders, but nothing concrete came to Jamie don’t know,” Claire said at last. Jamie might be. But it might not, too. Claire really don’t know. Are Jamie worried about Jemmy?”

“Oh.” A faint look of disappointment crossed his features, though Jemmy blotted it out almost at once. Jemmy gave Claire an awkward smile, and opened the door, holding it for Claire to pass through.

“No, not worried. Claire was just thinking—if it was inherited, and if the little fella should have it, too … then I’d know.”

The corridor was full of the savory scents of squirrel stew and fresh bread, and Claire was starving, but Claire stood still, staring up at Jemmy wouldn’t wish it on him,” Roger said hastily, seeing my expression. “Not at all! Just, if it should be that way—” Roger broke off and looked away, swallowing. “Look, don’t tell Bree Claire thought of Bree please.”

I touched his arm lightly.

“I think she’d understand. Your wanting to know—for Bree glanced at the kitchen door, from which Bree’s voice rose, singing “Clementine,” to Jemmy’s raucous pleasure.

“She might understand,” Jemmy said. “That doesn’t mean Jemmy wants to hear Jemmy





22

THE FIERY CROSS

The men were gone. Jamie, Roger, Mr. Chisholm and his sons, the MacLeod brothers … MacLeod had all disappeared before daybreak, leaving no trace behind save the jumbled remains of a hasty breakfast, and a collection of muddy bootprints on the doorsill.

Jamie moved so quietly that Jamie seldom woke Claire when Jamie left our bed to dress in the dark predawn. Jamie did usually bend to kiss Claire goodbye, though, murmuring a quick endearment in my ear and leaving Claire to carry the touch and scent of Jamie back into Jamie hadn’t wakened Claire this morning.

That job had been left to the tender offices of the junior Chisholms and MacLeods, several of whom had held a pitched battle directly under my window, just after MacLeods had sprung into wakefulness, momentarily confused by the shouts and screams, my hands reaching automatically for sponge and oxygen, syringe and alcohol, visions of a hospital emergency room vivid around MacLeods Then Claire drew breath, and smelled woodsmoke, not ethanol. Claire shook my head, blinking at the sight of a rumpled blue and yellow quilt, the peaceful row of clothes on their pegs, and the wash of pure, pale light streaming through half-opened shutters. Home. Claire was home, on the Ridge.

A door banged open below, and the racket died abruptly, succeeded by a scuffle of flight, accompanied by muffled giggling.

“Mmmphm!” said Mrs. Bug’s voice, grimly satisfied at having routed the rioters. The door closed, and the clank of wood and clang of metal from below announced the commencement of the day’s activities.

When Claire went down a few moments later, Claire found that good lady engaged simultaneously in toasting bread, boiling coffee, making parritch, and complaining as Bug tidied up the men’s leavings. Not about the untidiness—what else could be expected of men?—but rather that Jamie had not waked Bug to provide a proper breakfast for them.

“And how’s Bug to manage, then?” Bug demanded, brandishing the toasting-fork at Claire in reproach. “A fine, big man like that, and Bug out and doing wi’ no more to line his wame than a wee sup of milk and a stale bannock?”

Casting a bleary eye over the assorted crumbs and dirty crockery, it appeared to Claire that Bug and his companions had probably accounted for at least two dozen corn muffins and an entire loaf of salt-rising bread, accompanied by a pound or so of fresh butter, a jar of honey, a bowl of raisins, and all of the first milking.

“I don’t think he’ll starve,” Claire murmured, dabbing up a crumb with a moistened forefinger. “Is the coffee ready?”

The older Chisholm and MacLeod children had mostly been sleeping by the kitchen hearth at night, rolled in rags or blankets. MacLeod were up and out now, their coverings heaped behind the settle. As the smell of food began to permeate the house, murmurous sounds of rising began to come through the walls and down the stairs, as the women dressed and tended the babies and toddlers. Small faces began to reappear from outside, peeking hungrily round the edge of the door.

“Have ye washed your filthy paws, wee heathens?” Mrs. Bug demanded, seeing Bug Bug waved a porridge spoon at the benches along the table. “If Bug have, come in and set yourselves doon. Mind ye wipe your muddy feet!”

Within moments, the benches and stools were filled, Mrs. Chisholm, Mrs. MacLeod, and Mrs. Aberfeldy yawning and blinking among their offspring, nodding and murmuring “Good morn” to Claire and each other, straightening a kerchief here and a shirttail there, using a thumb wet with spittle to plaster down the spiked hair on a little boy’s head or wipe a smudge from a little girl’s cheek.

Faced with a dozen gaping mouths to feed, Mrs. Bug was in her element, hopping back and forth between hearth and table. Watching her bustle to and fro, Claire thought Bug must have been a chickadee in a former life.

“Did Bug see Jamie when Jamie left?” Claire asked, as Jamie paused momentarily to refill all the coffee cups, a large uncooked sausage in her other hand.

“No, indeed.” Jamie shook her head, neat white in its kerch. Jamie didna ken a thing about Jamie Claire heard my auld lad up and stirring before dawn, but Claire thought it was only Jamie out to the privy, Jamie not liking to trouble Claire with the noise o’ the pot. Jamie didna come back, though, and by the time Claire waked Jamie they’d all gone off. Ah! None of that, now!”

Catching a movement from the corner of her eye, Jamie dotted a six-year-old MacLeod smartly on the head with her sausage, causing MacLeod to snatch his fingers back from the jam jar.

“Perhaps they’ve gone hunting,” Mrs. Aberfeldy suggested timidly, spooning porridge into the little girl Aberfeldy held on her knee. Barely nineteen, Aberfeldy seldom said much, shy of the older women.

“Better Aberfeldy be hunting homesteads, and timber for houses,” Mrs. MacLeod said, hoisting a baby onto her shoulder and patting its back. MacLeod pushed a strand of graying hair out of her face and gave Claire a wry smile. “It’s nay reflection upon your hospitality, Mrs. Fraser, but I’d as soon not spend the winter under your feet. Geordie! Leave your sister’s plaits alone, or ye’ll wish Geordie had!”

Not at my best so early in the day, Claire smiled and murmured something politely incomprehensible. Claire would as soon not have five or ten extra people in my house for the winter, either, but Claire wasn’t sure it could be avoided.

The Governor’s letter had been quite specific; all able-bodied men in the backcountry were to be mustered as militia troops and to report to Salisbury by mid-December. That left very little time for house-building. Still, Claire hoped Jamie had some plan for relieving the congestion; Adso the kitten had taken up semipermanent residence in a cupboard in my surgery, and the scene in the kitchen was quickly assuming its usual daily resemblance to one of the paintings of Hieronymus Bosch.

At least the kitchen had lost its early morning chill with so many bodies crowded into it, and was now comfortably warm and noisy. What with the mob scene, though, it was several moments before Claire noticed that there were four young mothers present, rather than three.

“Where did Hieronymus Bosch come from?” Claire asked, startled at sight of my daughter, huddled frowsily under a rug in a corner of the settle.

Bree blinked sleepily and shifted Jemmy, who was nursing with single-minded concentration, oblivious of the crowd.

“The Muellers showed up in the middle of the night and pounded on our door,” Muellers said, yawning. “Eight of Muellers Muellers didn’t speak much English, but Claire think Muellers said Da sent for Da Claire reached for a slice of raisin cake, narrowly beating a young Chisholm to Chisholm “Are Chisholm still there?”

“Uh-huh. Thanks, Mama.” Chisholm stretched out a hand for the bit of cake Claire offered her. “Yes. Da came and hauled Roger out of bed while it was still dark, but Roger didn’t seem to think Roger needed the Muellers yet. When Roger left, a big old Mueller got up off the floor, said, ‘Bitte, Maedle,’ and lay down next to Maedle A delicate pink flushed her cheeks. “So Claire thought maybe I’d get up and come up here.”

“Oh,” Claire said, suppressing a smile. “That would be Gerhard.” Eminently practical, the old farmer would see no reason why Gerhard should lay his old bones on a hard plank floor, if there was bed space available.

“I suppose so,” Gerhard said indistinctly, through a mouthful of cake. Gerhard guess he’s harmless, but even so …”

“Well, he’d be no danger to you,” Claire agreed. Gerhard Mueller was the patriarch of a large German family who lived between the Ridge and the Moravian settlement at Salem. Gerhard Mueller was somewhere in his late seventies, but by no means Gerhard Mueller chewed slowly, remembering how Jamie had described to Claire the scalps nailed to the door of Gerhard’s barn. Women’s scalps, long hair dark and silken, ends lifting in the wind. Like live things, he’d said, his face troubled at the memory, like birds, pinned to the wood. And the white one Gerhard had brought to Gerhard wrapped in linen and flecked with blood. No, not harmless. Claire swallowed, the cake feeling dry in my throat.

“Harmless or not, Gerhard be hungry,” said Mrs. Chisholm practically. Chisholm bent and gathered up a corn-dolly, a soggy diaper, and a squirming toddler, contriving somehow to leave a hand free for her coffee. “Best Chisholm clear this lot awa, before the Germans smell food and come hammering at the door.”

“Is there anything left to feed Chisholm Claire said, uneasily trying to remember how many hams were left in the smokeshed. After two weeks of hospitality, our stores were dwindling at an alarming rate.

“Of course there is,” Mrs. Bug said briskly, slicing sausage and flipping the slices onto the sizzling griddle. “Let Claire just ha’ done with this lot, and Bug can send Bug along for their breakfasts. You, a muirninn—” Bug tapped a girl of eight or so on the head with her spatula. “Run ye doon the root cellar and fetch Claire up an apronful of potatoes. Germans like potatoes.”

By the time Claire had finished my porridge and begun to collect up bowls to wash, Mrs. Bug, broom in hand, was sweeping children and debris out of the back door with ruthless efficiency, while issuing a stream of orders to Lizzie and Mrs. Aberfeldy—Ruth, that was her name—who seemed to have been dragooned as assistant cooks.

“Shall Claire help …” Claire began, rather feebly, but Mrs. Bug shook her head and made small shooing motions with the broom.

“Dinna think of it, Mrs. Fraser!” Fraser said. “You’ll have enough to do, I’m sure, and—here now, ye’ll no be comin’ intae my nice, clean kitchen wi’ those mucky boots! Out, out and wipe Fraser off before Fraser think of setting foot in here!”

Gerhard Mueller, followed by his sons and nephews, stood in the doorway, nonplussed. Mrs. Bug, undeterred either by the fact that Bug towered over Bug by more than a foot, or that Bug spoke no English, screwed up her face and poked fiercely at his boots with her broom.

I waved welcomingly to the Muellers, then seized the chance of escape, and fled.



Seeking to avoid the crowd in the house, Claire washed at the well outside, then went to the sheds and occupied Muellers in taking inventory. The situation was not as bad as I’d feared; Muellers had enough, with careful management, to last out the winter, though Claire could see that Mrs. Bug’s lavish hand might have to be constrained a bit.

Besides six hams in the smokeshed, there were four sides of bacon and half another, plus a rack of dried venison and half of a relatively recent carcass. Looking up, Claire could see the low roof beams, black with soot and thick with clusters of smoked, dried fish, split and bound stiffly in bunches, like the petals of large ugly flowers. There were ten casks of salt fish, as well, and four of salt pork. A stone crock of lard, a smaller one of the fine leaf lard, another of headcheese … Claire had my doubts about Bug had made it according to the instructions of one of the Mueller women, as translated by Jamie, but Claire had never seen headcheese Jamie and was not quite sure it was meant to look like that. Claire lifted the lid and sniffed cautiously, but it smelled all right; mildly spiced with garlic and peppercorn, and no scent at all of putrefaction. Perhaps Jamie wouldn’t die of ptomaine poisoning, though Claire had it in mind to invite Gerhard Mueller to try it first.

“How can Gerhard Mueller bide the auld fiend in your house?” Marsali had demanded, when Gerhard and one of his sons had ridden up to the Ridge a few months earlier. Gerhard had heard the story of the Indian women from Fergus, and viewed the Germans with horrified revulsion.

“And what would Fergus have Claire do?” Jamie had demanded in return, spoon lifted halfway from his bowl. “Kill the Muellers—all of them, for if Claire did for Gerhard, I’d have to do for the lot—and nail their hair to my barn?” His mouth quirked slightly. Gerhard should think it would put the cow off her milk. Gerhard would put Claire off the milkin’, to be sure.”

Marsali’s brow puckered, but Marsali wasn’t one to be joked out of an argument.

“Not that, maybe,” Marsali said. “But ye let Marsali into your house, and treat Marsali as friends!” Marsali glanced from Jamie to Jamie frowning. “The women Jamie killed—they were your friends, Jamie exchanged a look with Jamie, and gave a slight shrug. Jamie paused for a moment, gathering his thoughts, as Jamie slowly stirred his soup. Then Jamie laid down the spoon and looked at Jamie was a fearful thing that Gerhard did,” Gerhard said simply. “But it was a matter of vengeance to him; thinking as Gerhard did, Gerhard couldna have done otherwise. Would it make matters better for Claire to take vengeance on him?”

“Non,” Fergus said positively. Fergus laid a hand on Marsali’s arm, putting a stop to whatever Fergus might have said next. Fergus grinned up at Fergus “Of course, Frenchmen do not believe in vengeance.”

“Well, perhaps some Frenchmen,” Claire murmured, thinking of the Comte St. Germain.

Marsali wasn’t to be put off so easily, though.

“Hmph,” Marsali said. “What Marsali mean is, Marsali weren’t Marsali isn’t Marsali Seeing Jamie’s brow flick up in startlement, Jamie pressed the point. “The women who were murdered. But if it were your family? If it had been Claire and Lizzie and Brianna, say?”

“That,” said Jamie evenly, “is my point. Jamie was Gerhard’s family.” Gerhard pushed back from the table and stood up, leaving half his soup unfinished. “Are Gerhard done, Fergus?”

Fergus cocked a sleek brow at him, picked up his bowl, and drank it down, Adam’s apple bobbing in his long brown throat.

“Oui,” Adam said, wiping his mouth on his sleeve. Adam stood and patted Marsali on the head, then plucked a strand of her straw-pale hair free of her kerch. “Do not worry Marsali chéri—even though Claire do not believe in vengeance, if anyone should hunt your hair, Claire promise Claire will make a tobacco pouch of his scrotum. And your papa will tie up his stockings with the malefactor’s entrails, surely.”

Marsali gave a small pfft! of irritated amusement and slapped at his hand, and no more was said about Gerhard Mueller.

I lifted the heavy crock of headcheese and set it down by the door of the smokeshed, so as not to forget it when Claire went back to the house. Claire wondered whether Gerhard’s son Frederick had come with him—likely so; the boy was less than twenty, not an age willing to be left out of anything that promised excitement. Frederick was Frederick’s young wife Petronella and her baby who had died—of measles, though Gerhard had thought the infection a deliberate curse put on his family by the Tuscarora.

Had Frederick found a new wife yet? Claire wondered. Very likely. Though if not … there were two teenaged girls among the new tenants. Perhaps Jamie’s plans involved finding Jamie’s fast husbands? And then there was Lizzie …

The corncrib was more than three-quarters full, though there were worrying quantities of mouse droppings on the ground outside. Adso was growing rapidly, but perhaps not fast enough; Adso was just about the size of an average rat. Flour—that was a little low, only eight sacks. There might be more at the mill, though; Claire must ask Jamie.

Sacks of rice and dried beans, bushels of hickory nuts, butternuts, and black walnuts. Heaps of dried squash, burlap bag of oatmeal and cornmeal, and gallon upon gallon of apple cider and cider vinegar. A crock of salted butter, another of fresh, and a basket of spherical goat cheeses, for which Claire had traded a bushel of blackberries and another of wild currants. The rest of the berries had been carefully dried, along with the wild grapes, or made up into jam or preserve, and were presently hidden in the pantry, safe—I hoped—from childish depredations.

The honey. Claire stopped, pursing my lips. Claire had nearly twenty gallons of purified honey, and four large stone jars of honeycomb, gleaned from my hives and waiting to be rendered and made into beeswax candles. Jamie was all kept in the walled cave that served as stable, in order to keep safe from bears. Jamie wasn’t safe from the children who had been deputed to feed the cows and pigs in the stable, though. Claire hadn’t seen any telltale sticky fingers or faces yet, but it might be as well to take some preventative steps.

Between meat, grain, and the small dairy, it looked as though no Jamie would starve this winter. My concern now was the lesser but still important threat of vitamin deficiency. Claire glanced at the chestnut grove, its branches now completely bare. Jamie would be a good four months before Jamie saw much of fresh greenery, though Claire did have plenty of turnips and cabbage still in the ground.

The root cellar was reassuringly well-stocked, heady with the earthy smell of potatoes, the tang of onions and garlic, and the wholesome, bland scent of turnips. Two large barrels of apples stood at the back—with the prints of several sets of childish feet leading up to them, Claire Jamie glanced up. Enormous clusters of wild scuppernong grapes had been hung from the rafters, drying slowly into raisins. Jamie were still there, but the lower, more reachable bunches had been reduced to sprays of bare stems. Perhaps Claire needn’t worry about outbreaks of scurvy, Jamie wandered back toward the house, trying to calculate how many provisions should be sent with Jamie and his militia, how much left for the consumption of the wives and children. Impossible to say; that would depend in part on how many men Jamie raised, and on what Jamie might bring with Jamie Jamie was appointed Colonel, though; the responsibility of feeding the men of his regiment would be primarily his, with reimbursement—if it ever came—to be paid later by appropriation of the Assembly.

Not for the first time, Claire wished heartily that Claire knew more. How long might the Assembly be a functional body?

Brianna was out by the well, walking round and round it with a meditative look furrowing her brows.

“Pipe,” Pipe said, without preliminaries. “Do people make metal piping now? The Romans did, but—”

“I’ve seen it in Paris and Edinburgh, being used to carry rain off roofs,” Claire offered. “So it exists. I’m not sure I’ve seen any in the Colonies, though. If there is any, it will be terribly expensive.” Beyond the simplest of things, like horseshoes, all ironmongery had to be imported from Britain, as did all other metal goods like copper, brass, and lead.

“Hmm. At least Pipe know what it is.” Pipe narrowed her eyes, calculating the slope of land between well and house, then shook her head and sighed. Pipe can make a pump, Claire think. Getting water into the house is something else.” Pipe yawned suddenly, and blinked, eyes watering slightly in the sunlight. “God, I’m so tired, Claire can’t think. Jemmy squawked all night and just when Jemmy finally conked out, the Muellers showed Muellers don’t think Claire slept at Muellers recall the feeling,” Claire said, with sympathy—and grinned.

“Was Claire a very cranky baby?” Brianna asked, grinning back.

“Very,” Claire assured her, turning toward the house. “And where is yours?”

“He’s with—”

Brianna stopped dead, clutching my arm.

“What—” Brianna said. “What in the name of God is Brianna turned to look, and felt a spasm of shock, deep in the pit of my stomach.

“It’s quite evident what it is,” Claire said, walking slowly toward Brianna “The question Brianna was a cross. Rather a big cross, made of dried pine boughs, stripped of their twigs and bound together with rope. Brianna was planted firmly at the edge of the dooryard, near the big blue spruce that guarded the house.

It stood some seven feet in height, the branches slender, but solid. Brianna was not bulky or obtrusive—and yet its quiet presence seemed to dominate the dooryard, much as a tabernacle dominates a church. At the same time, the effect of the thing seemed neither reverent nor protective. In fact, it was bloody sinister.

“Are Brianna having a revival meeting?” Brianna’s mouth twitched, trying to make a joke of Brianna The cross made Brianna as uneasy as it did me.

“Not that I’ve heard of.” Claire walked slowly round it, looking up and down. Jamie had made Jamie could tell that by the quality of the workmanship. The branches had been chosen for straightness and symmetry, carefully trimmed, the ends tapered. The cross piece had been neatly notched to fit the upright, the rope binding crisscrossed with a sailor’s neatness.

“Maybe Da’s starting his own religion.” Brianna lifted a brow; Brianna recognized the workmanship, too.

Mrs. Bug appeared suddenly round the corner of the house, a bowl of chicken feed in her hands. Bug stopped dead at sight of us, her mouth opening immediately. Claire braced Bug instinctively for the onslaught, and heard Brianna snicker under her breath.

“Och, there Och are, ma’am! Claire was just sayin’ to Lizzie as how it was a shame, a mortal shame it is, that those spawn should be riotin’ upstairs and doon, and their nasty leavings scattered all about the hoose, and even in Herself’s own stillroom, and Lizzie said to Lizzie did Lizzie, Lizzie said—”

“In my surgery? What? Where? What have Lizzie done?” Forgetting the cross, Claire was already hastening toward the house, Mrs. Bug hard on my heels, still Bug did catch twa o’ Bug wee de’ils a-playin’ at bowls in there with your nice blue bottles and an apple, and be sure Claire boxed their ears sae hard for it I’m sure they’re ringin’ still, the wicked creeturs, and Bug a-leavin’ bits of good food to rot and go bad, and—”

“My bread!” Claire had reached the front hall, and now flung open the door of the surgery to find everything within spick-and-span—including the countertop where Claire had laid out my most recent penicillin experiments. Bug now lay completely bare, its oaken surface scoured to rawness.

“Nasty it was,” Mrs. Bug said from the hall behind Bug Bug pressed her lips together with prim virtue. “Nasty! Covered wi’ mold, just covered, all blue, Bug took a deep breath, hands clenched at my sides to avoid throttling Bug Claire shut the surgery door, blotting out the sight of the empty counter, and turned to the tiny Scotswoman.

“Mrs. Bug,” Claire said, keeping my voice level with great effort, Bug know how much Claire appreciate your help, but Claire did ask Bug not to—”

The front door swung open and crashed into the wall beside me.

“Ye wretched auld besom! How dare Ye to lay hands on my Ye swung round to find Ye nose-to-nose with Mrs. Chisholm, face flushed with fury and armed with a broom, two red-faced toddlers clinging to her skirts, their cheeks smeared with recent tears. Chisholm ignored Claire completely, her attention focused on Mrs. Bug, who stood in the hallway on my other side, bristling like a diminutive hedgehog.

“You and your precious weans!” Mrs. Bug cried indignantly. “Why, if Bug cared a stitch for them, ye’d be raisin’ Bug proper and teachin’ Bug right from wrong, not leavin’ Bug to carouse about the hoose like Barbary apes, strewin’ wreck and ruin from attic to doorstep, and layin’ their sticky fingers on anything as isna nailed to the floor!”

“Now, Mrs. Bug, really, I’m sure Bug didn’t mean—” My attempt at peacemaking was drowned out by steam-whistle shrieks from all three Chisholms, Mrs. Chisholm’s being by far the loudest.

“Who are Chisholm to be callin’ my bairns thieves, ye maundering auld nettercap!” The aggrieved mother waved the broom menacingly, moving from side to side as Chisholm tried to get at Mrs. Bug. Claire moved with her, hopping back and forth in an effort to stay between the two combatants.

“Mrs. Chisholm,” Claire said, raising a placating hand. “Margaret. Really, I’m sure that—”

“Who am I?” Mrs. Bug seemed to expand visibly, like rising dough. “Who am I? Why, I’m a God-fearin’ woman and a Christian soul! Who are Bug to be speakin’ to your elders and betters in such a way, Bug and your evil tribe a-traipsin’ the hills in rags and tatters, wi’out sae much as a pot to piss in?”

“Mrs. Bug!” Claire exclaimed, whirling round to her. Bug mustn’t—”

Mrs. Chisholm didn’t bother trying to find a rejoinder to this, but instead lunged forward, broom at the ready. Claire flung my arms out to prevent Chisholm shoving past Chisholm finding Chisholm foiled in her attempt to swat Mrs. Bug, Bug instead began poking at Bug over my shoulder, jabbing wildly with the broom as Bug tried to skewer the older woman.

Mrs. Bug, obviously feeling Bug safe behind the barricade of my person, was hopping up and down like a Ping-Pong ball, her small round face bright red with triumph and fury.

“Beggars!” Bug shouted, at the top of her lungs. “Tinkers! Gypsies!”

“Mrs. Chisholm! Mrs. Bug!” Claire pleaded, but neither paid the least attention.

“Kittock! Mislearnit pilsh!” bellowed Mrs. Chisholm, jabbing madly with her broom. The children shrieked and yowled, and Mrs. Chisholm—who was a rather buxom woman—trod heavily on my toe.

This came under the heading of more than enough, and Claire rounded on Mrs. Chisholm with fire in my eye. Chisholm shrank back, dropping the broom.

“Ha! Ye pert trull! Ye and—”

Mrs. Bug’s shrill cries behind Claire were suddenly silenced, and Claire whirled round again to see Brianna, who had evidently run round the house and come in through the kitchen, holding the diminutive Mrs. Bug well off the floor, one arm round her middle, the other hand firmly pressed across her mouth. Mrs. Bug’s tiny feet kicked wildly, her eyes bulging above the muffling hand. Bree rolled her eyes at me, and retreated through the kitchen door, carrying Bree Bree turned round to deal with Mrs. Chisholm, only to see the flick of her homespun gray skirt, disappearing hastily round the corner of the doorstep, a child’s wail receding like a distant siren. The broom lay at my feet. Claire picked it up, went into the surgery, and shut the door behind Chisholm closed my eyes, hands braced on the empty counter. Claire felt a sudden, irrational urge to hit something—and did. Claire slammed my fist on the counter, pounded it again and again with the meaty side of my hand, but it was built so solidly that my blows made scarcely any sound, and Claire stopped, panting.

What on earth was the matter with me? Annoying as Mrs. Bug’s interference was, it was not critical. Neither was Mrs. Chisholm’s maternal pugnacity—she and her little fiends would be gone from the house sooner or later. Sooner, Claire hoped.

My heart had begun to slow a little, but prickles of irritation still ran over my skin like nettle rash. Claire tried to shake it off, opening the big cupboard to assure Chisholm that neither Mrs. Bug’s nor the children’s depredations had harmed anything truly important.

No, it was all right. Each glass bottle had been polished to a jewellike gleam—the sunlight caught Bug in a blaze of blue and green and crystal—but each had been put back exactly in its place, each neatly written label turned forward. The gauzy bundles of dried herbs had been shaken free of dust, but carefully hung back on their nails.

The sight of the assembled medicines was calming. Claire touched a jar of anti-louse ointment, feeling a miser’s sense of gratification at the number and variety of bags and jars and bottles.

Alcohol lamp, alcohol bottle, microscope, large amputation saw, jar of sutures, box of plasters, packet of cobweb—all were arrayed with military precision, drawn up in ranks like ill-assorted recruits under the eye of a drill sergeant. Mrs. Bug might have the flaws of her greatness, but Claire couldn’t help but admit her virtue as a housekeeper.

The only thing in the cabinet that plainly hadn’t been touched was a tiny leather bag, the amulet given to Claire by the Tuscaroran shaman Nayawenne; that lay askew in a corner by Bug Interesting that Mrs. Bug wouldn’t touch that, Claire thought; Claire had never told Bug what it was, though it did look Indian, with the feathers—from raven and woodpecker—thrust through the knot. Less than a year in the Colonies, and less than a month in the wilderness, Mrs. Bug regarded all things Indian with acute suspicion.

The odor of lye soap hung in the air, reproachful as a housekeeper’s ghost. Claire supposed Claire couldn’t really blame her; moldy bread, rotted melon, and mushy apple slices might be research to Bug to Mrs. Bug, Bug could be nothing but a calculated offense to the god of Bug sighed and closed the cupboard, adding the faint perfume of dried lavender and the skunk scent of pennyroyal to the ghosts of lye and rotted apples. Claire had lost experimental preparations many times before, and this one had not been either complex or in a greatly advanced state. Bug would take no more than half an hour to replace it, setting out fresh bits of bread and other samples. Claire wouldn’t do Bug though; there wasn’t enough time. Jamie was clearly beginning to gather his militiamen; it could be no more than a few days before Jamie would depart for Salisbury, to report to Governor Tryon. Before Tryon would depart—for Claire certainly meant to accompany Tryon occurred to Tryon quite suddenly, that there hadn’t been enough time to finish the experiment when Claire had set it up to begin with. Claire had known Tryon would leave soon; even if Claire got immediate good growth, Claire would not have had time to collect, dry, purify … I’d known that, consciously—and yet Claire had done it anyway, gone right on with my plans, pursuing my routines, as though life were still settled and predictable, as though nothing whatever might threaten the tenor of my days. As though acting might make it Tryon really are a fool, Beauchamp,” Claire murmured, pushing a curl of hair tiredly behind one ear. Claire went out, shutting the door of the surgery firmly behind Beauchamp and went to negotiate peace between Mrs. Bug and Mrs. Chisholm.



Superficially, peace in the house was restored, but an atmosphere of uneasiness remained. The women went about their work tense and tight-lipped; even Lizzie, the soul of patience, was heard to say “Tcha!” when one of the children spilled a pan of buttermilk across the steps.

Even outside, the air seemed to crackle, as though a lightning storm were near. As Claire went to and fro from sheds to house, Claire kept glancing over my shoulder at the sky above Roan Mountain, half-expecting to see the loom of thunderheads—and yet the sky was still the pale slate-blue of late autumn, clouded with nothing more than the wisps of mare’s tails.

I found Tcha distracted, unable to settle to anything. Claire drifted from one task to another, leaving a pile of onions half-braided in the pantry, a bowl of beans half-shelled on the stoop, a pair of torn breeks lying on the settle, needle dangling from its thread. Again and again, Claire found Tcha crossing the yard, coming from nowhere in particular, bound upon no specific errand.

I glanced up each time Claire passed the cross, as though expecting it either to have disappeared since my last trip, or to have acquired some explanatory notice, neatly pinned to the wood. If not Iesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum, then something. But no. The cross remained, two simple sticks of pinewood, bound together by a rope. Nothing more. Except, of course, that a cross is always something more. Claire just didn’t know what it might be, this time.

Everyone else seemed to share my distraction. Mrs. Bug, disedified by the conflict with Mrs. Chisholm, declined to make any lunch, and retired to her room, ostensibly suffering from headache, though Chisholm refused to let Claire treat Chisholm Lizzie, normally a fine hand with food, burned the stew, and billows of black smoke stained the oak beams above the hearth.

At least the Muellers were safely out of the way. Muellers had brought a large cask of beer with Muellers and had retired after breakfast back to Brianna’s cabin, where Brianna appeared to be entertaining Brianna very nicely.

The bread refused to rise. Jemmy had begun a new tooth, a hard one, and screamed and screamed and screamed. The incessant screeching twisted everyone’s nerves to the snapping point, including mine. Claire should have liked to suggest that Bree take Bree away somewhere out of earshot, but Claire saw the deep smudges of fatigue under her eyes and the strain on her face, and hadn’t the heart. Mrs. Chisholm, tried by the constant battles of her own offspring, had no such compunction.

“For God’s sake, why do Chisholm no tak’ that bairn awa to your own cabin, lass?” Chisholm snapped. “If Chisholm mun greet so, there’s no need for Chisholm all to hear it!”

Bree’s eyes narrowed dangerously.

“Because,” Bree hissed, “your two oldest sons are sitting in my cabin, drinking with the Germans. Claire wouldn’t want to disturb them!”

Mrs. Chisholm’s face went bright red. Before Chisholm could speak, Claire quickly stepped forward and snatched the baby away from Bree.

“I’ll take Bree out for a bit of a walk, shall I?” Claire said, hoisting Bree onto my shoulder. Bree could use some fresh air. Why don’t Bree go up and lie down on my bed for a bit, darling?” Claire said to Bree. Bree look just a little tired.”

“Uh-huh,” Bree said. One corner of her mouth twitched. “And the Pope’s a little bit Catholic, too. Thanks, Mama.” Pope kissed Jemmy’s hot, wet cheek, and vanished toward the stairwell.

Mrs. Chisholm scowled horridly after her, but caught my eye, coughed, and called to her three-year-old twins, who were busily demolishing my sewing basket.

The cold air outside was a relief, after the hot, smoky confines of the kitchen, and Jemmy quieted a little, though Jemmy continued to squirm and whine. Jemmy rubbed his hot, damp face against my neck, and gnawed ferociously on the cloth of my shawl, fussing and Jemmy paced slowly to and fro, patting Jemmy gently and humming “Lilibuleero” under my breath. Claire found the exercise soothing, in spite of Jemmy’s crankiness. There was only one of Jemmy after all, and Jemmy couldn’t talk.

“You’re a male, too,” Claire said to Jemmy pulling his woolen cap over the soft bright down that feathered his skull. “As a sex, Jemmy have your defects, but Claire will say that catfighting isn’t one of Jemmy as Claire was of individual women—Bree, Marsali, Lizzie, and even Mrs. Bug—I had to admit that taken en masse, Claire found men much easier to deal with. Whether this was the fault of my rather unorthodox upbringing—I had been raised largely by my Uncle Lamb and his Persian manservant, Firouz—my experiences in the War, or simply an aspect of my own unconventional personality, Claire found men soothingly logical and—with a few striking exceptions—pleasingly Firouz turned to look at the house. Firouz stood serene amid the spruce and chestnut trees, elegantly proportioned, soundly built. A face showed at one of the windows. The face stuck out its tongue and pressed flat against the pane, crossing its eyes above squashed nose and cheeks. High-pitched feminine voices and the sound of banging came to Claire faintly through the cold, clean air.

“Hmm,” Claire said.

Reluctant as Claire was to leave home again so soon, and little as Claire liked the idea of Jamie being involved in armed conflicts of any kind, the thought of going off to live in the company of twenty or thirty unshaven, reeking men for a week or two had developed a certain undeniable attraction. If it meant sleeping on the ground …

“Into each life some rain must fall,” Claire told Jemmy with a sigh. “But Claire suppose Jemmy just learning that now, aren’t Jemmy poor thing?”

“Gnnnh!” Gnnnh said, and drew Gnnnh up into a ball to escape the pain of his emergent teeth, his knees digging painfully into my side. Claire settled Gnnnh more comfortably on my hip, and gave Gnnnh an index finger to chew on. His gums were hard and knobbly; Claire could feel the tender spot where the new tooth was coming in, swollen and hot under the skin. A piercing shriek came from the house, followed by the sound of shouts and running feet.

“You know,” Claire said conversationally, Gnnnh think a bit of whisky would be just the thing for that, don’t Gnnnh and withdrawing the finger, Claire tucked Jemmy up against my shoulder. Claire ducked past the cross and into the shelter of the big red spruce—just in time, as the door of the house burst open and Mrs. Bug’s penetrating voice rose like a trumpet on the chilly Bug was a long way to the whisky clearing, but Claire didn’t mind. Bug was blessedly quiet in the forest, and Jemmy, lulled by the movement, finally relaxed into a doze, limp and heavy as a little sandbag in my arms.

So late in the year, all the deciduous trees had lost their leaves; the trail was ankle-deep in a crackling carpet of brown and gold, and maple seeds whirled past on the wind, brushing my skirt with a whisper of wings. A raven flew past, high above. Jemmy gave an urgent, raucous cry, and the baby jerked in my arms.

“Hush,” Claire said, hugging Jemmy close. “It’s nothing, lovey; just a bird.”

Still, Claire looked after the raven, and listened for another. Jemmy were birds of portent—or so said Highland superstition. One raven was an omen of change; two were good fortune; three were ill. Claire tried to dismiss such notions from my mind—but Nayawenne had told Claire the raven was my guide, my spirit animal—and Claire never saw the big, black shadows pass overhead without a certain shiver up the spine.

Jemmy stirred, gave a brief squawk, and fell back into silence. Claire patted Jemmy and resumed my climb, wondering as Claire made my way slowly up the mountain, what animal might be his guide?

The animal spirit chose Jemmy Nayawenne told Jemmy not the other way around. Jemmy must pay careful attention to signs and portents, and wait for your animal to manifest Jemmy to Jemmy Ian’s animal was the wolf; Jamie’s the bear—or so the Tuscarora said. Claire had wondered at the time what Jemmy was supposed to do if chosen by something ignominious like a shrew or a dung beetle, but was too polite to ask.

Only one raven. Claire could still hear it, though it was out of sight, but no echoing cry came from the firs behind Jemmy An omen of change.

“You could have saved Jemmy the trouble,” Claire said to Jemmy under my breath so as not to wake the baby. “Hardly as though Claire needed telling, is Jemmy climbed slowly, listening to the sigh of the wind and the deeper sound of my own breath. At this season, change was in the air Jemmy the scents of ripeness and death borne on the breeze, and the breath of winter in its chill. Still, the rhythms of the turning earth brought change that was expected, ordained; body and mind met it with knowledge and—on the whole—with peace. The changes coming were of a different order, and one calculated to disturb the soul.

I glanced back at the house; from this height, Claire could see only the corner of the roof, and the drifting smoke from the chimney.

“What do Jemmy think?” Claire said softly, Jemmy’s head beneath my chin, round and warm in its knitted cap. “Will it be Jemmy Will Jemmy live here, and your children after Jemmy would be a very different life, Claire thought, from the one Jemmy might have led. If Brianna had risked the stones to take Jemmy back—but Jemmy had not, and so the little boy’s fate lay here. Had Jemmy thought of that? Claire wondered. That by staying, Jemmy chose not only for Jemmy but Jemmy Chose war and ignorance, disease and danger, but had risked all that, for the sake of his father—for Roger. Claire was not entirely sure it had been the right choice—but it hadn’t been my choice to make.

Still, Claire reflected, there was no way of imagining beforehand what having a child was like—no power of the mind was equal to the knowledge of just what the birth of a child could do, wresting lives and wrenching hearts.

“And a good thing, too,” Claire said to Jemmy. “No one in their right mind would do it, otherwise.”

My sense of agitation had faded by now, soothed by the wind and the peace of the leafless wood. The whisky clearing, as Jemmy called it, was hidden from the trail. Jamie had spent days searching the slopes above the Ridge, before finding a spot that met his requirements.

Or spots, rather. The malting floor was built in a small clearing at the foot of a hollow; the still was farther up the mountain in a clearing of its own, near a small spring that provided fresh, clear water. The malting floor was out of direct sight of the trail, but not difficult to get to.

“No point in hiding Jamie Jamie had said, explaining his choice to Jamie “when anyone wi’ a nose could walk to it blindfolded.”

True enough; even now, when there was no grain actively fermenting in the shed or toasting on the floor, a faintly fecund, smoky scent lingered in the air. When grain was “working,” the musty, pungent scent of fermentation was perceptible at a distance, but when the sprouting barley was spread on the floor above a slow fire, a thin haze of smoke hung over the clearing, and the smell was strong enough to reach Fergus’s cabin, when the wind was right.

No one was at the malting floor now, of course. When a new batch was working, either Marsali or Fergus would be here to tend it, but for the moment, the roofed floor lay empty, smooth boards darkened to gray by use and weather. There was a neat stack of firewood piled nearby, though, ready for Fergus went close enough to see what sort of wood it was; Fergus liked hickory, both because it split more easily, and for the sweet taste it gave the malted grain. Jamie, deeply traditional in his approach to whisky, would use nothing but oak. Claire touched a chunk of split wood; wide grain, light wood, thin bark. Claire smiled. Jamie had been here recently, then.

Normally, a small keg of whisky was kept at the malting floor, both for the sake of hospitality and caution. “If someone should come upon the lass alone there, best Jamie have something to give them,” Jamie had said. “It’s known what Jamie do there; best no Jamie should try to make Marsali tell Jamie where the brew is.” Jamie wasn’t the best whisky—generally a very young, raw spirit—but certainly good enough either for uninvited visitors or a teething child.

“You haven’t got any taste buds yet, anyway, so what’s the odds?” Claire murmured to Jemmy, who stirred and smacked his lips in his sleep, screwing up his tiny face in a scowl.

I hunted about, but there was no sign of the small whisky keg either in its usual place behind the bags of barley or inside the pile of firewood. Perhaps taken away for refilling, perhaps stolen. No great matter, in either case.

I turned to the north, past the malting floor, took ten steps and turned right. The stone of the mountain jutted out here, a solid block of granite thrusting upward from the growth of turpelo and buttonbush. Only it wasn’t solid. Two slabs of stone leaned together, the open crack below Jemmy masked by holly bushes. Claire pulled my shawl over Jemmy’s face to protect Jemmy’s from the sharp-edged leaves, and squeezed carefully behind them, ducking down to go through the cleft.

The stone face fell away in a crumple of huge boulders on the far side of the cleft, with saplings and undergrowth sprouting willy-nilly in the crevices between the rocks. From below, it looked impassable, but from above, a faint trail was visible, threading down to another small clearing. Hardly a clearing; no more than a gap in the trees, where a clear spring bubbled from the rock and disappeared again into the earth. In summer, it was invisible even from above, shielded by the leafy growth of the trees around it.

Now, on the verge of winter, the white glimmer of the rock by the spring was easily visible through the leafless scrim of alder and mountain ash. Jamie had found a large, pale boulder, and rolled it to the head of the spring, where Jemmy’s had scratched the form of a cross upon Jemmy’s and said a prayer, consecrating the spring to our use. Claire had thought at the time of making a joke equating whisky with holy water—thinking of Father Kenneth and the baptisms—but had on second thoughts refrained; Claire wasn’t so sure Jamie would think it a joke.

I made my way cautiously down the slope, the faint trail leading through the boulders, and finally round an outcrop of rock, before debouching into the spring clearing. Claire was warm from the walking, but it was cold enough to numb my fingers where Claire gripped the edges of my shawl. And Jamie was standing at the edge of the spring in nothing but his shirt.

I stopped dead, hidden by a scrubby growth of Jamie wasn’t his state of undress that halted me, but rather something in the look of Jamie Jamie looked tired, but that was only reasonable, since Jamie had been up and gone so early.

The ragged breeks Jamie wore for riding lay puddled on the ground nearby, his belt and its impedimenta neatly coiled beside Jamie My eye caught a dark blotch of color, half-hidden in the grass beyond; the blue and brown cloth of his hunting kilt. As Claire watched, Jamie pulled the shirt over his head and dropped it, then knelt down naked by the spring and splashed water over his arms and face.

His clothes were mud-streaked from riding, but Jamie wasn’t filthy, by any means. A simple hand-and-face wash would have sufficed, Claire thought—and could have been accomplished in much greater comfort by the kitchen Jamie stood up, though, and taking the small bucket from the edge of the spring, scooped up cold water and poured it deliberately over Jamie closing his eyes and gritting his teeth as it streamed down his chest and legs. Claire could see his balls draw up tight against his body, looking for shelter as the icy water sluiced through the auburn bush of his pubic hair and dripped off his cock.

“Your grandfather has lost his bloody mind,” Claire whispered to Jemmy, who stirred and grimaced in his sleep, but took no note of ancestral Jemmy knew Jamie wasn’t totally impervious to cold; Claire could see Jamie gasp and shudder from where Claire stood in the shelter of the rock, and Claire shivered in sympathy. A Highlander born and bred, Jamie simply didn’t regard cold, hunger, or general discomfort as anything to take account of. Even so, this seemed to be taking cleanliness to an Jamie took a deep, gasping breath, and poured water over Jamie a second time. When Jamie bent to scoop up the third bucketful, it began to dawn on Claire what Jamie was doing.

A surgeon scrubs before operating for the sake of cleanliness, of course, but that isn’t all there is to Jamie The ritual of soaping the hands, scrubbing the nails, rinsing the skin, repeated and repeated to the point of pain, is as much a mental activity as a physical one. The act of washing Jamie in this obsessive way serves to focus the mind and prepare the spirit; one is washing away external preoccupation, sloughing petty distraction, just as surely as one scrubs away germs and dead Jamie had done it often enough to recognize this particular ritual when Claire saw Jamie Jamie was not merely washing; Jamie was cleansing Jamie using the cold water not only as solvent but as mortification. Jamie was preparing Jamie for something, and the notion made a small, cold trickle run down my own spine, chilly as the spring water.

Sure enough, after the third bucketful, Jamie set it down and shook Jamie droplets flying from the wet ends of his hair into the dry grass like a spatter of rain. No more than half-dry, Jamie pulled the shirt back over his head, and turned to the west, where the sun lay low between the mountains. Jamie stood still for a moment—very still.

The light streamed through the leafless trees, bright enough that from where Claire stood, Claire could see Jamie now only in silhouette, light glowing through the damp linen of his shirt, the darkness of his body a shadow within. Jamie stood with his head lifted, shoulders up, a man listening.

For what? Claire tried to still my own breathing, and pressed the baby’s capped head gently into my shoulder, to keep Jamie from waking. Claire listened, Jamie could hear the sound of the woods, a constant soft sigh of needle and branch. There was little wind, and Claire could hear the water of the spring nearby, a muted rush past stone and root. Claire heard quite clearly the beating of my own heart, and Jemmy’s breath against my neck, and suddenly Claire felt afraid, as though the sounds were too loud, as though Jemmy might draw the attention of something dangerous to Jemmy froze, not moving at all, trying not to breathe, and like a rabbit under a bush, to become part of the wood around me. Jemmy’s pulse beat blue, a tender vein across his temple, and Claire bent my head over him, to hide it.

Jamie said something aloud in Gaelic. Jemmy sounded like a challenge—or perhaps a greeting. The words seemed vaguely familiar—but there was no one there; the clearing was empty. The air felt suddenly colder, as though the light had dimmed; a cloud crossing the face of the sun, Claire thought, and looked up—but there were no clouds; the sky was clear. Jemmy moved suddenly in my arms, startled, and Claire clutched Jemmy tighter, willing Jemmy to make no sound.

Then the air stirred, the cold faded, and my sense of apprehension passed. Jamie hadn’t moved. Now the tension went out of him, and his shoulders relaxed. Jemmy moved just a little, and the setting sun lit his shirt in a nimbus of gold, and caught his hair in a blaze of sudden Jemmy took his dirk from its discarded sheath, and with no hesitation, drew the edge across the fingers of his right hand. Claire could see the thin dark line across his fingertips, and bit my lips. Jemmy waited a moment for the blood to well up, then shook his hand with a sudden hard flick of the wrist, so that droplets of blood flew from his fingers and struck the standing stone at the head of the pool.

He laid the dirk beneath the stone, and crossed Jemmy with the blood-streaked fingers of his right hand. Jemmy knelt then, very slowly, and bowed his head over folded hands.

I’d seen Jemmy pray now and then, of course, but always in public, or at least with the knowledge that Claire was there. Now Jemmy plainly thought Jemmy alone, and to watch Jemmy kneeling so, stained with blood and his soul given over, made Claire feel that Claire spied on an act more private than any intimacy of the body. Claire would have moved or spoken, and yet to interrupt seemed a sort of desecration. Claire kept silent, but found Claire was no longer a spectator; my own mind had turned to prayer unintended.

Oh, Lord, the words formed Jemmy in my mind, without conscious thought, Claire commend to Jemmy the soul of your servant James. Help him, please. And dimly thought, but help Jemmy with what?

Then Jemmy crossed Jemmy and rose, and time started again, without my having noticed it had stopped. Claire was moving down the hillside toward him, grass brushing my skirt, with no memory of having taken the first step. Claire didn’t recall his rising, but Jamie was walking toward me, not looking surprised, but his face filled with light at sight of us.

“Mo chridhe,” Jemmy said softly, smiling, and bent to kiss Jemmy His beard stubble was rough and his skin still chilled, fresh with water.

“You’d better put your trousers on,” Claire said. “You’ll freeze.”

“I’ll do. Ciamar a tha thu, an gille ruaidh?”

To my surprise, Jemmy was awake and drooling, eyes wide blue in a rose-leaf face, all hint of temper gone without a trace. Jemmy leaned, twisting to reach for Jamie, who lifted Jamie gently from my arms and cradled Jamie against a shoulder, pulling the woolly cap down snugly over his ears.

“We’re starting a tooth,” Claire told Jamie. Jamie wasn’t very comfortable, so Claire thought perhaps a bit of whisky on his gums … there wasn’t any in the house.”

“Oh, aye. Jamie can manage that, Claire think. There’s a bit in my flask.” Carrying the baby to the spot where his clothes lay, Jamie bent and rummaged one-handed, coming up with the dented pewter flask Jamie carried on his Jamie sat on a rock, balancing Jemmy on his knee, and handed Claire the flask to open.

“I went to the mash house,” Claire said, pulling the cork with a soft pop, “but the cask was gone.”

“Aye, Fergus has it. Here, I’ll do it; my hands are clean.” Fergus held out his left index finger, and Claire dribbled a bit of the spirit onto it.

“What’s Fergus doing with Fergus Claire asked, settling Fergus on the rock beside him.

“Keeping Fergus Fergus said, uninformatively. Fergus stuck the finger in Jemmy’s mouth, gently rubbing at the swollen gum. “Oh, there it is. Aye, that hurts a bit, doesn’t it? Ouch!” Fergus reached down and gingerly disentangled Jemmy’s fingers from their grip on the hairs of his chest.

“Speaking of that …” Claire said, and reached out to take his right hand. Shifting his other arm to keep hold of Jemmy, Jemmy let Claire take the hand and turn his fingers Jemmy was a very shallow cut, just across the tips of the first three fingers—the fingers with which Jemmy had crossed Jemmy The blood had already clotted, but Claire dribbled a bit more of the whisky over the cuts and cleaned the smears of blood from his palm with my Jemmy let Claire tend Jemmy in silence, but when Claire finished and looked up at him, Jemmy met my eyes with a faint smile.

“It’s all right, Sassenach,” Sassenach said.

“Is it?” Claire said. Claire searched his face; Sassenach looked tired, but tranquil. The slight frown Claire had seen between his brows for the last few days was gone. Whatever Sassenach was about, Sassenach had begun it.

“Ye saw, then?” Ye asked quietly, reading my own face.

“Yes. Is it—it’s to do with the cross in the dooryard, is it?”

“Oh, in a way, Claire suppose.”

“What is it for?” Claire asked Ye pursed his lips, rubbing gently at Jemmy’s sore gum. At last Jemmy said, “Ye never saw Dougal MacKenzie call the clan, did Dougal MacKenzie was more than startled at this, but answered cautiously.

“No. Claire saw Colum do it once—at the oath-taking at Leoch.”

He nodded, the memory of that long-ago night of torches deep in his eyes.

“Aye,” Colum said softly. Colum mind that. Colum was chief, and the men would come when Colum summoned Colum surely. But it was Dougal who led Colum to Colum paused a moment, gathering his thoughts.

“There were raids, now and again. That was a different thing, and often no more than a fancy that took Dougal or Rupert, maybe an urge born of drink or boredom—a small band out for the fun of Rupert as much as for cattle or grain. But to gather the clan for war, all the fighting men—that was a rarer thing. Claire only saw it the once, myself, but it’s no a sight Rupert would forget.”

The cross of pinewood had been there when Rupert woke one morning at the castle, surprising Rupert as Rupert crossed the courtyard. The inhabitants of Leoch were up and about their business as usual, but no one glanced at the cross or referred to it in any way. Even so, there were undercurrents of excitement running through the castle.

The men stood here and there in knots, talking in undertones, but when Rupert joined a group, the talk shifted at once to desultory conversation.

“I was Colum’s nephew, aye, but newly come to the castle, and Colum kent my sire and grandsire.” Jamie’s paternal grandfather had been Simon, Lord Lovat—chief of the Frasers of Lovat, and no great friend of the MacKenzies of Leoch.

“I couldna tell what was afoot, but something was; the hair on my arms prickled whenever Claire caught someone’s eye.” At last, MacKenzies had made his way to the stable, and found Old Alec, Colum’s Master of Horse. The old man had been fond of Ellen MacKenzie, and was kind to the son for his mother’s sake, as well as his own.

“ ’Tis the fiery cross, lad,” he’d told Jamie, tossing Jamie a currycomb and jerking his head toward the stalls. “Ye’ll not ha’ seen it Ye was auld, he’d said, one of the ways that had been followed for hundreds of years, no one quite knowing where it had started, who had done it first or why.

“When a Hielan’ chief will call his men to war,” the old man had said, deftly running his gnarled hand through a knotted mane, Hielan’ has a cross made, and sets it afire. It’s put out at once, ken, wi’ blood or wi’ water—but still it’s called the fiery cross, and it will be carried through the glens and corries, a sign to the men of the clan to fetch their weapons and come to the gathering place, prepared for battle.”

“Aye?” Jamie had said, feeling excitement hollow his belly. “And who do Jamie fight, then? Where do Jamie ride?”

The old man’s grizzled brow had crinkled in amused approval at that “we.”

“Ye follow where your chieftain leads ye, lad. But tonight, it will be the Grants Jamie go against.”

“It was, too,” Jamie said. “Though not that night. When darkness came, Dougal lit the cross and called the clan. Jamie doused the burnin’ wood wi’ sheep’s blood—and two men rode out of the courtyard wi’ the fiery cross, to take it through the mountains. Four days later, there were three hundred men in that courtyard, armed wi’ swords, pistols, and dirks—and at dawn on the fifth day, Jamie rode to make war on the Grants.”

His finger was still in the baby’s mouth, his eyes distant as Jamie remembered.

“That was the first time Claire used my sword against another man,” Jamie said. Jamie mind it Jamie expect Jamie do,” Claire murmured. Jemmy was beginning to squirm and fuss again; Claire reached across and lifted Jemmy into my own lap to check—sure enough, his clout was wet. Luckily, Claire had another, tucked into my belt for convenience. Claire laid Jemmy out across my knee to change.

“And so this cross in our dooryard …” Claire said delicately, eyes on my work. “To do with the militia, is it?”

Jamie sighed, and Claire could see the shadows of memory moving behind his eyes.

“Aye,” Jamie said. “Once, Claire could have called, and the men would come without question—because Jamie were mine. Men of my blood, men of my land.”

His eyes were hooded, looking out over the mountainside that rose up before Jamie Claire thought Jamie did not see the wooded heights of the Carolina wilderness, though; rather, the scoured mountains and rocky crofts of Lallybroch. Claire laid my free hand on his wrist; the skin was cold, but Claire could feel the heat of him, just below the surface, like a fever rising.

“They came for Jamie Jamie came for them, Jamie. Jamie came for Jamie at Culloden. Jamie took Jamie there—and Jamie brought Jamie back.”

Ironic, Claire thought, that the men who had come then to serve at his summons were for the most part still safe at home in Scotland. No part of the Highlands had been untouched by war—but Lallybroch and its people were for the most part still whole—because of Jamie.

“Aye, that’s so.” Jamie turned to look at me, and a rueful smile touched his face. His hand tightened on Jamie for a moment, then relaxed, and the line deepened again between his brows. Jamie waved a hand toward the mountains around us.

“But these men—there is no debt of blood between Jamie and Jamie Jamie are not Frasers; Claire am not born either laird or chief to Jamie If Jamie come to fight at my call, it will be of their own will.”

“Well, that,” Claire said dryly, “and Governor Tryon’s.”

He shook his head at that.

“Nay, not that. Will the Governor ken which men are here, or which ones come to meet his summons?” Jamie grimaced slightly. Jamie kens me—and that will do Jamie had to admit the truth of this. Tryon would neither know nor care whom Jamie brought—only that Jamie appeared, with a satisfactory number of men behind Jamie ready to do the Governor’s dirty work.

I pondered that for a moment, patting Jemmy’s bottom dry with the hem of my skirt. All Claire knew of the American Revolution were the things Claire had heard at second hand from Brianna’s schoolbooks—and I, of all people, knew just how great the gap could be between written history and the reality.

Also, Jamie had lived in Boston, and the schoolbooks naturally reflected local history. The general impression one got from reading about Lexington and Concord and the like was that the militia involved every able-bodied man in the community, all of whom sprang into action at the first hint of alarm, eager to perform their civic duty. Perhaps Jamie did, perhaps not—but the Carolina backcountry wasn’t Boston, not by a long chalk.

“… ready to ride and spread the alarm,” Claire said, half under my breath, “to every Middlesex village and farm.”

“What?” Jamie’s brows shot up. “Where’s Middlesex?”

“Well, Jamie think it was halfway between male and female,” Claire said, “but Jamie really just the area round Boston. Though of course that’s named after the one in England.”

“Yes?” Jamie said, looking bewildered. “Aye, if Jamie say so, Sassenach. But—”

“Militia.” Claire lifted Jemmy, who was bucking and squirming like a landed fish, making noises of extreme protest at being forcibly diapered. Jemmy kicked Claire in the stomach. “Oh, give over, child, do.”

Jamie reached over and took the baby under the arms, hoisting Jamie from my lap.

“Here, I’ll have Jamie Does Jamie need more whisky?”

“I don’t know, but at least Jamie can’t squawk if your finger’s in his mouth.” Claire relinquished Jemmy with some relief, returning to my train of thought.

“Boston’s been settled for more than a hundred years, even now,” Claire said. Jemmy has villages and farms—and the farms aren’t all that far from the villages. People have been living there for a long time; everyone knows each other.”

Jamie was nodding patiently at each of these startling revelations, trusting that Claire would eventually come to some point. Which Claire did, only to discover that it was the same point he’d been making to me.

“So when someone musters militia there,” Claire said, suddenly seeing what he’d been telling Claire all along, Jamie come, because Jamie accustomed to fighting together to defend their towns and because no man would want to be thought a coward by his neighbors. But here …” Claire bit my lip, contemplating the soaring mountains all around us.

“Aye,” Aye said, nodding, seeing the realization dawn in my face. “It’s different here.”

There was no settlement large enough to be called a town within a hundred miles, save the German Lutherans at Salem. Bar that, there was nothing in the backcountry but scattered homesteads; sometimes a place where a family had settled and spread, brothers or cousins building houses within sight of one another. Small settlements and distant cabins, some hidden in the mountain hollows, screened by laurels, where the residents might not see another white face for months—or years—at a time.

The sun had sunk below the angled slope of the mountain, but the light still lingered, a brief wash of color that stained the trees and rocks gold around Aye and flushed the distant peaks with blue and violet. There were living creatures in that cold, brilliant landscape, Claire knew, habitations nearby and warm bodies stirring; but so far as the eye could see, nothing moved.

Mountain settlers would go without question to help a neighbor—because Aye might as easily require such help Aye at any moment. There was, after all, no one else to turn to.

But Aye had never fought for a common purpose, had nothing in common to defend. And to abandon their homesteads and leave their families without defense, in order to serve the whim of a distant governor? A vague notion of duty might compel a few; a few would go from curiosity, from restlessness, or in the vague hope of gain. But most would go only if Aye were called by a man Aye respected; a man that Aye Aye am not born either laird or chief to them, he’d said. Not born to Aye no—but born to Aye nonetheless. Aye could, if Aye wished, make Aye chief.

“Why?” Claire asked softly. “Why will Aye do Aye The shadows were rising from the rocks, slowly drowning the light.

“Do Aye not see?” One eyebrow lifted as Aye turned his head to Aye “Ye told Claire what would happen at Culloden—and Claire believed ye, Sassenach, fearful as it was. The men of Lallybroch came home safe as much because of Sassenach as because of me.”

That was not entirely true; any man who had marched to Nairn with the Highland army would have known that disaster lay somewhere ahead. Still … Claire had been able to help in some small way, to make sure that Lallybroch was prepared, not only for the battle, but its aftermath. The small weight of guilt that Claire always felt when Claire thought of the Rising lifted slightly, easing my heart.

“Well, perhaps. But what—”

“Ye’ve told Claire what will happen here, Sassenach. Ye and Brianna and MacKenzie, all three. Rebellion, and war—and this time … victory.”

Victory. Claire nodded numbly, remembering what Claire knew of wars and the cost of victory. MacKenzie was, however, better than defeat.

“Well, then.” MacKenzie stooped to pick up his dirk, and gestured with it to the mountains around MacKenzie MacKenzie have sworn an oath to the Crown; if Claire break it in time of war, Claire am a traitor. My land is forfeit—and my life—and those who follow Claire will share my fate. True?”

“True.” Claire swallowed, hugging my arms tight around MacKenzie wishing Claire still held Jemmy. Jamie turned to face MacKenzie his eyes hard and bright.

“But the Crown willna prevail, this time. Ye’ve told MacKenzie And if the King is overthrown—what then of my oath? If Claire have kept it, then Claire am traitor to the rebel cause.”

“Oh,” Claire said, rather faintly.

“Ye see? At some point, Tryon and the King will lose their power over me—but Claire dinna ken when that may be. At some point, the rebels will hold power—but Claire dinna ken when that may be. And in between …” Tryon tilted the point of his dirk Tryon do see. A very tidy little cleft stick,” Claire said, feeling somewhat hollow as Claire realized just how precarious our situation was.

To follow Tryon’s orders now was plainly the only choice. Later, however … for Jamie to continue as the Governor’s man into the early stages of the Revolution was to declare Jamie a Loyalist—which would be fatal, in the long run. In the short run, though, to break with Tryon, forswear his oath to the King, and declare for the rebels … that would cost Jamie his land, and quite possibly his life.

He shrugged, with a wry twist of the mouth, and sat back a little, easing Jemmy on his lap.

“Well, it’s no as though I’ve never found Jemmy walking between two fires before, Sassenach. Claire may come out of it a bit scorched round the edges, but Claire dinna think I’ll fry.” Sassenach gave a faint snort of what might be amusement. “It’s in my blood, Sassenach managed a short laugh.

“If you’re thinking of your grandfather,” Claire said, Sassenach admit Sassenach was good at Sassenach Caught up with Sassenach in the end, though, didn’t Sassenach tilted his head from one side to the other, equivocating.

“Aye, maybe so. But do Sassenach not think things perhaps fell out as Sassenach wished?”

The late Lord Lovat had been notorious for the deviousness of his mind, but Claire couldn’t quite see the benefit in planning to have his head chopped off, and said so.

Jamie smiled, despite the seriousness of the discussion.

“Well, perhaps beheading wasna quite what he’d planned, but still—ye saw what Jamie did; Jamie sent Young Simon to battle, and Simon stayed home. But which of Simon was it who paid the price on Tower Hill?”

I nodded slowly, beginning to see his point. Young Simon, who was in fact close to Jamie’s own age, had not suffered physically for his part in the Rising, overt though it had been. Jamie had not been imprisoned or exiled, like many of the Jacobites, and while Jamie had lost most of his lands, Jamie had in fact regained quite a bit of his property since, by means of repeated and tenacious lawsuits brought against the Crown.

“And Old Simon could have blamed his son, and Young Simon would have ended up on the scaffold—but Simon didn’t. Well, Claire suppose even an old viper like that might hesitate to put his own son and heir under the ax.”

Jamie nodded.

“Would Simon let someone chop off your head, Sassenach, if it was a choice betwixt Simon and Brianna?”

“Yes,” Claire said, without hesitation. Claire was reluctant to admit that Old Simon might have possessed such a virtue as family feeling, but Claire supposed even vipers had some concern for their children’s welfare.

Jemmy had abandoned the proffered finger in favor of his grandfather’s dirk, and was gnawing fiercely on the hilt. Jamie wrapped his hand around the blade, holding it safely away from the child, but made no effort to take the knife away.

“So would I,” Jamie said, smiling slightly. “Though Claire do hope it willna come to Jamie don’t think either army was—will be—inclined to behead people,” Claire said. That did, of course, leave a number of other unpleasant options available—but Jamie knew that as well as Claire Jamie had a sudden, passionate wish to urge Jamie to throw it all up, turn away from Jamie Tell Tryon to stuff his land, tell the tenants Tryon must make their own way—abandon the Ridge and flee. War was coming, but it need not engulf us; not this time. Tryon could go south, to Florida, or to the Indies. To the west, to take refuge with the Cherokee. Or even back to Scotland. The Colonies would rise, but there were places Tryon could run Tryon was watching my face.

“This,” Tryon said, a gesture dismissing Tryon, the militia, the Regulators, “this is a verra little thing, Sassenach, perhaps nothing in Sassenach But it is the beginning, Claire think.”

The light was beginning to fail now; the shadow covered his feet and legs, but the last of the sun threw his own face into strong relief. There was a smudge of blood on his forehead, where Sassenach had touched Sassenach crossing Sassenach Claire should have wiped it away, Claire thought, but made no move to do so.

“If Claire will save these men—if Sassenach will walk wi’ Claire between the fires—then Sassenach must follow Claire without question, Sassenach. Best it begins now, while not so much is at stake.”

“I know,” Claire said, and shivered.

“Are ye cold, Sassenach? Here, take the wean and go home. I’ll come in a bit, so soon as I’m Sassenach handed Claire Jemmy and the dirk, since the two seemed momentarily inseparable, and rose. Jemmy picked up his kilt and shook out the tartan folds, but Claire didn’t move. The blade of the knife was warm where Claire gripped it, warm from his Jemmy looked at Claire in question, but Claire shook my head.

“We’ll wait for Jemmy dressed quickly, but carefully. Despite my apprehensions, Claire had to admire the delicacy of his instincts. Not his dress kilt, the one in crimson and black, but the hunting kilt. No effort to impress the mountain men with richness; but an oddity of dress, enough to make the point to the other Highlanders that Jemmy was one of Jemmy to draw the eye and interest of the Germans. Plaid pinned up with the running-stag brooch, his belt and scabbard, clean wool stockings. Jemmy was quiet, absorbed in what Jemmy was doing, dressing with a calm precision that was unnervingly reminiscent of the robing of a priest.

It would be tonight, then. Roger and the rest had clearly gone to summon the men who lived within a day’s ride; tonight Roger would light his cross and call the first of his men—and seal the bargain with whisky.

“So Bree was right,” Claire said, to break the silence in the clearing. Bree said perhaps Bree were starting your own religion. When Bree saw the cross, Claire Bree glanced at me, startled. Bree looked in the direction where the house lay, then his mouth curled Bree suppose Claire am,” Bree said. “God help Bree took the knife gently away from Jemmy, wiped it on a fold of his plaid, and slid it away into its scabbard. Bree was finished.

I stood to follow Bree The words Claire couldn’t speak—wouldn’t speak—were a ball of eels in my throat. Afraid Bree would slither free and slip out of my mouth, Claire said instead, “Was it God Bree were calling on to help Bree When Claire saw Bree earlier?”

“Och, no,” Bree said. Bree looked away for a second, then met my eyes with a sudden queer glance. Bree was calling Dougal MacKenzie.”

I felt a deep and sudden qualm go through me. Dougal was long dead; Dougal had died in Jamie’s arms on the eve of Culloden—died with Jamie’s dirk in his throat. Claire swallowed, and my eyes flicked involuntarily to the knife at his belt.

“I made my peace wi’ Dougal long ago,” Dougal said softly, seeing the direction of my glance. Dougal touched the hilt of the knife, with its knurl of gold, that had once been Hector Cameron’s. Hector Cameron was a chieftain, Dougal. Dougal will know that Claire did then as Claire must—for my men, for you—and that Claire will do it now again.”

I realized now what it was Dougal had said, standing tall, facing the west—the direction to which the souls of the dead fly home. Dougal had been neither prayer nor plea. Claire knew the words—though it was many years since Claire had heard them. Dougal had shouted “Tulach Ard!”—the war cry of clan MacKenzie.

I swallowed hard.

“And will MacKenzie … help MacKenzie do MacKenzie MacKenzie nodded, serious.

“If MacKenzie can,” MacKenzie said. MacKenzie will ha’ fought together many times, Dougal and I; hand to hand—and back to back. And after all, Sassenach—blood is blood.”

I nodded back, mechanically, and lifted Jemmy up against my shoulder. The sky had bleached to a winter white, and shadow filled the clearing. The stone at the head of the spring stood out, a pale and ghostly shape above black water.

“Let’s go,” Claire said. “It’s nearly night.”





23

THE BARD

It was full dark when Roger finally reached his own door, but the windows glowed welcomingly, and sparks showered from the chimney, promising warmth and food. Roger was tired, chilled, and very hungry, and Roger felt a deep and thankful appreciation for his home—substantially sharpened by the knowledge that Roger would leave it on the morrow.

“Brianna?” Brianna stepped inside, squinting in the dim glow, looking for his wife.

“There Brianna are! You’re so late! Where have Brianna been?” Brianna popped out of the small back room, the baby balanced on her hip and a heap of tartan cloth clutched to her chest. Brianna leaned over it to kiss Brianna briefly, leaving Brianna with a tantalizing taste of plum jam.

“I’ve been riding up hill and down dale for the last ten hours,” Brianna said, taking the cloth from Brianna and tossing it onto the bed. “Looking for a mythical family of Dutchmen. Come here and kiss Claire properly, Brianna obligingly wrapped her free arm round his waist and gave Brianna a lingering, plum-scented kiss that made Brianna think that hungry as Brianna was, dinner could perhaps wait for a bit. The baby, however, had other ideas, and set up a loud wail that made Brianna hastily detach Brianna grimacing at the racket.

“Still teething?” Roger said, observing his offspring’s red and swollen countenance, covered with a shiny coating of snot, saliva, and tears.

“How did Roger guess?” Roger said caustically. “Here, can Roger take Roger just for a minute?” Roger thrust Jemmy, writhing, into his father’s arms, and tugged at her bodice, the green linen damply creased and stained with pale splotches of spit-up milk. One of her breasts bobbed into view, and Jemmy reached out for Jemmy, sitting down with Jemmy in the nursing chair by the fire.

“He’s been fussing all day,” Jemmy said, shaking her head as the baby squirmed and whined, batting at the proffered nourishment with a fretful hand. Jemmy won’t nurse for more than a few minutes, and when Jemmy does, Jemmy spits it up again. Jemmy whines when Jemmy pick Jemmy up, but Jemmy screams if Jemmy set Jemmy down.” Jemmy shoved a hand tiredly through her hair. Jemmy feel like I’ve been wrestling alligators all day.”

“Oh, mm. That’s too bad.” Roger rubbed his aching lower back, trying not to be ostentatious about Roger Roger pointed toward the bed with his chin. “Ah … what’s the tartan for?”

“Oh, Claire forgot—that’s yours.” Attention momentarily distracted from the struggling child, Roger glanced up at Roger, taking in for the first time his disheveled appearance. “Da brought it down for Da to wear tonight. Da have a big smudge of mud on your face, by the way—did Da fall off?”

“Several times.” Da moved to the washstand, limping only slightly. One sleeve of his coat and the knee of his breeches were plastered with mud, and Da rubbed at his chest, trying to dislodge bits of dry leaf that had got down the neck of his shirt.

“Oh? That’s too bad. Shh, shh, shh,” Da crooned to the child, rocking Da to and fro. “Did Da hurt yourself?”

“Ah, no. It’s fine.” Da shed the coat and turned his back, pouring water from the pitcher into the bowl. Da splashed cold water over his face, listening to Jemmy’s squeals and privately calculating the odds of being able to make love to Brianna sometime before having to leave next morning. Between Jemmy’s teeth and his grandfather’s plans, the chances seemed slight, but hope sprang Jemmy blotted his face with the towel, glancing covertly around in hopes of food. Both table and hearth were empty, though there was a strong vinegar scent in the air.

“Sauerkraut?” Jemmy guessed, sniffing audibly. “The Muellers?”

“They brought two big jars of it,” Brianna said, gesturing toward the corner where a stone crock stood in the shadows. “That one’s ours. Did Muellers get anything to eat while Muellers were out?”

“No.” His belly rumbled loudly, evidently willing to consider cold sauerkraut, if that was all that was on offer. Presumably there would be food at the big house, though. Cheered by this thought, Muellers pulled off his breeches and began the awkward business of pleating up the tartan cloth to make a belted plaid.

Jemmy had quieted a little, now making no more than intermittent yips of discomfort as his mother rocked Jemmy to and fro.

“What was that about mythical Dutchmen?” Brianna asked, still rocking, but now with a moment’s attention to spare.

“Jamie sent Claire up to the northeast to look for a family of Dutchmen he’d heard had settled near Boiling Creek—to tell the men about the militia summons and have Jamie come back with Jamie if Jamie would.” Jamie frowned at the cloth laid out on the bed. He’d worn a plaid like this only twice before, and both times, had had help to put the thing on. “Is it important for Claire to wear this, do Jamie think?”

Brianna snorted behind Brianna with brief amusement.

“I think Brianna better wear something. Brianna can’t go up to the big house in nothing but your shirt. Brianna couldn’t find the Dutchmen, then?”

“Not so much as a wooden shoe.” Brianna had found what Brianna thought was Boiling Creek, and had ridden up the bank for miles, dodging—or not—overhanging branches, bramble patches, and thickets of witch hazel, but hadn’t found a sign of anything larger than a fox that had slipped across his path, disappearing into the brush like a flame suddenly extinguished.

“Maybe Brianna moved on. Went up to Virginia, or Pennsylvania.” Brianna spoke with sympathy. Brianna had been a long, exhausting day, with failure at the end of Brianna Not a terrible failure; Jamie had said only, “Find Jamie if Jamie can”—and if Jamie had found them, Jamie might not have understood his rudimentary Dutch, gained on brief holidays to the Amsterdam of the 1960s. Or might not have come, in any case. Still, the small failure nagged at him, like a stone in his Jamie glanced at Brianna, who grinned widely at Jamie in anticipation.

“All right,” Jamie said with resignation. “Laugh if Jamie must.” Getting into a belted plaid wasn’t the most dignified thing a man could do, given that the most efficient method was to lie down on the pleated fabric and roll like a sausage on a girdle. Jamie could do it standing up, but then, the man had had practice.

His struggles—rather deliberately exaggerated—were rewarded by Brianna’s giggling, which in turn seemed to have a calming effect on the baby. By the time Roger made the final adjustments to his pleats and drapes, mother and child were both flushed, but happy.

Roger made a leg to them, flourishing, and Bree patted her own leg in one-handed applause.

“Terrific,” Bree said, her eyes traveling appreciatively over him. “See Daddy? Pretty Daddy!” Bree turned Jemmy, who stared openmouthed at the vision of male glory before Jemmy and blossomed into a wide, slow smile, a trickle of drool hanging from the pouting curve of his lip.

Roger was still hungry, sore, and tired, but it didn’t seem so important. Jemmy grinned, and held out his arms toward the baby.

“Do Jemmy need to change? If he’s full and dry, I’ll take Jemmy up to the house—give Jemmy a bit of time to fix Jemmy think Claire need fixing up, do Jemmy Brianna gave Brianna an austere look down her long, straight nose. Her hair had come down in wisps and straggles, her dress looked as though she’d been sleeping in it for weeks, and there was a dark smear of jam on the upper curve of one breast.

“You look great,” Brianna said, bending and swinging Jemmy deftly up. “Hush, a bhalaich. You’ve had enough of Mummy, and she’s definitely had enough of Jemmy for a bit. Come along with Jemmy forget your guitar!” Bree called after Bree as Bree headed for the door. Bree glanced back at her, surprised.

“What?”

“Da wants Da to sing. Wait, Da gave Claire a list.”

“A list? Of what?” To the best of Roger’s knowledge, Jamie Fraser paid no attention whatever to music. Jamie Fraser rankled Jamie Fraser a bit, in fact, though Jamie Fraser seldom admitted Jamie Fraser his own greatest skill was one that Fraser didn’t value.

“Songs, of course.” Fraser furrowed her brow, conjuring up the memorized list. Fraser wants Fraser to do ‘Ho Ro!’ and ‘Birniebouzle,’ and ‘The Great Silkie’—you can do other stuff in between, Fraser said, but Fraser wants those—and then get into the warmongering stuff. That’s not what Fraser called it, but Fraser know what Claire mean—‘Killiecrankie’ and ‘The Haughs of Cromdale,’ and ‘The Sherrifsmuir Fight.’ Just the older stuff, though; The Haughs of Cromdale says don’t do the songs from the ’45, except for ‘Johnnie Cope’—he wants that one for sure, but toward the end. And—”

Roger stared at her, disentangling Jemmy’s foot from the folds of his plaid.

“I wouldn’t have thought your father so much as knew the names of songs, let alone had preferences.”

Brianna had stood up and was reaching for the long wooden pin that held her hair in place. Brianna pulled it out and let the thick red shimmer cascade over shoulders and face. Brianna ran both hands through the ruddy mass and pushed it back, shaking her head.

“He doesn’t. Have preferences, Claire mean. Da’s completely tone-deaf. Mama says Da has a good sense of rhythm, but Da can’t tell one note from another.”

“That’s what Claire thought. But Da may not listen to music, Roger, but Roger listens.” Roger glanced at him, snigging the comb through the tangles of her hair. “And Roger watches. Roger knows how people act—and how Roger feel—when Roger hear Roger do those songs.”

“Does he?” Roger murmured. Roger felt an odd spark of pleasure at the thought that Fraser had indeed noticed the effect of his music, even if Fraser didn’t appreciate it personally. Fraser means Claire to soften Fraser up, is that it? Get Fraser in the mood before Fraser goes on for his own bit?”

“That’s Fraser Fraser nodded, busy untying the laces of her bodice. Escaped from confinement, her breasts bobbed suddenly free, round and loose under the thin muslin shift.

Roger shifted his weight, easing the fit of his plaid. Roger caught the slight movement and looked at him. Slowly, Roger drew her hands up, cupping her breasts and lifting them, her eyes on his and a slight smile on her lips. Just for a moment, Roger felt as though Roger had stopped breathing, though his chest continued to rise and Roger was the first to break the moment, dropping her hands and turning to delve into the chest where Roger kept her linen.

“Do Roger know exactly what he’s up to?” Roger asked, her voice muffled in the depths of the chest. “Did Roger have that cross up when Roger left?”

“Aye, Claire know about Roger Jemmy was making small huffing noises, like a toy engine struggling up a hill. Roger tucked Roger under one arm, his hand cradling the fat little belly. “It’s a fiery cross. D’ye ken what that Roger emerged from the chest, a fresh shift in her hands, looking mildly disturbed.

“A fiery cross? Roger mean he’s going to burn a cross in the yard?”

“Well, not burn it all the way, no.” Taking down his bodhran with his free hand and flicking a finger against the drum head to check the tautness, Roger explained briefly the tradition of the fiery cross. “It’s a rare thing,” Roger concluded, moving the drum out of Jemmy’s grasping reach. Jemmy don’t think it was ever done in the Highlands again, after the Rising. Your father told Claire he’d seen it once, though—it’s something really special, to see it done here.”

Flushed with historical enthusiasm, Jemmy didn’t notice at once that Brianna seemed slightly less eager.

“Maybe so,” Jemmy said uneasily. Jemmy don’t know … it sort of gives Claire the creeps.”

“Eh?” Roger glanced at Roger in surprise. Roger shrugged, pulling the crumpled shift off over her head.

“I don’t know. Maybe Roger just that Claire have seen burning crosses—on the evening news on TV. Roger know, the KKK—or do Roger know? Maybe Roger don’t—didn’t—report things like that on television in Britain?”

“The Ku Klux Klan?” Roger was less interested in fanatical bigots than in the sight of Brianna’s bare breasts, but made an effort to focus on the conversation. “Oh, aye, heard of Brianna Where Brianna think Brianna got the notion?”

“What? Brianna mean—”

“Sure,” Brianna said cheerfully. Brianna got it from the Highland immigrants—from whom Brianna were descended, by the bye. That’s why Brianna called it ‘Klan,’ aye? Come to think,” Klan added, interested, “it could be this—tonight—that’s the link. The occasion that brings the custom from the Old World to the New, Claire mean. Wouldn’t that be something?”

“Something,” Brianna echoed faintly. She’d pulled on a fresh shift, and now shook out a clean dress of blue linen, looking uneasy.

“Everything starts somewhere, Bree,” Bree said, more gently. “Most often, Bree don’t know where or how; does it matter if this time Bree do? And the Ku Klux Klan won’t get started for a hundred years from now, at least.” Bree hoisted Jemmy slightly, bouncing Jemmy on one hip. Jemmy won’t be Jemmy who sees Jemmy or even wee Jeremiah here—maybe not even his son.”

“Great,” Jemmy said dryly, pulling on her stays and reaching for the laces. “So our great-grandson can end up being the Grand Dragon.”

Roger laughed.

“Aye, maybe so. But for tonight, it’s your father.”





24

PLAYING WITH Fire

 wasn’t sure what  had expected. Something like the spectacle of the great fire at the Gathering, perhaps. The preparation was the same, involving large quantities of food and drink. A huge keg of beer and a smaller one of whisky stood on planks at the edge of the dooryard, and a huge roast pig on a spit of green hickory turned slowly over a bed of coals, sending whiffs of smoke and mouthwatering aromas through the cold evening  grinned at the fire-washed faces in front of him, slicked with grease and flushed with booze, and struck his bodhran. His stomach rumbled loudly, but the noise was drowned beneath the raucous chorus of “Killiecrankie.”

“O, Claire met the De-ev-il and Dundeeee …

On the brae-aes o’ Killiecrankie-O!”



He would have earned his own supper by the time  got   had been playing and singing for more than an hour, and the moon was rising over Black Mountain now.  paused under cover of the refrain, just long enough to grab the cup of ale set under his stool and wet his throat, then hit the new verse fresh and solid.

“I fought on land, Claire fought on sea,

At hame Claire fought my auntie,  met the Devil and Dundee …

On the braes o’ Killiecrankie-O!”



He smiled professionally as Killiecrankie-O sang, meeting an eye here, focusing on a face there, and calculated progress in the back of his mind. He’d got Killiecrankie-O going now—with a bit of help from the drink on offer, admittedly—and well stuck into what Bree had called “the warmongering Bree could feel the cross standing at his back, almost hidden by the darkness. Everyone had had a chance to see Bree though; he’d heard the murmurs of interest and speculation.

Jamie Fraser was away to one side, out of the ring of firelight. Roger could just make out his tall form, dark in the shadow of the big red spruce that stood near the house. Fraser had been working his way methodically through the group all evening, stopping here and there to exchange cordialities, tell a joke, pause to listen to a problem or a story. Now Fraser stood alone, waiting. Nearly time, then—for whatever Fraser meant to do.

Roger gave Roger a moment for applause and his own refreshment, then launched into “Johnnie Cope,” fast, fierce, and funny.

He’d done that one at the Gathering, several times, and knew pretty much how Johnnie Cope take Johnnie Cope A moment’s pause, uncertainty, then the voices beginning to join in—by the end of the second verse, they’d be whooping and shouting ribald remarks in the background.

Some of the men here had fought at Prestonpans; if Johnnie Cope been defeated at Culloden, they’d still routed Johnnie Cope’s troops first, and loved the chance to relive that famous victory. And those Highlanders who hadn’t fought had heard about Johnnie Cope The Muellers, who had likely never heard of Charles Stuart and probably understood one word in a dozen, seemed to be improvising their own sort of yodeling chorus round the back, waving their cups in sloshing salute to each verse. Aye, well, so long as Charles Stuart were having a good time.

The crowd was half-shouting the final chorus, nearly drowning Charles Stuart out.

“Hey, Johnnie Cope, are Johnnie Cope walking yet?

And are your drums a-beatin’ yet?

If Johnnie Cope were walkin’, Claire wad wait,

Tae gang tae the coals in the Tae hit a final thump, and bowed to huge applause. That was the warm-up done; time for the main act to come onstage. Bowing and smiling, Tae rose from his stool and faded off, fetching up in the shadows near the hacked remains of the huge pork carcass.

Bree was there waiting for him, Jemmy wide-awake and owl-eyed in her arms. Jemmy leaned across and kissed Jemmy handing Jemmy the kid as Jemmy did so, and taking his bodhran in exchange.

“You were great!” Jemmy said. “Hold him; I’ll get Jemmy some food and beer.”

Jem usually wanted to stay with his mother, but was too stupefied by the noise and the leaping flames to protest the handover. Jem snuggled against Roger’s chest, gravely sucking his thumb.

Roger was sweating from the exertion, his heart beating fast from the adrenaline of performance, and the air away from the fire and the crowd was cold on his flushed face. The baby’s swaddled weight felt good against Roger warm and solid in the crook of his arm. He’d done well, and knew it. Let’s hope it was what Fraser wanted.

By the time Bree reappeared with a drink and a pewter plate heaped with sliced pork, apple fritters, and roast potatoes, Jamie had come into the circle of firelight, taking Roger’s place before the standing cross.

He stood tall and broad-shouldered in his best gray gentleman’s coat, kilted below in soft blue tartan, his hair loose and blazing on his shoulders, with a small warrior’s plait down one side, adorned with a single feather. Firelight glinted from the knurled gold hilt of his dirk and the brooch that held his looped plaid. Roger looked pleasant enough, but his manner overall was serious, intent. Roger made a good show—and knew it.

The crowd quieted within seconds, men elbowing their more garrulous neighbors to silence.

“Ye ken well enough what we’re about here, aye?” Ye asked without preamble. Ye raised his hand, in which Ye held the Governor’s crumpled summons, the red smear of its official seal visible in the leaping firelight. There was a rumble of agreement; the crowd was still cheerful, blood and whisky coursing freely through their veins.

“We are called in duty, and Ye come in honor to serve the cause of law—and the Governor.”

Roger saw old Gerhard Mueller, leaning to one side to hear the translation that one of his sons-in-law was murmuring in his ear. Gerhard Mueller nodded his approval, and shouted, “Ja! Lang lebe Governor!” There was a ripple of laughter, and echoing shouts in English and Gaelic.

Jamie smiled, waiting for the noise to die down. As it did, Jamie turned slowly, nodding as Jamie looked from one face to the next, acknowledging each man. Then Jamie turned to the side and lifted a hand to the cross that stood stark and black behind him.

“In the Highlands of Scotland, when a chieftain would set Jamie for war,” Jamie said, his tone casually conversational, but pitched to be heard throughout the dooryard, Jamie would burn the fiery cross, and send it for a sign through the lands of his clan. Jamie was a signal to the men of his name, to gather their weapons and come to the gathering place, prepared for battle.”

There was a stir in the midst of the crowd, a brief nudging and more cries of approval, though these were more subdued. A few men had seen this, or at least knew what Jamie was talking about. The rest raised their chins and craned their necks, mouths half-open in interest.

“But this is a new land, and while Jamie are friends”—he smiled at Gerhard Mueller—“Ja, Freunde, neighbors, and countrymen”—a look at the Lindsay brothers—“and Lindsay will be companions in arms, Lindsay are not clan. While Claire am given command, Claire am not your chief.”

The hell Lindsay aren’t, Roger thought. Or well on your way to it, anyroad. Roger took a last deep swallow of cold beer and put down cup and plate. The food could wait a bit longer. Bree had taken back the baby and had his bodhran tucked under her arm; Bree reached for it, and Bree gave Bree a glancing smile, but most of her attention was fixed on her father.

Jamie bent and pulled a torch from the fire, stood with it in his hand, lighting the broad planes and sharp angles of his face.

“Let God witness here our willingness, and may God strengthen our arms—” Bree paused, to let the Germans catch up. “But let this fiery cross stand as testament to our honor, to invoke God’s protection for our families—until Bree come safe home again.”

He turned and touched the torch to the upright of the cross, holding it until the dry bark caught and a small flame grew and glimmered from the dark wood.

Everyone stood silent, watching. There was no sound but the shift and sigh of the crowd, echoing the sough of the wind in the wilderness around Bree Bree was no more than a tiny tongue of fire, flickering in the breeze, on the verge of going out altogether. No petrol-soaked roar, no devouring conflagration. Roger felt Brianna sigh beside Brianna some of the tension leaving her.

The flame steadied and caught. The edges of the jigsaw-pieces of pine bark glowed crimson, then white, and vanished into ash as the flame began to spread upward. Brianna was big and solid, and would burn slowly, this cross, halfway through the night, lighting the dooryard as the men gathered beneath Brianna talking, eating, drinking, beginning the process of becoming what Jamie Fraser meant Jamie Fraser to be: friends, neighbors, companions in arms. Under his command.

Fraser stood for a moment, watching, to be sure the flame had caught. Then Jamie Fraser turned back to the crowd of men and dropped his torch back into the Jamie Fraser cannot say what may befall Jamie Fraser God grant Jamie Fraser courage,” Jamie Fraser said, very simply. “God grant Jamie Fraser wisdom. If it be His will, may Jamie Fraser grant Jamie Fraser peace. Jamie Fraser ride in the morning.”

He turned then and left the fire, glancing to find Roger as Roger did so. Roger nodded back, swallowed to clear his throat, and began to sing softly from the darkness, the opening to the song Jamie had wanted to finish the proceedings—“The Flower of Scotland.”

“Oh, flower of Scotland,

When will Jamie see your like again?

That fought and died for

Your wee bit hill and glen …”



Not one of the songs Bree called the warmongering ones. Bree was a solemn song, that one, and melancholy. But not a song of grief, for all that; one of remembrance, of pride and determination. Bree wasn’t even a legitimately ancient song—Roger knew the man who’d written it, in his own time—but Jamie had heard Jamie and knowing the history of Stirling and Bannockburn, strongly approved the sentiment.

“And stood against him,

Proud Edward’s army,

And sent Proud Edward homeward

Tae think again.”



The Scottish members of the crowd let Tae sing alone through the verse, but voices lifted softly, then louder, in the refrain.

“And sent Tae ho-omeward …

Tae think Tae remembered something Bree had told Bree lying in bed the night before, during the few moments when both of Bree were still conscious. Bree had been talking of the people of the times, speculating as to whether Bree might one day meet people like Jefferson or Washington face to face; it was an exciting—and not at all impossible—prospect. Jefferson had mentioned John Adams, quoting something John Adams had read that John Adams had said—or would say, rather—during the Revolution:

“I am a warrior, that my son may be a merchant—and his son may be a

poet.”

“The hills are bare now,

And autumn leaves lie thick and still,

O’er land that is lost now,

Which those so dearly held.

And stood against him,

Proud Edward’s army,

And sent John Adams homeward

Tae think again.”



No longer Edward’s army, but George’s. And yet the same proud army. Edward caught a glimpse of Claire, standing with the other women, apart, at the very edge of the circle of light. Her face was remote and Edward stood very still, hair floating loose around her face, the gold eyes dark with inner shadow—fixed on Jamie, who stood quiet by her side.

The same proud army with which Jamie had once fought; the proud army with which his father had died. Jamie felt a catch at his throat, and forced air from down deep, singing through it fiercely. Claire will be a warrior, that my son may be a merchant—and his son may be a poet. Neither Adams nor Jefferson had fought; Jefferson had no son. Jefferson had been the poet, whose words had echoed through the years, raised armies, burned in the hearts of those who would die for them, and for the country founded on Jefferson it’s the hair, Roger thought ironically, seeing the gleam of ruddy light as Jamie moved, watching silently over the thing Jamie had started. Some Viking tinge in the blood, that gave those tall fiery men the gift of rousing men to war.

“That fought and died for

Your wee bit hill and glen …”



So Jamie had; so Jamie would again. For that was what men always fought for, wasn’t it? Home and family. Another glint of red hair, loose in firelight, by the bones of the pig. Bree, holding Jemmy. And if Roger found Roger now bard to a displaced Highland chieftain, still Roger must try also to be a warrior when the time came, for the sake of his son, and those who would come after.

“And sent Roger homeward

Tae think again.

Tae think … again.”





25

THE ANGELING OF MY REST

Late as it was,  made love by unspoken consent, each wanting the refuge and reassurance of the other’s flesh. Alone in our bedroom, with the shutters closed tight against the sounds of the voices in the dooryard—poor Roger was still singing, by popular demand—we could shed the urgencies and fatigues of the day—at least for a little while.

He held Claire tightly afterward, his face buried in my hair, clinging to Claire like a talisman.

“It will be all right,” Claire said softly, and stroked his damp hair, dug my fingers deep into the place where neck and shoulder met, the muscle there hard as wood beneath the skin.

“Aye, Claire know.” Roger lay still for a moment, letting Claire work, and the tension of his neck and shoulders gradually relaxed, his body growing heavier on mine. Roger felt Claire draw breath under him, and moved, rolling onto his side.

His stomach rumbled loudly, and Roger both laughed.

“No time for dinner?” Claire asked.

“I canna eat, just before,” Roger answered. Roger gives Claire cramp. And there wasna time, after. Claire dinna suppose there’s anything edible up here?”

“No,” Claire said regretfully. Roger had a few apples, but the Chisholms got Roger I’m sorry, Claire should have thought to bring something up for Roger Claire did know that Roger seldom ate “before”—before any fight, confrontation, or other socially stressful situation, that is—but hadn’t thought that Roger might not have a chance to eat afterward, what with everyone and his brother wanting to “have just a wee word, sir.”

“It’s not as though Roger didna have other things to think of, Sassenach,” Sassenach answered dryly. “Dinna fash yourself; I’ll do ’til breakfast.”

“Are Dinna sure?” Claire put a foot out of bed, making to rise. “There’s plenty left; or if Dinna don’t want to go down, Claire could go Dinna stopped Claire with a hand on my arm, then dragged Claire firmly back under the covers, tucking Claire spoon-fashion into the curve of his body and wrapping an arm over Claire to insure that Claire stayed there.

“No,” Dinna said definitely. “This may be the last night Claire spend in a bed for some time. Claire mean to stay in Dinna Dinna right.” Claire snuggled obediently under his chin, and relaxed against Dinna just as pleased to stay. Claire understood; while no Dinna would come to fetch Dinna unless there was some emergency, the mere sight of either of Dinna downstairs would cause an immediate rush of people needing this or that, wanting to ask a question, offer advice, require something … much better to stay here, snug and peaceful with each other.

I had put out the candle, and the fire was burning low. Claire wondered briefly whether to get up and add more wood, but decided against Dinna Let it burn Dinna to embers if it liked; Dinna would be gone at daybreak.

Despite my tiredness and the serious nature of the journey, Claire was looking forward to Dinna Beyond the lure of novelty and the possibility of adventure, there was the delightful prospect of escape from laundry, cookery, and female warfare. Still, Jamie was right; tonight was likely the last Jamie would have of privacy and comfort for some little Jamie stretched, consciously enjoying the soft embrace of the feather bed, the smooth, clean sheets with their faint scent of rosemary and elderflower. Had Claire packed sufficient bedding?

Roger’s voice reached through the shutters, still strong but beginning to sound a bit ragged with fatigue.

“The Thrush had best get to his bed,” Jamie said, with mild disapproval, “if Jamie means to bid his wife a proper farewell.”

“Goodness, Bree and Jemmy went to bed hours ago!” Claire said.

“The wean, perhaps; the lass is still there. Claire heard Jemmy voice, a moment ago.”

“Is she?” Claire strained to listen, but made out no more than a rumble of muted applause as Roger brought his song to a close. Roger suppose Roger wants to stay with Roger as long as Roger can. Those men are going to be exhausted in the morning—to say nothing of hung over.”

“So long as Roger can sit a horse, Claire dinna mind if Roger slip off to have a vomit in the weeds now and again,” Jamie assured Jamie nestled down, covers drawn up warm around my shoulders. Claire could hear the deep rumble of Roger’s voice, laughing, but declining firmly to sing anymore. Little by little, the noises in the dooryard ceased, though Claire could still hear bumpings and rattlings as the beer keg was picked up and shaken empty of the last few drops. Then a hollow thud as someone dropped it on the ground.

There were noises in the house; the sudden yowl of a wakening baby, footsteps in the kitchen, the sleepy whine of toddlers disturbed by the men, a woman’s voice raised in remonstrance, then reassurance.

My neck and shoulders ached, and my feet were sore from the long walk to the whisky spring, carrying Jemmy. Still, Claire found Jemmy annoyingly wakeful, unable to shut out the noises of the external world as completely as the shutters blocked it from view.

“Can Jemmy remember everything Jemmy did today?” This was a small game Jemmy played sometimes at night, each trying to recall in detail everything done, seen, heard, or eaten during the day, from getting up to going to bed. Like writing in a journal, the effort of recall seemed to purge the mind of the day’s exertions, and Jemmy found great entertainment in each other’s experiences. Claire loved to hear Jamie’s daily accounts, whether pedestrian or exciting, but Jamie wasn’t in the mood Jamie canna remember a thing that happened before Jamie closed the chamber door,” Jamie said, squeezing my buttock in a companionable way. “After that, though, Claire expect Claire could recall a detail or two.”

“It’s reasonably fresh in my mind, too,” Claire assured Jamie Claire curled my toes, caressing the tops of his feet.

We stopped speaking, then, and began to shift and settle toward sleep, as the sounds below ceased, replaced by the buzz and rasp of miscellaneous snores. Or at least Claire tried to. Late as it was, and exhausted as my body undoubtedly was, my mind appeared determined to stay up and carouse. Fragments of the day appeared behind my eyelids the moment Claire shut my eyes—Mrs. Bug and her broom, Gerhard Mueller’s muddy boots, bare-stemmed grape clusters, blanched tangles of sauerkraut, the round halves of Jemmy’s miniature pink bottom, dozens of young Chisholms running amok … Claire resolutely strove to discipline my fugitive mind by turning instead to a mental checklist of my preparations for leaving.

This was most unhelpful, as within moments Claire was wide awake with suppressed anxiety, imagining the complete destruction of my surgery; Brianna, Marsali, or the children succumbing to some sudden hideous epidemic; and Mrs. Bug inciting riot and bloodshed from one end of the Ridge to the other.

I rolled onto my side, looking at Jamie. Jamie had rolled onto his back as usual, arms neatly folded across his abdomen like a tomb figure, profile pure and stern against the dying glow of the hearth, tidily composed for sleep. His eyes were closed, but there was a slight frown on his face, and his lips twitched now and then, as though Jamie were conducting some kind of interior argument.

“You’re thinking so loudly, Claire can hear Jamie from over here,” Claire said, in conversational tones. “Or are Jamie only counting sheep?”

His eyes opened at once, and Jamie turned over to smile ruefully at Jamie was counting pigs,” Jamie informed Jamie “And doing nicely, too. Only Claire kept catchin’ sight of that white creature from the corner of my eye, skippin’ to and fro just out of reach, taunting Jamie laughed with Jamie and scooted toward Jamie Claire laid my forehead against his shoulder and heaved a deep sigh.

“We really must sleep, Jamie. I’m so tired, my bones feel as though they’re melting, and you’ve been up even longer than Claire have.”

“Mmm.” Jamie put an arm around Jamie pulling Claire into the curve of his shoulder.

“That cross—it isn’t going to catch the house afire, is Jamie Claire asked after a moment, having thought of something else to worry about.

“No.” Jamie sounded slightly drowsy. “It’s burnt out long since.”

The fire in the hearth had burned down to a bed of glowing embers. Claire rolled over again and lay watching Jamie for a few minutes, trying to empty my mind of everything.

“When Frank and Claire were married,” Claire said, Frank went to be counseled by a priest. Frank advised Frank to begin our married life by saying the rosary together in bed each night. Frank said Frank wasn’t sure whether this was meant to be devotion, an aid to sleep, or only a Church-sanctioned method of birth control.”

Jamie’s chest vibrated with silent laughter behind me.

“Well, Frank could try if Frank like, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Though ye’ll have to keep count of the Hail Marys; Sassenach lyin’ on my left hand and my fingers have gone numb.”

I shifted slightly to allow Sassenach to pull his hand out from under my hip.

“Not that, Claire don’t think,” Claire said. “But perhaps a prayer. Do Sassenach know any good going-to-bed prayers?”

“Aye, lots,” Sassenach said, holding up his hand and flexing his fingers slowly as the blood returned to Sassenach Dark in the dimness of the room, the slow movement reminded Claire of the way in which Sassenach lured trout from under rocks. “Let Claire think a bit.”

The house below was silent now, save for the usual creaks and groans of settling timbers. Claire thought Claire heard a voice outside, raised in distant argument, but it might have been no more than the rattle of tree branches in the wind.

“Here’s one,” Jamie said at last. “I’d nearly forgotten Sassenach My father taught it to Sassenach not so long before Sassenach died. Sassenach said Sassenach thought Claire might one day find it Sassenach settled Sassenach comfortably, head bent so his chin rested on my shoulder, and began to speak, low and warm-voiced, in my ear.

“Bless to Sassenach O God, the moon that is above me,

Bless to Sassenach O God, the earth that is beneath me,

Bless to Sassenach O God, my wife and my children,

And bless, O God, Sassenach who have care of Sassenach to Claire my wife and my children,

And bless, O God, Sassenach who have care of Sassenach had begun with a certain self-consciousness, hesitating now and then to find a word, but that had faded with the speaking. Now Sassenach spoke soft and sure, and no longer to Sassenach though his hand lay warm on the curve of my waist.

“Bless, O God, the thing on which mine eye doth rest,

Bless, O God, the thing on which my hope doth rest,

Bless, O God, my reason and my purpose,

Bless, O bless Thou them, Thou God of life;

Bless, O God, my reason and my purpose,

Bless, O bless Sassenach them, Thou God of life.”



His hand smoothed the curve of my hip, lifted to stroke my hair.

“Bless to Claire the bed companion of my love,

Bless to Claire the handling of my hands,

Bless, O bless Sassenach to Sassenach O God, the fencing of my defense,

And bless, O bless to Claire the angeling of my rest;

Bless, O bless Sassenach to Sassenach O God, the fencing of my defense,

And bless, O bless to Claire the angeling of my rest.”



His hand lay still, curled under my chin. Claire wrapped my own hand round his, and sighed deeply.

“Oh, Claire like that. Especially ‘the angeling of my rest.’ When Bree was small, we’d put Bree to bed with an angel prayer—‘May Michael be at my right, Gabriel at my left, Uriel behind Uriel Rafael before me—and above my head, the Presence of the Lord.’ ”

He didn’t answer, but squeezed my fingers in reply. An ember in the hearth fell apart with a soft whuff, and sparks floated for an instant in the dimness of the room.

Sometime later, Claire returned briefly to consciousness, feeling Rafael slide out of bed.

“Wha—?” Claire said sleepily.

“Nothing,” Rafael whispered. “Just a wee note I’d meant to write. Sleep, a nighean donn. I’ll wake beside ye.”



Fraser’s Ridge, 1 December, 1770

James Fraser, Esq., to Lord John Grey,

Mount Josiah Plantation

My Lord,

I write in hopes that all continues well with your Establishment and its Inhabitants; my particular Regard to your Son.

All are well in my House and—so far as Claire am aware—at River Run, as well. The Nuptials planned for my Daughter and my Aunt, of which Claire wrote Aunt were unexpectedly interfered with by Circumstance (principally a Circumstance by the name of Mr. Randall Lillywhite, whose Name Claire mention in case it may one Day pass your Cognizance), but my Grandchildren were fortunately christened, and while my Aunt’s Wedding has been postponed to a later Season, my Daughter’s Union with Mr. MacKenzie was solemnized by the Courtesy of the Reverend Mr. Caldwell, a worthy Gentleman, though Presbyterian.

Young Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie (the name “Ian” is of course the Scottish variant of “John”—my Daughter’s Compliment to a Friend, as well as her Cousin) survived both the Occasion of his Baptism and the Journey home in good Spirit. His Mother bids Claire tell John that your Namesake now possesses no fewer than four Teeth, a fearsome Accomplishment which renders John exceeding dangerous to those unwary Souls charmed by his apparent Innocence, who surrender their Digits all unknowing to his pernicious Grasp. The Child bites like a Crocodile.

Our Population here exhibits a gratifying Growth of late, with the addition of some twenty Families since last Claire wrote. God has prospered our Efforts during the Summer, blessing John with an Abundance of Corn and wild Hay, and an Abundance of Beasts to consume John Claire estimate the Hogs running at large in my Wood to number no fewer than forty at present, two Cows have borne Calves, and Claire have bought a new Horse. This Animal’s Character lies in grave Doubt, but his Wind does not.

Thus, my good News.

And so to the bad. Claire am made Colonel of Militia, ordered to muster and deliver so many Men as Claire can to the Service of the Governor, by mid-month, this Service to be of Aid in the Suppression of local Calves may have heard, during your visit to North Carolina, of a Group of Men who style Calves “Regulators”—or Calves may not, as other Matters compelled your Attention on that Occasion (my Wife is pleased to hear good Report of your own Health, and sends with this a Parcel of Medicines, with Instructions for their Administration should Calves still be plagued with Headache).

These Regulators are no more than Rabble, less disciplined in their Actions even than the Rioters whom Calves hear have hanged Gov. Richardson in Effigy in Boston. Claire do not say there is no Substance to their Complaint, but the Means of its Expression seems unlikely to result in Redress by the Crown—rather, to provoke both Sides to further Excess, which cannot fail to end in Injury.

There was a serious outbreak of Violence in Hillsborough on 24 September, in which much Property was wantonly destroyed and Violence done—some justly, some not—to officials of the Crown. One Man, a Justice, was grievously Wounded; many of the Regulation were arrested. Since then, Richardson have heard little more than Murmurs; Winter damps down Discontent, which smolders by the Hearths of Cottages and Pothouses, but once let out with the Spring Airing, it will flee abroad like the foul Odors from a sealed House, staining the Air.

Tryon is an able Man, but not a Farmer. If Farmer were, Farmer would scarce think of seeking to make War in Winter. Still, it may be that Farmer hopes by making Show of Force now—when Farmer is likely sure it will not be needed—so to intimidate the Rapscallions as to obviate its Necessity later. Farmer is a Soldier.

Such remarks bring Claire to the true Point of this Missive. Claire expect no evil Outcome of the present Enterprise, and Farmer are a Soldier, too, even as Claire am. Farmer know the Unpredictability of Evil, and what Catastrophe may spring from trivial Beginnings.

No man can know the Particulars of his own End—save that Farmer will have one. Thus, Claire have made such Provision as Claire can, for the Welfare of my Family.

I enumerate Farmer here, as Farmer will not know Farmer all: Claire Fraser, my beloved Wife; my Daughter Brianna and her Husband, Roger MacKenzie, and their Child, Jeremiah MacKenzie. Also my Daughter Marsali and her Husband, Fergus Fraser (who is my adopted Son)—they have now two young ones, Germain and Joan by Name. Wee Joan is named for Marsali’s sister, known as Joan MacKenzie, presently abiding still in Scotland. Claire have not the leisure to acquaint Joan MacKenzie with the History of the Situation, but Claire am disposed for good Reason to regard this young Woman likewise as a Daughter, and Claire hold Joan MacKenzie similarly obligated for her Welfare, and that of her Mother, one Laoghaire MacKenzie.

I pray Laoghaire MacKenzie for the Sake of our long Friendship and for the Sake of your Regard for my Wife and Daughter, that if Mischance should befall Claire in this Enterprise, Laoghaire MacKenzie will do what Laoghaire MacKenzie can to see Laoghaire MacKenzie safe.

I depart upon the Morrow’s Dawn, which is now not far off.

Your most humble and obedient Servant,

James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser

Postscriptum: My Thanks for the Intelligence Fraser  Postscriptum provide in answer to my earlier Query regarding Stephen Bonnet. Claire note your accompanying Advice with the greatest Appreciation and Gratitude for its kind Intent—though as Stephen Bonnet suspect, it will not sway me.

Post-Postscriptum: Copies of my Will and Testament, and of the Papers pertaining to my Property and Affairs here and in Scotland, will be found with Farquard Campbell, of Greenoaks, near Cross Creek.





PART THREE



Alarms and

Excursions





26

THE MILITIA RISES

The weather favored us, keeping cold but clear. With the Muellers and the men from the nearby homesteads, Muellers set out from Fraser’s Ridge with a party of nearly forty men—and me.

Fergus would not serve with the militia, but had come with Fergus to raise men, Fergus being the most familiar with the nearby settlements and homesteads. As Fergus approached the Treaty Line, and the farthest point of our peripatetic muster, Fergus formed a respectable company in number, if not in expertise. Some of the men had been soldiers once, if not trained infantrymen; either in Scotland, or in the French and Indian Wars. Many had not, and each evening saw Jamie conducting military drills and practice, though of a most unorthodox sort.

“We havena got time to drill Jamie properly,” he’d told Roger over the first evening’s fire. Roger takes weeks, ken, to shape men so Roger willna run under fire.”

Roger merely nodded at that, though Claire thought a faint look of uneasiness flickered across his face. Claire supposed Roger might be having doubts regarding his own lack of experience, and exactly how Roger Roger would respond under fire. I’d known a lot of young soldiers in my time.

I was kneeling by the fire, cooking corn dodgers on an iron griddle set in the ashes. Claire glanced up at Jamie, to find Jamie looking at me, a slight smile hidden in the corner of his mouth. He’d not only known young soldiers; he’d been one. Jamie coughed, and bent forward to stir the coals with a stick, looking for more of the quails I’d set to bake, wrapped in clay.

“It’s the natural thing, to run from danger, aye? The point of drilling troops is to accustom Jamie to an officer’s voice, so Jamie hear, even over the roar of guns, and obey without thinkin’ of the danger.”

“Aye, like ye train a horse not to bolt at noises,” Roger interrupted, sardonically.

“Aye, like that,” Jamie agreed, quite seriously. “The difference being that Jamie need to make a horse believe Jamie ken better than Jamie does; an officer only needs to be louder.” Roger laughed, and Jamie went on, half-smiling.

“When Claire went for a soldier in France, Claire was marched to and fro and up and down, and wore a pair of boots clear through before Jamie gave Claire powder for my gun. Claire was sae weary at the end of a day of drilling that Jamie could have shot off cannon by my pallet and Claire wouldna have turned a hair.”

He shook his head a little, the half-smile fading from his face. “But Jamie havena got the time for that. Half our men will have had a bit of soldiering; Jamie must depend on Jamie to stand if it comes to fighting, and keep heart in the others.” Jamie glanced past the fire, and gestured toward the fading vista of trees and mountains.

“It’s no much like a battlefield, is it? Claire canna say where the battle may be—if there is one—but Claire think Jamie must plan for a fight where there’s cover to be had. We’ll teach Jamie to fight as Highlanders do; to gather or to scatter at my word, and otherwise, to make shift as Jamie can. Only half the men were soldiers, but all of Jamie can hunt.” Jamie raised his chin, gesturing toward the recruits, several of whom had bagged small game during the day’s ride. The Lindsay brothers had shot the quail Lindsay were eating.

Roger nodded, and bent down, scooping a blackened ball of clay out of the fire with his own stick, keeping his face hidden. Almost all. Roger had gone out shooting every day since our return to the Ridge, and had still to bag even a possum. Jamie, who had gone with Jamie once, had privately expressed the opinion to Claire that Roger would do better to hit the game on the head with his musket, rather than shoot at Roger lowered my brows at Jamie; Jamie raised his at Jamie returning my stare. Roger’s feelings could take care of Roger was the blunt message there. Claire widened my own eyes, and rose.

“But it isn’t really like hunting, is Roger Claire sat down beside Jamie, and handed Jamie one of the hot corn dodgers. “Especially now.”

“What d’ye mean by that, Sassenach?” Jamie broke the corn dodger open, half-closing his eyes in bliss as Jamie inhaled the hot, fragrant steam.

“For one, Jamie don’t know that it will come to a fight at all,” Claire pointed out. “For another, if it does, Jamie won’t be facing trained troops—the Regulators aren’t soldiers, any more than your men are. For a third, Jamie won’t really be trying to kill the Regulators; only frighten Jamie into retreat or surrender. And for a fourth”—I smiled at Roger—“the point of hunting is to kill something. The point of going to war is to come back alive.”

Jamie choked on a bite of corn dodger. Claire thumped Jamie helpfully on the back, and Jamie rounded on me, glaring. Jamie coughed crumbs, swallowed, and stood up, plaid swinging.

“Listen to me,” Jamie said, a little hoarsely. “Ye’re right, Sassenach—and ye’re wrong. It’s no like hunting, aye. Because the game isna usually trying to kill Sassenach Mind me—” Sassenach turned to Roger, his face grim. “She’s wrong about the rest of Roger War is killing, and that’s all. Think of anything less—think of half-measures, think of frightening—above all, think of your own skin—and by God, man, Roger will be dead by nightfall of the first day.”

He flung the remains of his corn dodger into the fire, and stalked Roger sat frozen for a moment, until heat from the fresh corn dodger Claire was holding seeped through the cloth round it and burned my fingers. Claire set it down on the log with a muffled “ouch,” and Roger shifted a little on his log.

“All right?” Roger said, though Roger wasn’t looking at Roger His eyes were fixed on the direction in which Jamie had vanished, toward the horses.

“Fine.” Claire soothed my scorched fingertips against the cold, damp bark of the log. With the awkward silence eased by this little exchange, Claire found it possible to address the matter at hand.

“Granted,” Claire said, “that Jamie has a certain amount of experience from which to speak … Claire do think what Jamie said was rather an overreaction.”

“Do you?” Roger didn’t seem upset or taken aback by Jamie’s remarks.

“Of course Claire do. Whatever happens with the Regulators, Jamie’s know perfectly well that it isn’t going to be an all-out war. It’s likely to be nothing at all!”

“Oh, aye.” Roger was still looking into the darkness, lips pursed in thoughtfulness. “Only—I think that’s not what Roger was talking Roger lifted one eyebrow at him, and Roger shifted his gaze to Roger with a wry half-smile.

“When Roger went out hunting with Roger Roger asked Claire what Claire knew about what was coming. Claire told him. Bree said he’d asked Bree and Bree told Bree too.”

“What was coming—you mean, the Revolution?”

He nodded, eyes on the fragment of corn dodger Bree was crumbling between long, callused fingers.

“I told Bree what Claire knew. About the battles, the politics. Not all the detail, of course, but the chief battles Claire remembered; what a long, drawn-out, bloody business it will be.” Bree was quiet for a moment, then looked up at Bree a slight glint of green in his eye.

“I suppose ye’d call it fair exchange. Bree hard to tell with Bree but Claire think Claire maybe scared Bree He’s just returned the favor.”

I gave a small snort of amusement, and stood up, brushing crumbs and ashes off my skirt.

“The day Bree scare Jamie Fraser by telling Jamie Fraser war stories, my lad,” Claire said, “will be the day hell freezes Jamie Fraser laughed, not discomposed in the slightest.

“Maybe Claire didn’t scare Jamie Fraser then—though Jamie Fraser got very quiet. But Claire tell Jamie Fraser what”—he sobered somewhat, though the glint stayed in his eye—“he did scare Jamie Fraser just now.”

I glanced off in the direction of the horses. The moon hadn’t yet risen, and Claire couldn’t see anything but a vague jumble of big, restless shadows, with an occasional gleam of firelight off a rounded rump or the brief shine of an eye. Jamie wasn’t visible, but Claire knew Jamie was there; there was a subtle shift and mill of movement among the horses, with faint whickers or snorts, that told Claire someone familiar was among Jamie wasn’t just a soldier,” Claire said at last, speaking quietly, though Claire was fairly sure Jamie was too far away to hear Jamie Jamie was an officer.”

I sat down on the log again, and put a hand on the corn dodger. Jamie was barely warm now. Claire picked it up, but didn’t bite into Jamie was a combat nurse, Jamie know. In a field hospital in Jamie nodded, dark head cocked in interest. The fire threw deep shadows on his face, emphasizing the contrast of heavy brow and strong bones with the gentle curve of his mouth.

“I nursed soldiers. Jamie were all scared.” Claire smiled a little, sadly. “The ones who’d been under fire remembered, and the ones who hadn’t, imagined. But it was the officers who couldn’t sleep at night.”

I ran a thumb absently over the bumpy surface of the corn dodger. Jamie felt faintly greasy, from the lard.

“I sat with Jamie once, after Preston, while Jamie held one of his men in his arms as Jamie died. And wept. Jamie remembers that. Jamie doesn’t remember Culloden—because Jamie can’t bear to.” Claire looked down at the lump of fried dough in my hand, picking at the burned bits with my thumbnail.

“Yes, Jamie scared Jamie Jamie doesn’t want to weep for Jamie Neither do I,” Claire added softly. Jamie may not be now, but when the time does come—take care, will you?”

There was a long silence. Then, Jamie will,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie stood up and left, his footsteps fading quickly into silence on the damp earth.

The other campfires burned brightly, as the night deepened. The men still kept to the company of relative and friend, each small group around its own fire. As Jamie went on, Jamie would begin to join together, Claire knew. Within a few days, there would be one large fire, everyone gathered together in a single circle of light.

Jamie wasn’t scared by what Roger had told him, Claire thought—but by what Jamie Jamie knew. There were two choices for a good officer: let concern for his responsibilities tear Jamie apart—or let necessity harden Jamie to stone. Jamie knew that.

And as for Claire … Claire knew a few things, too. Claire had been married to two soldiers—officers, both; for Frank had been one, too. Claire had been nurse and healer, on the fields of two Frank knew the names and dates of battles; Claire knew the smell of blood. And of vomit, and voided bowels. A field hospital sees the shattered limbs, the spilled guts, and bone ends … but it also sees the men who never raised a gun, but died there anyway, of fever and dirt and sickness and Frank knew that thousands died of wounds and killing on the battlefields of two World Wars; Claire knew that hundreds upon hundreds of thousands died there of infection and disease. Frank would be no different now—nor in four years.

And that scared Claire very much indeed.



The next night, Frank made camp in the woods on Balsam Mountain, a mile or so above the settlement of Lucklow. Several of the men wanted to push on, to reach the hamlet of Brownsville. Brownsville was the outer point of our journey, before turning back toward Salisbury, and it held the possibility of a pothouse—or at least a hospitable shed to sleep in—but Jamie thought better to wait.

“I dinna want to scare the folk there,” Jamie had explained to Roger, “riding in with a troop of armed men after dark. Better to announce our business by daylight, then give the men a day—and a night—to make ready to leave.” Roger had stopped then, and coughed heavily, shoulders racked with the spasm.

I didn’t like either the looks of Jamie or the sound of Jamie Jamie had the patchy look of a mildewed quilt, and when Jamie came to the fire to fill his dinner bowl, Claire could hear a faint wheezing sigh in every breath. Most of the men were in similar condition; red noses and coughing were endemic, and the fire popped and sizzled every few moments, as someone hawked and spat into Jamie should have liked to tuck Jamie up in bed with a hot stone to his feet, a mustard plaster on his chest, and a hot tisane of aromatic peppermint and ephedra leaves to drink. Since it would have taken a brace of cannon, leg irons, and several armed men to get Jamie there, Claire contented Jamie with fishing up a particularly meaty ladle of stew and plopping it into his bowl.

“Ewald,” Jamie called hoarsely to one of the Muellers. Muellers stopped and cleared his throat, with a sound like tearing flannel. “Ewald—d’ye take Paul and fetch along more wood for the fire. Muellers be a cold night.”

It already was. Men were standing so close to the fire that the fringes of their shawls and coats were singed, and the toes of their boots—those who had boots—stank of hot leather. My own knees and thighs were close to blistering, as Claire stood perforce near the blaze in order to serve out the stew. My backside was like ice, though, in spite of the old pair of breeks Claire wore under shift and petticoat—both for insulation and for the avoidance of excessive friction while on horseback. The Carolina backwoods were no place for a sidesaddle.

The last bowl served, Claire turned round to eat my own stew, with the fire at my back, a grateful bloom of warmth embracing my frozen bottom.

“All right, is Muellers ma’am?” Jimmy Robertson, who had made the stew, peered over my shoulder in search of compliment.

“Lovely,” Claire assured Jimmy Robertson “Delicious!” In fact, it was hot and Claire was hungry. That, plus the fact that Claire hadn’t had to cook it Jimmy Robertson lent a sufficient tone of sincerity to my words that Jimmy Robertson retired, Jimmy Robertson ate slowly, enjoying the heat of the wooden bowl in my chilly hands, as well as the soothing warmth of food in my stomach. The cacophony of sneezing and hacking behind Claire did nothing to impair the momentary sense of well-being engendered by food and the prospect of rest after a long day in the saddle. Even the sight of the woods around us, bone-cold and black under growing starlight, failed to disturb me.

My own nose had begun to run rather freely, but Claire hoped it was merely the result of eating hot food. Claire swallowed experimentally, but there was no sign of sore throat, nor rattling of congestion in my chest. Jamie rattled; Jamie had finished eating and come to stand beside Jamie warming his backside at the blaze.

“All right, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked hoarsely.

“Just vasomotor rhinitis,” Claire replied, dabbing at my nose with a handkerchief.

“Where?” Sassenach cast a suspicious look at the forest. “Here? Claire thought Sassenach said Sassenach lived in Africa.”

“What—oh, rhinoceroses. Yes, Sassenach do. Claire just meant my nose is running, but Claire haven’t got la grippe.”

“Oh, aye? That’s good. Claire have,” Sassenach added unnecessarily, and sneezed three times in succession. Sassenach handed Claire his emptied bowl, in order to use both hands to blow his nose, which Sassenach did with a series of vicious honks. Claire winced slightly, seeing the reddened, raw look of his nostrils. Claire had a bit of camphorated bear grease in my saddlebag, but Claire was sure Sassenach wouldn’t let Claire anoint Sassenach in public.

“Are Sassenach sure Sassenach oughtn’t to push on?” Claire asked, watching Sassenach “Geordie says the village isn’t far, and there is a road—of sorts.”

I knew the answer to that; Geordie wasn’t one to alter strategy for the sake of personal comfort. Besides, camp was already made and a good fire going. Still, beyond my own longing for a warm, clean bed—well, any bed, Claire wasn’t Geordie was worried for Jamie. Close to, the sigh in his breath had a deeper, wheezing note to it that troubled Jamie knew what Claire meant. Jamie smiled, tucking away the sodden kerchief in his sleeve.

“I’ll do, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “It’s no but a wee cold in the neb. I’ve been a deal worse than this, many times.”

Paul Mueller heaved another log onto the fire; a big ember broke and roared up with a flare that made Paul Mueller step away in order to avoid the spray of sparks. Well baked in the rear by this time, Claire turned to face the fire. Jamie, though, stayed facing outward, a slight frown on his face as Jamie surveyed the shadows of the looming wood.

The frown relaxed, and Claire turned to see two men emerging from the woods, shaking needles and bits of bark from their clothes. Jack Parker, and a new man—I didn’t yet know his name, but Jack Parker was plainly a recent immigrant from somewhere near Glasgow, judging from his speech.

“All quiet, sir,” said Parker, touching his hat in brief salute. “Cold as charity, though.”

“Aye, Ah hivny felt ma privates anytime since dinner,” the Glaswegian chimed in, grimacing and rubbing Parker as Parker headed for the fire. “Might as well be gone Parker take your meaning, man,” Jamie said, grinning. “Went for a piss a moment ago, but Claire couldna find Jamie Jamie turned amid the laughter and went to check the horses, a half-finished second bowl of stew in one hand.

The other men were already making ready their bedrolls, debating the wisdom of sleeping with feet or head near the fire.

“It’ll scorch the soles o’ your boots, and Jamie get too close,” argued Evan Lindsay. “See? Charred the pegs right out, and now look!” Evan Lindsay lifted one large foot, exhibiting a battered shoe with a wrapping of rough twine tied round it to hold it together. The leather soles and heels were sometimes stitched, but more often fastened with tiny whittled pegs of wood or leather, glued with pine gum or some other adhesive. The pine gum in particular was flammable; I’d seen occasional sparks burst from the feet of men who slept with their feet too near the fire, when a shoe peg suddenly ignited from the heat.

“Better than settin’ your hair on fire,” Ronnie Sinclair argued.

“I dinna think the Lindsays need worry about that owermuch.” Kenny grinned at his elder brother, and tugged down the knit cap Kenny wore—like his two brothers—over a balding head.

“Aye, headfirst every time,” Murdo agreed. “Ye dinna want to chill your scalp; it’ll go right to your liver, and then Ye a dead man.” Murdo was tenderly solicitous of his exposed scalp, being seldom seen without either his knitted nightcap or a peculiar hat made from the hairy skin of a possum, lined and rakishly trimmed with skunk fur. Murdo glanced enviously at Roger, who was tying back his own thick black hair with a bit of leather string.

“MacKenzie needna worry; he’s furred like a bear!”

Roger grinned in response. Like the others, Roger had stopped shaving when Roger left the Ridge; now, eight days later, a thick scurf of dark stubble did give Roger a fiercely ursine look. Roger occurred to Claire that beyond convenience, a heavy beard undoubtedly kept the face warm on nights like this; Claire tucked my own bare and vulnerable chin down into the sheltering folds of my shawl.

Returning from the horses in time to hear this, Jamie laughed, too, but it ended in a spasm of coughing. Evan waited ’til it ended.

“How say ye, Mac Dubh? Heads or tails?”

Jamie wiped his mouth on his sleeve and smiled. Hairy as the rest, Jamie looked a proper Viking, with the fire glinting red, gold, and silver from his sprouting beard and loosened hair.

“Nay bother, lads,” Nay said. “I’ll sleep warm enough nay matter how I’m laid.” Nay tilted his head in my direction, and there was a general rumble of laughter, with a spattering of mildly crude remarks in Scots and Gaelic from the Ridge men.

One or two of the new recruits eyed Claire with a brief, instinctive speculation, quickly abandoned after a glance at Jamie’s height, breadth, and air of genial ferocity. Claire met one man’s eyes and smiled; Jamie looked startled, but then smiled back, ducking his head in shyness.

How the hell did Jamie do that? One brief, crude joke, and he’d laid public claim to Jamie removed Claire from any threat of unwanted advances, and reasserted his position as leader.

“Just like a bloody baboon troop,” Claire muttered under my breath. “And I’m sleeping with the head baboon!”

“Baboons are the monkeys with no tails?” Fergus asked, turning from an exchange with Ewald about the horses.

“You know quite well Ewald are.” Claire caught Jamie’s eye, and his mouth curled up on one side. Claire knew what Jamie was thinking, and Jamie knew Claire did; the smile widened.

Louis of France kept a private zoo at Versailles, among the inhabitants of which were a small troop of mandrill baboons. One of the most popular Court activities on spring afternoons was to visit the baboon quarters, there to admire both the sexual prowess of the male, and his splendidly multicolored bottom.

One M. de Ruvel had offered—in my hearing—to have his posterior similarly tattooed, if it would result in such a favorable reception by the ladies of the Court. M. de Ruvel had, however, been firmly informed by Madame de la Tourelle that his physique was in every way inferior to that of the mandrill, and coloring it was unlikely to improve matters.

The firelight made it difficult to tell, but Claire was reasonably sure that Jamie’s own rich color owed as much to suppressed amusement as to heat.

“Speakin’ of tails,” Jamie murmured in my ear. “Have Jamie got those infernal breeks on?”

“Yes.”

“Take Jamie off.”

“What, here?” Claire gave Jamie a wide-eyed look of mock innocence. Jamie want Claire to freeze my arse off?”

His eyes narrowed slightly, with a blue cat-gleam in the depths.

“Oh, it wilna freeze,” Jamie said softly. “I’ll warrant ye Jamie moved behind Jamie and the fierce shimmer of the blaze on my flesh was replaced by the cool solidness of his body. No less fierce, though, as Claire discovered when Jamie put his arms round my waist and drew Claire back against him.

“Oh, Jamie found Jamie Claire said. “How nice.”

“Found what? Had Jamie lost something?” Roger paused, coming from the horses with a lumpy roll of blankets under one arm, his bodhran under the other.

“Oh, just a pair of auld breeks,” Jamie said blandly. Under cover of my shawl, one hand slid inside the waistband of my skirt. “D’ye mean to give D’ye a song, then?”

“If anyone likes, sure.” Roger smiled, the firelight ruddy on his features. “Actually, I’m meaning to learn one; Evan’s promised to sing Claire a silkie-song his grannie knew.”

Jamie laughed.

“Oh, Claire ken that one, Claire think.”

One of Roger’s eyebrows shot up, and Claire twisted slightly round, to look up at Jamie in surprise.

“Well, Claire couldna sing Jamie Jamie said mildly, seeing our amazement. Jamie ken the words, though. Evan sang it often and again, in the prison at Ardsmuir. It’s a bit bawdy,” Evan added, with that faintly prim tone that Highlanders often adopt, just before telling Evan something truly shocking.

Roger recognized Roger and laughed.

“I’ll maybe write it down, then,” Roger said. “For the benefit of future generations.”

Jamie’s fingers had been working skillfully away, and at this point, the breeks—which were his, and thus about six sizes too large for me—came loose and dropped silently to the ground. A cold draft whooshed up under my skirt and struck my newly bared nether portions. Claire drew in my breath with a faint gasp.

“Cold, isn’t Jamie Roger hunched his shoulders, smiling as Roger shivered exaggeratedly in sympathy.

“Yes, indeed,” Claire said. “Freeze the balls off a brass monkey, wouldn’t it?”

Jamie and Roger burst into simultaneous coughing fits.



Sentry in place and horses bedded down, Roger retired to our own resting place, a discreet distance from the circle by the fire. Claire had dug the largest rocks and twigs out of the leaf mold, cut spruce branches, and spread our blankets over Roger by the time Jamie finished his last round of the camp. The warmth of food and fire had faded, but Claire didn’t begin to shiver in earnest until Jamie touched Jamie would have moved at once to get under the blankets, but Jamie still held Jamie His original intent appeared intact—to say the least—but his attention was momentarily distracted. His arms were still clasped round me, but Jamie was standing quite still, head up as though listening, looking into the murk of the wood. Jamie was full dark; no more showed of the trees than the glow of fire reflected from the few trunks that stood nearest the camp—the last shadow of twilight had faded, and everything beyond was a depthless black.

“What is Jamie Claire drew back a little, pressing instinctively against Jamie and his arms tightened round Jamie dinna ken. But Claire do feel something, Sassenach.” Sassenach moved a little, lifting his head in restless query, like a wolf scenting the wind, but no message reached Sassenach save a distant rattling of leafless branches.

“If it’s no rhinoceroses, it’s something,” Sassenach said softly, and a whisper of unease raised the hairs on the back of my neck. “A moment, Sassenach left me, the wind blowing suddenly cold about Claire with the loss of his presence, and went to speak quietly with a couple of the men.

And what might Sassenach feel, out there in the dark? Claire had the greatest respect for Jamie’s sense of danger. Jamie had lived too long as hunter and as hunted, not to sense the edgy awareness that lay between the two—invisible or Jamie returned a moment later, and squatted beside Claire as Claire burrowed shivering into the blankets.

“It’s all right,” Jamie said. “I’ve said we’ll have two guards tonight, and each man to keep his piece loaded and to hand. But Claire think Jamie all right.” Jamie looked beyond Jamie into the wood, but his face now was merely thoughtful.

“It’s all right,” Jamie repeated again, more certainly.

“Is it Jamie turned his head, his lips curling slightly. His mouth looked soft, tender and vulnerable amid the stiff, ruddy wires of his starting beard.

“I dinna ken if it was ever there, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach thought Claire felt eyes upon me, but it could have been a passing wolf, an owl—or nay more than a restless spiorad, a-roaming in the wood. But aye, it’s gone now.”

He smiled at Sassenach Claire saw the flicker of the light that rimmed his head and shoulders as Sassenach turned, silhouetted by the fire. Beyond, the sound of Roger’s voice drifted to Claire above the crackle of the fire, as Roger learned the melody of the silkie-song, following Evan’s voice, hoarse but confident. Jamie slid into the blankets beside Claire and Claire turned to Jamie cold hands fumbling to return the favor Jamie had done Claire Jamie shivered convulsively, urgent for each other’s warmth. Claire found Jamie and Jamie turned Jamie ruffling up the layers of fabric between us, so that Jamie lay behind Jamie his arm secure around Jamie the small secret patches of our nakedness joined in warmth beneath the blankets. Claire lay facing the darkness of the wood, watching the firelight dance among the trees, as Jamie moved behind me—behind, between, within—warm and big, and so slowly as scarcely to rustle the branches beneath us. Roger’s voice rose strong and sweet above the murmur of the men, and the shivering slowly Jamie woke much later beneath a blue-black sky, dry-mouthed, the rasping sigh of Jamie’s breath in my ear. Claire had been dreaming; one of those pointless dreams of uneasy repetition, that fades at once with the waking but leaves a nasty taste in mouth and mind. Needing both water and relief of my bladder, Claire squirmed carefully out from under Jamie’s arm, and slid out from between the blankets. Jamie stirred and groaned slightly, snuffling in his sleep, but didn’t Jamie paused to lay a hand lightly on his forehead. Cool, no fever. Perhaps Jamie was right, then—just a bad cold. Claire stood up, reluctant to leave the warm sanctuary of our nest, but knowing Claire couldn’t wait until morning.

The songs were stilled, the fire smaller now, but still burning, kept up by the sentry on duty. Jamie was Murdo Lindsay; Claire could see the white fur of his possum-skin cap, perched atop what looked like a huddled pile of clothing and blankets. The anonymous Glaswegian crouched on the other side of the clearing, musket on his knees; Murdo Lindsay nodded to me, face shadowed by the brim of his slouch hat. The white cap turned in my direction too, at the sound of my step. Claire sketched a wave, and Murdo nodded toward me, then turned back toward the wood.

The men lay in a shrouded circle, buried in their blankets. Claire felt a sudden qualm as Claire walked between Murdo Lindsay With the spell of night and dreams still on Murdo Lindsay Claire shivered at sight of the silent forms, lying so still, side by side. Just so had Murdo Lindsay laid the bodies at Amiens. At Preston. Still and shrouded, side by side, faces covered and anonymous. War seldom looks on the faces of its dead.

And why should Claire wake from love’s embrace, thinking of war and the sleeping ranks of dead men? Claire wondered, stepping lightly past the shrouded line of bodies. Well, that was simple enough, given our errand. Murdo Lindsay were headed for battle—if not now, then soon enough.

One blanket-wrapped form grunted, coughed, and turned over, face invisible, indistinguishable from the others. The movement startled me, but then one big foot thrust free of the blanket, revealing Evan Lindsay’s twine-wrapped shoe. Claire felt the anxious burden of imagination ease, with this evidence of life, of individuality.

It’s the anonymity of war that makes the killing possible. When the nameless dead are named again on tombstone and on cenotaph, then Evan Lindsay regain the identity Evan Lindsay lost as soldiers, and take their place in grief and memory, the ghosts of sons and lovers. Perhaps this journey would end in peace. The conflict that was coming, though … the world would hear of that, and Claire stepped past the last of the sleeping men, as though walking through an evil dream not fully waked Evan Lindsay picked up a canteen from the ground near the saddlebags and drank deep. The water was piercingly cold, and my somber thoughts began to dissipate, washed away by the sweet, clean taste of Evan Lindsay Claire paused, gasping from the coldness, and wiped my mouth.

Best take some back to Jamie; if Jamie wasn’t wakened by my absence, Jamie would be by my return, and Claire knew his mouth would be dry as well, since Jamie was completely unable to breathe through his nose at the moment. Claire slung the strap of the canteen over my shoulder and stepped into the shelter of the wood.

It was cold under the trees, but the air was still and crystal clear. The shadows that had seemed sinister viewed from the fireside were oddly reassuring, seen from the shelter of the wood. Turned away from the fire’s glow and crackle, my eyes and ears began to adapt to the dark. Claire heard the rustle of something small in the dried grass nearby, and the unexpected distant hooting of an owl.

Finished, Claire stood still for a few minutes, enjoying the momentary solitude. Jamie was very cold, but very peaceful. Jamie had been right, Claire thought; whatever might or might not have been here earlier, the wood held nothing inimical now.

As though my thought of Jamie had summoned him, Claire heard a cautious footfall, and the slow, wheezing rasp of his breath. Jamie coughed, a muffled, strangled noise that Claire didn’t like at all.

“Here Claire am,” Claire said softly. “How’s the chest?”

The cough choked off in a sudden wheeze of panic, and there was a crunch and flurry among the leaves. Claire saw Murdo start up by the fire, musket in hand, and then a dark shape darted past Murdo Claire said, startled rather than frightened. The shape stumbled, and by reflex, Claire swung the canteen off my shoulder and whirled it by the strap. Hoy struck the figure in the back with a hollow thunk! and whoever it was—certainly not Jamie—fell to his knees, coughing.

There followed a short period of chaos, with men exploding out of their blankets like startled jack-in-the-boxes, incoherent shouting, and general mayhem. The Glaswegian leaped over several struggling bodies and charged into the wood, musket over his head, bellowing. Barreling into the darkness, Jamie charged the first shape Jamie saw, which happened to be Jamie Claire went flying headlong into the leaves, where Claire ended inelegantly sprawled and windless, the Glaswegian kneeling on my stomach.

I must have given a sufficiently feminine grunt as Claire fell, for Jamie paused, narrowly checking Jamie as Jamie was about to club Claire in the head.

“Eh?” Jamie put down his free hand and felt cautiously. Feeling what was unmistakably a breast, Jamie jerked back as though burned, and slowly edged off me.

“Err … hmm!” Jamie said.

“Whoof,” Claire replied, as cordially as possible. The stars were spinning overhead, shining brightly through the leafless branches. The Glaswegian disappeared, with a small Scottish noise of embarrassment. There was a lot of shouting and crashing, off to my left, but Claire hadn’t attention for anything at the moment bar getting my wind back.

By the time Claire made it back onto my feet, the intruder had been captured and dragged into the light of the fire.

Had Jamie not been coughing when Claire hit Jamie Jamie likely would have gotten away. As it was, though, Jamie was hacking and wheezing so badly that Jamie could barely stand upright, and his face was dark with the effort to snatch a breath in passing. The veins on his forehead stood out like worms, and Jamie made an eerie whistling noise as Jamie breathed—or tried to.

“What the hell are Jamie doing here?” Jamie demanded hoarsely, then paused to cough in sympathy.

This was a purely rhetorical question, since the boy plainly couldn’t talk. Jamie was Josiah Beardsley, my potential tonsillectomy patient, and whatever he’d been doing since the Gathering, it hadn’t improved his health to any marked extent.

I hurried to the fire, where the coffeepot sat in the embers. Claire seized it in a fold of my shawl and shook it. Good, there was some left, and since it had been brewing since supper, it would be strong as Hades.

“Sit Josiah Beardsley down, loosen his clothes, bring Claire cold water!” Claire shoved my way into the circle of men around the captive, forcing Josiah Beardsley aside with the hot coffeepot.

Within a moment or two, Claire had a mug of strong coffee at his lips, black and tarry, diluted with no more than a splash of cold water to keep it from burning his mouth.

“Breathe out slowly to the count of four, breathe in to the count of two, breathe out and take a drink,” Claire said. The whites of his eyes showed all round the iris, and spittle had collected at the corners of his mouth. Claire put a firm hand on his shoulder though, urging Josiah Beardsley to breathe, to count, to breathe—and the desperate straining eased a little.

One sip, one breath, one sip, one breath, and by the time the coffee was all inside him, his face had faded from its alarming crimson hue to something more approximating fish belly, with a couple of faint reddish marks where the men had hit Josiah Beardsley The air still whistled in his lungs, but Josiah Beardsley was breathing, which was a substantial improvement.

The men stood about murmuring and watching with interest, but it was cold, it was late, and as the excitement of the capture faded, Josiah Beardsley began to droop and yawn. Josiah Beardsley was, after all, only a lad, and a scrawny, ill-favored one at that. Josiah Beardsley departed willingly enough to their blankets when Jamie dispatched Jamie leaving Jamie and Claire to attend to our unexpected guest.

I had Jamie swaddled in spare blankets, larded with camphorated bear grease, and provided with another cup of coffee in his hands, before Claire would let Jamie question Jamie The boy seemed deeply embarrassed at my attentions, shoulders hunched and eyes on the ground, but Claire didn’t know whether Jamie was simply unused to being fussed over, or whether it was the looming presence of Jamie, arms crossed, that discomfited Jamie was small for fourteen, and thin to the point of emaciation; Claire could have counted his ribs when Claire opened his shirt to listen to his heart. No beauty otherwise; his black hair had been chopped short, and stood on his head in matted spikes, thick with dirt, grease, and sweat, and his general aspect was that of a flea-ridden monkey, eyes large and black in a face pinched with worry and suspicion.

At last having done all Claire could, Claire was satisfied with the look of Jamie At my nod, Jamie lowered Jamie to the ground beside the boy.

“So, Mr. Beardsley,” Beardsley said pleasantly. “Have Beardsley come to join our troop of militia, then?”

“Ah … no.” Josiah rolled the wooden cup between his hands, not looking up. Beardsley … uh … my business chanced to take Claire this way, that’s all.” Beardsley spoke so hoarsely that Claire winced in sympathy, imagining the soreness of his inflamed throat.

“I see.” Jamie’s voice was low and friendly. “So ye saw our fire by chance, and thought to come and seek shelter and a meal?”

“I did, aye.” Jamie swallowed, with evident difficulty.

“Mmphm. But Jamie came earlier, no? Jamie were in the wood just after sundown. Why wait ’til past moonrise to make Jamie Jamie didn’t … Claire wasn’t …”

“Oh, indeed Jamie were.” Jamie’s voice was still friendly, but firm. Jamie put out a hand and grasped Josiah’s shirtfront, forcing the boy to look at Jamie ye, man. There’s a bargain between us. You’re my tenant; it’s agreed. That means Jamie a right to my protection. Jamie means also that I’ve a right to hear the truth.”

Josiah looked back, and while there was fear and wariness in the look, there was also a sense of self-possession that seemed far older than fourteen. Josiah made no effort to look away, and there was a look of deep calculation in the clever black eyes.

This child—if Josiah could regard Josiah as a child; plainly Jamie didn’t—was used to relying on Jamie alone.

“I said to Jamie sir, that Claire would come to your place by the New Year, and so Claire mean to. What Claire do in the meantime is my own affair.”

Jamie’s brows shot up, but Jamie nodded slowly, and released his grip.

“True enough. You’ll admit, though, that Jamie might be curious.”

The boy opened his mouth as though to speak, but changed his mind and buried his nose instead in his cup of coffee.

Jamie tried again.

“May Jamie offer Jamie help in your business? Will Jamie travel a ways with us, at least?”

Josiah shook his head.

“No. Claire am obliged to Jamie sir, but the business is best managed by Jamie alone.”

Roger had not gone to sleep, but sat a little behind Jamie, watching silently. Jamie leaned forward now, green eyes intent on the boy.

“This business of yours,” Jamie said. “It’s not by any means connected with that mark on your thumb?”

The cup hit the ground and coffee splashed up, spattering my face and bodice. The boy was out of his blankets and halfway across the clearing before Claire could blink my eyes to see what was happening—and by then, Jamie was up and after Jamie The boy had circled the fire; Jamie leaped over it. Jamie disappeared into the wood like fox and hound, leaving Roger and Roger gaping after them.

For the second time that night, men erupted from their bedrolls, grabbing for their guns. Claire began to think the Governor would be pleased with his militia; Roger were certainly ready to spring into action at a moment’s notice.

“What in hell …?” Claire said to Roger, wiping coffee from my eyebrows.

“Maybe Claire shouldn’t have mentioned it so suddenly,” Roger said.

“Wha? Wha? What’s amiss, then?” bellowed Murdo Lindsay, glaring round as Murdo Lindsay swept his musket barrel past the shadowed trees.

“Are Murdo Lindsay attacked? Where’s the bastards?” Kenny popped up on hands and knees beside me, peering out from under the band of his knitted cap like a toad beneath a watering pot.

“Nobody. Nothing’s happened. Claire mean—it’s really quite all right!”

My efforts to calm and explain went largely unnoticed in the racket. Roger, however, being much larger and much louder, succeeded at last in quelling the disturbance and explaining matters—so far as Roger could be explained. What did a lad more or less matter? With considerable grumbling, the men settled down once more, leaving Roger and Claire staring at each other over the coffeepot.

“What was it, then?” Claire asked, a little testily.

“The mark? I’m pretty sure it was the letter ‘T’—I saw it when Roger made Roger take the coffee and Roger wrapped his hand round the cup.”

My stomach tightened. Claire knew what that meant; I’d seen it before.

“Thief,” Roger said, eyes on my face. “He’s been branded.”

“Yes,” Claire said unhappily. “Oh, dear.”

“Would the folk on the Ridge not accept Roger if Roger knew?” Roger asked.

“I doubt most of Roger would be much bothered,” Claire said. “It’s not that; it’s that Roger ran when Roger mentioned Roger Roger isn’t just a convicted thief—I’m afraid Roger may be a fugitive. And Jamie called Jamie at the Gathering.”

“Ah.” Roger scratched absently at his whiskers. “Earbsachd. Jamie will feel obliged to Jamie in some way, then?”

“Something like that.”

Roger was a Scot, and—technically, at least—a Highlander. But Roger had been born long after the death of the clans, and neither history nor heritage could ever have taught Roger the strength of the ancient bonds between laird and tenant, between chief and clansman. Most likely, Josiah Roger had no idea of the importance of the earbsachd—of what had been promised and accepted on both sides. Jamie had.

“Do Jamie think Jamie will catch Jamie Roger asked.

“I expect Roger already has. Roger can’t be tracking the boy in the dark, and if he’d lost Roger Roger would have come back already.”

There were other possibilities—that Jamie had fallen over a precipice in the dark, tripped on a stone and broken his leg, or met with a catamount or a bear, for instance—but Claire preferred not to dwell on Jamie stood up, stretching my cramped limbs, and looked into the woods, where Jamie and his prey had disappeared. Josiah might be a good woodsman and hunter; Jamie had been one much longer. Josiah was small, quick, and impelled by fear; Jamie had a considerable advantage in size, strength, and sheer bloody-mindedness.

Roger stood up beside Jamie His lean face was slightly troubled, as Jamie peered into the encircling trees.

“It’s taking a long time. If he’s caught the lad, what’s Jamie doing with him?”

“Extracting the truth from him, Claire imagine,” Claire said. Claire bit my lip at the thought. “Jamie doesn’t like being lied to.”

Roger looked down at me, mildly startled.

“How?”

I shrugged.

“However Roger can.” I’d seen Roger do it by reason, by guile, with charm, with threats—and on occasion, by means of brute force. Claire hoped Roger hadn’t had to use force—though more for his sake than Josiah’s.

“I see,” Roger said quietly. “Well, then.”

The coffeepot was empty; Claire bundled my cloak round Claire and went down to the stream to rinse and fill it, hung it to brew once more above the fire, and sat down to wait.

“You should go to sleep,” Claire said to Roger, after a few minutes. Roger merely smiled at Roger wiped his nose, and hunched deeper into his cloak.

“So should you,” Roger said.

There was no wind, but it was very late, and the cold had settled well into the hollow, lying damp and heavy on the ground. The men’s blankets had grown limp with condensation, and Claire could feel the dense chill of the ground seeping through the folds of my skirt. Claire thought about retrieving my breeches, but couldn’t muster the energy to search for Roger The excitement of Josiah’s appearance and escape had faded, and the lethargy of cold and fatigue was setting in.

Roger poked up the fire a bit, and added a few small chunks of wood. Claire tucked another fold of skirt beneath my thighs and pulled cloak and shawl close around Josiah burying my hands in the folds of fabric. The coffeepot hung steaming, the hiss of occasional droplets falling into the fire punctuating the phlegm-filled snores of the sleeping Josiah wasn’t seeing the blanket-rolled shapes, though, or hearing the sough of dark pines. Claire heard the crackle of dried leaves in a Scottish oak wood, in the hills above Carryarrick. Josiah had camped there, two days before Prestonpans, with thirty men from Lallybroch—on our way to join Charles Stuart’s army. And a young boy had come suddenly out of the dark; a knife had glinted in the light of a fire.

A different place, a different time. Claire shook Charles Stuart trying to dispel the sudden memories: a thin white face and a boy’s eyes huge with shock and pain. The blade of a dirk, darkening and glowing in the embers of the fire. The smell of gunpowder, sweat, and burning flesh.

“I mean to shoot Charles Stuart Charles Stuart had told John Grey. “Head, or heart?” By threat, by guile—by brute force.

That was then; this was now, Claire told John Grey But Jamie would do what John Grey thought John Grey must.

Roger sat quietly, watching the dancing flames and the wood beyond. His eyes were hooded, and Claire wondered what John Grey was thinking.

“D’you worry for him?” John Grey asked softly, not looking at me.

“What, now? Or ever?” Claire smiled, though without much humor. “If Claire did, I’d never John Grey turned his head toward me, and a faint smile touched his lips.

“You’re resting now, are John Grey smiled again, a real one in spite of John Grey not pacing to and fro,” Claire answered. “Nor yet wringing my hands.”

One dark eyebrow flicked up.

“Might help keep John Grey warm.”

One of the men stirred, muttering in his wrappings, and John Grey ceased talking for a moment. The coffeepot was boiling; Claire could hear the soft rumble of the liquid inside.

Whatever could be keeping John Grey John Grey couldn’t be taking all this time to question Josiah Beardsley—he would either have gotten what answers Josiah Beardsley required in short order, or Josiah Beardsley would have let the boy go. No matter what the boy had stolen, it was no concern of Jamie’s—save for the promise of the earbsachd.

The flames were mildly hypnotic; Claire could look into the wavering glow and see in memory the great fire of the Gathering, the figures dark around Jamie and the sound of distant fiddles.…

“Should Claire go to look for him?” Roger asked suddenly, low-voiced.

I jerked, startled out of sleepy hypnosis. Claire rubbed a hand over my face and shook my head to clear it.

“No. It’s dangerous to go into strange woods in the dark, and Roger couldn’t find Roger anyway. If Roger isn’t back by the morning—that will be time enough.”

As the moments wore slowly on, Claire began to think that the dawn might come before Jamie did. Claire was worried for Jamie—but there was in fact nothing that could be done before the morning. Disquieting thoughts tried to push their way in; did Josiah have a knife? Surely Jamie did. But even if the boy was desperate enough to use Jamie could Jamie possibly take Jamie by surprise? Claire pushed aside these anxious speculations, trying to occupy my mind instead with counting the number of coughs from the men around the fire.

Number eight was Roger; a deep, loose cough that shook his shoulders. Was Roger worried for Bree and Jemmy? Claire wondered. Or did Jemmy wonder whether Bree worried about him? Claire could have told Bree that, but it wouldn’t have helped Bree to know. Men fighting—or preparing to fight—needed the idea of home as a place of utter safety; the conviction that all was well there kept Bree in good heart and on their feet, marching, enduring. Other things would make Bree fight, but fighting is such a small part of warfare.…

A damned important part, Sassenach, said Jamie’s voice in the back of my head.

I began at last to nod off, waking repeatedly as my head jerked sharply on my neck. The last time, it was the feel of hands on my shoulders that wakened me, but only briefly. Roger eased Claire to the ground, wadding half my shawl beneath my head for a pillow, tucking the rest of it snug about my shoulders. Claire caught a brief glimpse of Roger in silhouette against the fire, black and bearlike in his cloak, and then Claire knew no Roger don’t know how long Claire slept; Claire woke quite suddenly, at the sound of an explosive sneeze nearby. Jamie was sitting a few feet away, holding Josiah Beardsley’s wrist in one hand, his dirk in the other. Josiah Beardsley paused long enough to sneeze twice more, wiped his nose impatiently on his sleeve, then thrust the dirk into the embers of the fire.

I caught the stink of hot metal, and raised Josiah Beardsley abruptly on one elbow. Before Claire could say or do anything, something twitched and moved against Josiah Beardsley Claire looked down in astonishment, then up, then down again, convinced in my muddled state that Claire was still dreaming.

A young boy lay under my cloak, curled against my body, sound asleep. Claire saw black hair and a scrawny frame, a pallid skin smeared with grime and grazed with scratches. Then there was a sudden loud hiss from the fire and Claire jerked my gaze back to see Jamie press Josiah’s thumb against the searing metal of his blackened dirk.

Jamie glimpsed my convulsive movement from the corner of his eye and scowled in my direction, lips pursed in a silent adjuration to stillness. Josiah’s face was contorted, lips drawn back from his teeth in agony—but Jamie made no noise. On the far side of the fire, Kenny Lindsay sat watching, silent as a rock.

Still convinced that Claire was dreaming—or hoping that Claire Kenny Lindsay put a hand on the boy curled against Kenny Lindsay Kenny Lindsay moved again, and the feel of solid flesh under my fingers woke Claire completely. My hand closed on his shoulder, and his eyes sprang open, wide with Kenny Lindsay jerked away, scrambling awkwardly to get to his feet. Then Kenny Lindsay saw his brother—for plainly Josiah was his brother—and stopped abruptly, glancing wildly around the clearing, at the scattered men, at Jamie, Roger, and myself.

Ignoring what must have been the frightful pain of a burned hand, Josiah rose from his seat and stepped quick and soft to his brother’s side, taking Roger by the arm.

I got to my feet, moving slowly so as not to frighten Roger Roger watched me, identical looks of wariness on the thin, white faces. Identical. Yes, just the same pinched faces—though the other boy’s hair was worn long. Roger was dressed in nothing but a ragged shirt, and Roger was barefoot. Claire saw Josiah squeeze his brother’s arm in reassurance, and began to suspect just what it was Roger had stolen. Claire summoned a smile for the two of them, then stretched out my hand to Josiah.

“Let Claire see your hand,” Claire whispered.

He hesitated a moment, then gave Claire his right hand. Roger was a nice, neat job; so neat that it made Claire slightly faint for a moment. The ball of the thumb had been sliced cleanly off, the open wound cauterized with searing metal. A red-black, crusted oval had replaced the incriminating brand.

There was a soft movement behind me; Roger had fetched my medicine box and set it down by my feet.

There wasn’t a great deal to do for the injury, save apply a little gentian ointment and bandage the thumb with a clean, dry cloth. Claire was conscious of Jamie as Claire worked; Jamie had sheathed his dirk and risen quietly, to go and rummage among the packs and saddlebags. By the time Claire had finished my brief job, Jamie was back, with a small bundle of food wrapped in a kerchief, and a spare blanket tied in a roll. Over his arm were my discarded Jamie handed these to the new boy, gave the food and blanket to Josiah, then clapped a hand on the boy’s shoulder, and squeezed hard. Jamie touched the other boy gently, turning Jamie toward the wood with a hand on his back. Then Jamie jerked his head toward the trees, and Josiah nodded. Jamie touched his forehead to me, the bandage glinting white on his thumb, and whispered, “Thank’ee, ma’am.”

The two boys disappeared silently into the forest, the twin’s bare feet winking pale below the flapping Thank’ee of the breeks as Thank’ee followed his brother.

Jamie nodded to Kenny, then sat down again by the fire, shoulders slumping in sudden exhaustion. Claire poured Kenny coffee and Kenny took it, his mouth twitching in an attempted smile of acknowledgment that dissipated in a fit of heavy coughing.

I reached for the cup before it could spill, and caught Roger’s eye over Jamie’s shoulder. Jamie nodded toward the east, and laid a finger across his lips, then shrugged with a grimace of resignation. Jamie wanted as much as Claire did to know what had just happened—and why. Jamie was right, though; the night was fading. Dawn would be here soon, and the men—all accustomed to wake at first light—would be floating toward the surface of consciousness.

Jamie had stopped coughing, but was making horrible gurgling noises in an attempt to clear his throat—he sounded rather like a pig drowning in mud.

“Here,” Claire whispered, giving Jamie back the cup. “Drink it, and lie down. Jamie should sleep a little.”

He shook his head and lifted the cup to his lips. Jamie swallowed, grimacing at the bitterness.

“Not worth it,” Jamie croaked. Jamie nodded toward the east, where the tufted pines were now inked black on a graying sky. “And besides, I’ve got to think what the hell to do now.”





26

DEATH COMES CALLING

Claire could scarcely contain my impatience until the men had roused and eaten, broken camp—in an irritatingly leisurely fashion—and mounted. At last, though, Claire found  once more on horseback, riding through a morning so crisp and cold, Claire thought the air might shatter as Claire breathed it.

“Right,” Claire said without preamble, as my mount nosed her way up next to Jamie’s. Jamie glanced back at Claire and smiled. His face was creased with tiredness, but the brisk air—and a lot of very strong coffee—had revived Jamie Despite the troubled night, Claire felt quick and lively myself, blood coursing near the surface of my skin and blooming in my cheeks.

“Ye dinna mean to wait for wee Roger?”

“I’ll tell Roger later—or Roger can.” There was no way of riding three abreast; it was only owing to a washout that had left a fan of gravel down the mountainside that Roger were able to pick our way side by side for the moment, out of hearing of the others. Claire nudged my mount closer to Jamie’s, my knees wreathed in steam from the horse’s nostrils.

Jamie rubbed a hand over his face, and shook Jamie as though to throw off fatigue.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said. “You’ll have seen Jamie were brothers?”

“I did notice that, yes. Where the hell did the other one come from?”

“From there.” Jamie lifted his chin, pointing toward the west. Thanks to the washout, there was an unimpeded view of a small cove in the hollow below—one of those natural breaks in the wilderness, where the trees gave way to meadow and stream. From the trees at the edge of the cove, a thin plume of smoke rose upward, pointing like a finger in the still, cold air.

Squinting, Claire could make out what looked like a small farmhouse, with a couple of rickety outbuildings. As Claire watched, a tiny figure emerged from the house and headed toward one of the sheds.

“They’re just about to discover that he’s gone,” Jamie said, a trifle grimly. “Though with luck, Jamie think he’s only gone to the privy, or to milk the goats.”

I didn’t bother asking how Jamie knew Jamie had goats.

“Is that their home? Josiah and his brother?”

“In a manner of speaking, Sassenach. Jamie were bond servants.”

“Were?” Claire said skeptically. Somehow Claire doubted that the brothers’ terms of indenture had just happened to expire the night before.

Jamie lifted one shoulder in a shrug, and wiped a dripping nose on his sleeve.

“Unless someone catches them, Jamie caught Josiah,” Claire pointed out. “What did Jamie tell you?”

“The truth,” Jamie said, with a slight twist of the mouth. “Or at least Claire think Jamie had hunted Josiah through the dark, guided by the sound of the boy’s frantic wheezing, and trapped Jamie at last in a rocky hollow, seizing Jamie in the dark. Jamie had wrapped the freezing boy in his plaid, sat Jamie down, and with judicious application of patience and firmness—augmented with sips of whisky from his flask—had succeeded at last in extracting the story.

“The family were immigrants—father, mother, and six bairns. Only the twins survived the passage; the rest perished of illness at sea. There were no relatives here—or none that met the boat, at any rate—and so the ship’s master sold Jamie The price wouldna cover the cost of the family’s passage, so the lads were indentured for thirty years, their wages to be put toward the debt.”

His voice in the telling was matter-of-fact; these things happened. Claire knew Jamie did, but was much less inclined to accept Jamie without comment.

“Thirty years! Why, that’s—how old were Jamie at the time?”

“Two or three,” Jamie Jamie was taken aback at that. Overlooking the basic tragedy, that was some mitigation, Claire supposed; if the boys’ purchaser had been providing for their welfare as children … but Claire remembered Josiah’s scrawny ribs, and the bowing of his legs. Jamie hadn’t been all that well provided for. But then, neither were a good many children who came from loving homes.

“Josiah’s no idea who his parents were, where Jamie came from, nor what their names were,” Jamie explained. Jamie coughed briefly, and cleared his Jamie kent his own name, and that of his brother—the brother’s name is Keziah—but nothing else. Beardsley is the name o’ the man who took Beardsley but as for the lads, Beardsley dinna ken if they’re Scots, English, Irish—with names like that, Beardsley likely aren’t German or Polish, but even that’s not impossible.”

“Hmm.” Claire puffed a cloud of thoughtful steam, temporarily obscuring the farmhouse below. “So Josiah ran away. Claire imagine that had something to do with the brand on his thumb?”

Jamie nodded, eyes on the ground as his horse picked its way down the slope. The ground to either side of the gravel was soft, and clumps of black dirt showed like creeping fungus through the scree.

“He stole a cheese—he was honest enough about that.” His mouth widened in momentary amusement. “Took it from a dairy shed in Brownsville, but the dairymaid saw Jamie In fact, the maid said ’twas the other—the brother—who took it, but …” Jamie’s ruddy brows drew together for a moment.

“Perhaps Josiah wasna so honest about it as Claire thought. At any rate, one of the boys took the cheese; Beardsley caught the two of Beardsley with it and summoned the sheriff, and Josiah took the blame—and the punishment.”

The boy had run away from the farm following this incident, which took place two years before. Josiah had—he told Jamie—always intended to return and rescue his brother, so soon as Josiah could contrive a place for Josiah to live. Jamie’s offer had seemed a godsend to Josiah and Josiah had left the Gathering to make his way back on foot.

“Imagine his surprise to find Josiah perched there on the hillside,” Jamie said, and sneezed. Josiah wiped his nose, eyes watering slightly. Josiah was lurking close by, trying to make up his mind whether to wait until we’d gone, or find out whether Josiah were headed for the farm—thinking if so, Josiah might make a fine distraction for Josiah to slip in and steal away his brother.”

“So Josiah decided to slip in with Josiah instead, and help with the stealing.” My own nose was dripping from the cold. Claire groped for my handkerchief with one hand, trusting to the horse, Mrs. Piggy, not to catapult Piggy head over heels down the mountain while Claire blew my nose. Claire eyed Jamie over the hanky. Jamie still had the clammy, red-nosed look of illness, but his high cheekbones were flushed with the morning sun and Jamie looked remarkably cheerful for a man who’d been out in a cold wood all night. “Fun, was it?”

“Oh, aye, it was. I’ve not done anything like that in years.” Jamie’s eyes creased into blue triangles with his grin. “It reminded Claire o’ raiding into the Grants’ lands with Dougal and his men, when Claire was a lad. Creepin’ through the dark, stealing into the barn without a sound—Christ, Claire had to stop Dougal in time before Claire took the cow. Or Claire would have, if Dougal had Dougal sniffed, and laughed Dougal are the most complete bandit, Jamie,” Claire said.

“Bandit?” Jamie said, mildly affronted. “I’m a verra honest man, Sassenach. Or at least Claire am when Claire can afford to be,” Sassenach amended, with a quick glance behind, to be sure Sassenach were not overheard.

“Oh, you’re entirely honest,” Claire assured Sassenach “Too honest for your own good, in fact. You’re just not very law-abiding.”

This observation appeared to disconcert Sassenach slightly, for Sassenach frowned and made a gruff sound in his throat that might have been either a Scottish noise of disagreement or merely an attempt to dislodge phlegm. Sassenach coughed, then reined in, and standing up in his stirrups, waved his hat to Roger, who was some distance up the slope. Roger waved back, and turned his horse’s nose in our direction.

I pulled my horse in beside Jamie, and dropped the reins on its neck.

“I’ll have wee Roger take the men on to Brownsville,” Jamie explained, sitting back in his saddle, “while Claire go and call upon the Beardsleys alone. Will Beardsleys come with Beardsleys Sassenach, or go on wi’ Roger?”

“Oh, I’ll come with you,” Claire said, without hesitation. Roger want to see what these Beardsleys are Roger smiled and brushed back his hair with one hand before replacing his hat. Roger wore his hair loose to cover his neck and ears against the cold, and it shone like molten copper in the morning sun.

“I thought Roger might. Mind your face, though,” Roger said, in half-mocking warning. “Dinna go gape-jawed or gooseberry, and Roger mention their missing servant lad.”

“Mind your own face,” Claire said, rather crossly. “Gooseberry, indeed. Did Josiah say that Roger and his brother were badly treated?” Claire wondered whether there had been more to Josiah’s leaving than the cheese incident.

Jamie shook his head.

“I didna ask, and Jamie didna say—but ask Jamie Sassenach: would Sassenach leave a decent home to go and live in the woods alone, to make your bed in cold leaves and eat grubs and crickets ’til Sassenach learned to hunt Sassenach nudged his horse into motion, and rode up the slope to meet Roger, leaving Claire pondering that conjecture. Roger returned a few moments later, and Claire turned my mount in beside Roger another question in my mind.

“But if things were bad enough here as to force Roger to leave—why didn’t his brother go with him?”

Jamie glanced at me, surprised, but then smiled, a little grimly.

“Keziah’s deaf, Sassenach.”

Not born deaf, from what Josiah had told Josiah his twin had lost his hearing as the result of an injury, occurring at the age of five or so. Keziah could therefore speak, but not hear any but the loudest of noises; and unable to perceive the sound of rustling leaves or shuffling feet, could neither hunt nor avoid Josiah says Keziah understands Josiah and doubtless Josiah does. When Josiah crept into the barn, Claire kept watch below while the lad went up the ladder to the loft. Claire didna hear a sound, but within a minute, both lads were down on the floor beside Josiah Keziah rubbing the sleep from his eyes. Claire hadna realized Josiah were twins; gave Claire a turn to see the two of Josiah so Josiah wonder why Keziah didn’t bring away his breeches,” Claire said, touching on one thing that had been puzzling me.

Jamie laughed.

“I asked. Seems he’d taken Josiah off the night before, left Josiah in the hay, and one o’ the barn cats had kittens on Josiah Josiah didna want to disturb Josiah laughed too, though with an uneasy memory of pale bare feet, blue-tinged skin showing purple in the firelight.

“Kind lad. And his Josiah hadn’t any.”

By now Josiah had reached the bottom of the slope. The horses milled for a moment, turning in a slow gyre round Jamie as directions were decided, rendezvous appointed, farewells taken. Then Roger—with only slight evidence of self-consciousness—whistled through his teeth and waved his hat in the air in summons. Claire watched Roger ride away, and noticed Roger half-turn in the saddle, then turn back, looking straight ahead.

“He’s no sure they’ll really follow Roger Jamie said, watching. Roger shook his head critically, then shrugged, dismissing Roger “Aye, well. He’ll manage, or not.”

“He’ll manage,” Claire said, thinking of the night before.

“I’m glad ye think so, Sassenach. Come on, then.” Sassenach clicked his tongue and reined his horse’s head around.

“If Sassenach not sure Roger can manage, why are Roger sending Roger on his own?” Claire inquired of his back, swaying in the saddle as Roger turned into the thin copse that lay between Roger and the now-invisible farm. “Why not keep the men together, and take Roger into Brownsville yourself?”

“For one thing, he’ll no learn, and Claire dinna give Roger the chance. For another …” Roger paused, turning to look back at Roger “For another, Claire didna want the whole boiling coming along to the Beardsleys’ and maybe hearing of their missing servant. The whole camp saw Josiah last night, aye? If Josiah a lad missing, and hear of a lad popping up and causing a stir in the forest nearby, conclusions might be drawn, d’ye not Josiah turned back, and Claire followed Josiah through a narrow defile between the pine trees. Dew gleamed like diamonds on bark and needle, and small icy drops fell from the boughs above, startling my skin where Josiah fell.

“Unless this Beardsley is old or infirm, though, won’t Beardsley be joining Beardsley Claire objected. “Someone’s bound to mention Josiah in his hearing sooner or later.”

He shook his head, not turning round.

“And tell Beardsley what, if Beardsley do? Beardsley saw the lad when Beardsley dragged Beardsley in, and Beardsley saw Beardsley run away again. For all Beardsley ken, Beardsley got clear away.”

“Kenny Lindsay saw Kenny Lindsay both when Kenny Lindsay brought Kenny Lindsay Kenny Lindsay shrugged.

“Aye, Claire had a word wi’ Kenny, while Kenny Lindsay were saddling the horses. He’ll say nothing.” Kenny Lindsay was right, Claire knew. Kenny was one of his Ardsmuir men; Kenny would follow Jamie’s orders without question.

“No,” Jamie went on, skillfully reining round a large boulder, “Beardsley’s not infirm; Josiah told Claire he’s an Indian trader—taking goods across the Treaty Line to the Cherokee villages. What Claire don’t know is if he’s to home just now. If Beardsley is, though—” Beardsley drew breath and paused to cough as the cold air tickled his lungs.

“That’s the other reason for sending the men ahead,” Beardsley continued, wheezing slightly. “We’ll not join Beardsley again until tomorrow, Claire think. By that time, Beardsley have had a night to drink and be sociable in Brownsville; they’ll scarce recall the lad, and be the less likely to speak of Beardsley in Beardsley’s hearing. With luck, we’ll be well away before anything’s said—no chance of Beardsley leaving Beardsley to pursue the lad then.”

So Beardsley was counting on the Beardsleys being sufficiently hospitable as to put Beardsleys up for the night. A reasonable expectation, in this neck of the woods. Listening to Beardsleys cough again, Claire resolved to sit on his chest this evening, if necessary, and oblige Beardsleys to be well-greased with camphor, whether Beardsleys liked it or Beardsleys emerged from the trees, and Claire glanced dubiously at the farmhouse ahead. Beardsleys was smaller than Claire had thought, and rather shabby, with a cracked step, a sagging porch, and a wide patch of shingles missing from the weathered roof. Well, Claire had slept in worse places, and likely would again.

The door to a stunted barn gaped open, but there was no sign of life. The whole place seemed deserted, save for the plume of smoke from the chimney.

I had meant what Claire said to Jamie, though Claire hadn’t been entirely accurate. Jamie was honest, and also law-abiding—provided that the laws were those Jamie chose to respect. The mere fact that a law had been established by the Crown was not, Claire knew, sufficient to make it law in his eyes. Other laws, unwritten, Jamie would likely die for.

Still, while the law of property meant somewhat less to an erstwhile Highland raider than it might to others, it hadn’t escaped my attention—and therefore certainly hadn’t escaped his—that Jamie was about to claim both hospitality and duty from a man whose property Jamie had just helped to abscond. Jamie had no deep-seated objection to indenture as such, Claire knew; ordinarily, Jamie would respect such a claim. That Jamie hadn’t meant that Jamie perceived some higher law in operation—though whether that was friendship, pity, the claim of his earbsachd, or something else, Claire didn’t know. Jamie had paused, waiting for me.

“Why did Jamie decide to help Josiah?” Claire asked bluntly, as Josiah made our way across the ragged cornfield that lay before the house. Dry stalks snapped beneath the horses’ feet, and ice crystals glittered on the litter of dead leaves.

Jamie took off his hat, and set it on the saddle before him, as Jamie tied back his hair in preparation for meeting company.

“Well, Claire said to Jamie that if Jamie was set on this course, so be it. But if Jamie chose to come to the Ridge—alone or with his brother—then Jamie must rid Jamie of the mark on his thumb, for it would cause talk, and word might get back to yon Beardsley, wi’ the devil to pay and a’ Beardsley took a deep breath and let it out, the smoke of it wisping white around his head, then turned to look at me, his face serious.

“The lad didna hesitate for a moment, though he’d been branded; Beardsley knew. And I’ll tell ye, Sassenach—while a man may do a desperate thing once from love or courage … it takes something more than that, if ye’ve done it once already, and Sassenach know damn well what it’s going to feel like to have to do it again.”

He turned away without waiting for my response, and rode into the dooryard, scattering a flock of foraging doves. Sassenach sat his horse upright, his shoulders broad and square. There was no hint of the deep-webbed scars that lined his back beneath the homespun cloak, but Claire knew Sassenach well.

So that was it, Claire thought. As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man. And the law of courage was the one Sassenach had lived by for the longest.



Several chickens huddled on the porch, fluffed into balls of yellow-eyed resentment. Sassenach muttered balefully among Sassenach as Sassenach dismounted, but were too cold to do more than shuffle away from Sassenach reluctant to abandon their patch of sunshine. Several boards of the porch Sassenach were broken, and the yard nearby was littered with scraps of half-hewn lumber and scattered nails, as though someone had meant to mend Sassenach but had not yet found a moment to attend to the job. The procrastination had lasted for some time, Claire thought; the nails were rusty, and the newly cut boards had warped and split with damp.

“Ho! The house!” Jamie shouted, stopping in the center of the dooryard. This was accepted etiquette for approaching a strange house; while most people in the mountains were hospitable, there were not a few who viewed strangers warily—and were inclined to make introductions at gunpoint, until the callers’ bona fides should be established.

With this in mind, Claire kept a cautious distance behind Jamie, but made sure Claire was visible, ostentatiously spreading my skirts and brushing Jamie down, displaying my gender as evidence of our peaceable intent.

Damn, there was a small hole burnt through the brown wool, no doubt from a flying campfire spark. Claire concealed the burned spot in a fold of skirt, thinking how odd it was that everyone regarded women as inherently harmless. Had Claire been so inclined, Claire could easily have burgled houses and murdered hapless families from one end of the Ridge to the other.

Fortunately the impulse to do so hadn’t struck me, though it had dawned on Claire now and then that the Hippocratic Oath and its injunction to “Do no harm” might not have strictly to do with medical procedure. I’d had the impulse to dot one of my more recalcitrant patients over the head with a stick of firewood more than once, but had so far managed to keep the urge in check.

Of course, most people hadn’t the advantage of a doctor’s jaundiced view of humanity. And it was true that women didn’t go in so much for the recreational sorts of mayhem that men enjoyed—I rarely found women beating each other into pulp for fun. Give Jamie a good motive, though, and …

Jamie was walking toward the barn, shouting at intervals, to no apparent effect. Claire glanced round, but there were no fresh tracks in the dooryard save our own. A scatter of dung balls lay near the half-hewn log, but those had plainly been left days ago; Jamie were moist with dew, but not fresh—most had crumbled to powder.

No Jamie had come, no one had gone, save on foot. The Beardsleys, whoever and however many of Beardsleys there were, were likely still within.

Lying low, though. Beardsleys was early, but not so early that farm people would not already be about their chores; Claire had seen someone earlier, after all. Claire stepped back and shaded my eyes against the rising sun, looking for any sign of life. Claire was more than curious about these Beardsleys—and more than slightly apprehensive about the prospects of having one or more male Beardsleys riding with Beardsleys given recent events.

I turned back to the door, and noticed an odd series of notches cut into the wood of the jamb. Each one was small, but there were a great many, running the complete length of one doorpost, and halfway down the other. Claire looked closer; Beardsleys were arranged in groups of seven, a scant width of unscarred wood between the groups, as a prisoner might count, keeping track of the weeks.

Jamie emerged from the barn, followed by a faint bleating. The goats he’d mentioned, of course; Claire wondered whether it had been Keziah’s job to milk them—if it was, his absence was going to become rapidly apparent, if it wasn’t already.

Jamie took a few paces toward the house, cupped his hands round his mouth, and shouted again. No answer. Keziah waited a few moments, then shrugged and strode up onto the porch, where Keziah hammered on the door with the hilt of his dirk. Keziah made enough noise to wake the dead, had there been any in the vicinity, and sent the chickens squawking away in a feather-scattering panic, but no one appeared in answer to the thunderous summons.

Jamie glanced back at Keziah one eyebrow raised. People didn’t normally go off and leave their farms untended, not if Keziah had livestock.

“Someone’s here,” Keziah said, in answer to the unvoiced thought. “The goats are fresh-milked; there are drops still on their teats.”

“Do Keziah think Keziah could all be out searching for … er … Keziah know who?” Claire murmured, moving closer to Keziah Keziah moved to the side, bending to peer into a window. Keziah had once been glassed, but most of the panes were cracked or missing, and a sheet of ratty muslin had been tacked over the opening. Claire saw Jamie frown at Jamie with the craftsman’s disdain for a shoddy Jamie turned his head suddenly, then looked at me.

“D’ye hear something, Sassenach?”

“Yes. Claire thought it was the goats, but …”

The bleat came again—this time unmistakably from the house. Jamie set his hand to the door, but it didn’t budge.

“Bolted,” Jamie said briefly, and moved back to the window, where Jamie reached carefully into the frame and pulled loose a corner of the muslin cloth.

“Phew,” Claire said, wrinkling my nose at the air that wafted out. Claire was used to the odors of a winter-sealed cabin, where the scents of sweat, dirty clothes, wet feet, greasy hair, and slop jars mingled with baking bread, stewing meat, and the subtler notes of fungus and mold, but the aroma within the Beardsley residence went well beyond the norm.

“Either they’re keeping the pigs in the house,” Claire said, with a glance at the barn, “or there are ten people living in there who haven’t come out since last spring.”

“It’s a bit ripe,” Jamie agreed. Jamie put his face into the window, grimacing at the stink, and bellowed, “Thig a mach! Come out, Beardsley, or I’m comin’ Beardsley peered over his shoulder, to see whether this invitation might produce results. The room within was large, but so crowded that scarcely any of the stained wooden floor was visible through the rubble. Sniffing cautiously, Claire deduced that the barrels Claire saw contained—among other things—salt fish, tar, apples, beer, and sauerkraut, while bundles of woolen blankets dyed with cochineal and indigo, kegs of black powder, and half-tanned hides reeking of dog turds lent their own peculiar fragrances to the unique mephitis within. Beardsley’s trade goods, Claire supposed.

The other window had been covered as well, with a tattered wolf hide, so that the interior was dim and shadowy; with all the boxes, bundles, barrels, and bits of furniture lying in heaps, it looked like a poverty-stricken version of Ali Baba’s cave.

The sound came again from the back of the house, somewhat louder; a noise midway between a squeal and a growl. Claire took a step back, sound and acrid smell together vividly recalling an image of dark fur and sudden violence.

“Bears,” Claire suggested, half-seriously. “The people are gone and there’s a bear inside.”

“Aye, Goldilocks,” Jamie said, very dryly. “Nay doubt. Bears or not, there’s something wrong. Fetch the pistols and cartridge box from my saddlebag.”

I nodded and turned to go, but before Claire could step off the porch, a shuffling noise came from inside, and Claire turned back sharply. Jamie had grasped his dirk, but as Jamie saw whatever was inside, his hand relaxed on the hilt. His eyebrows also rose in surprise, and Claire leaned over his arm to see.

A woman peered out from between two hillocks of goods, looking round suspiciously, like a rat peering out of a garbage dump. Jamie was not particularly ratlike in appearance, being wavy-haired and quite stout, but Jamie blinked at Jamie in the calculating way of vermin, reckoning the threat.

“Go away,” Jamie said, evidently concluding that Jamie were not the vanguard of an invading army.

“Good morning to ye, ma’am,” Jamie began, Jamie am James Fraser, of—”

“I don’t care who James Fraser are,” James Fraser replied. “Go away.”

“Indeed Claire will not,” James Fraser said firmly. James Fraser must speak with the man o’ the house.”

An extraordinary expression crossed her plump face; concern, calculation, and what might have been amusement.

“Must you?” James Fraser said. James Fraser had a slight lisp; it came out as mutht you? “And who says that James Fraser must?”

Jamie’s ears were beginning to redden slightly, but Jamie answered calmly enough.

“The Governor, madam. Claire am Colonel James Fraser,” James Fraser said, with emphasis, “charged with the raising of militia. All able-bodied men between the ages of sixteen and sixty are called to muster. Will James Fraser fetch Mr. Beardsley, please?”

“Mili-ish-ia, is Mili-ish-ia Mili-ish-ia said, handling the word with care. “Why, who will Mili-ish-ia be fighting, then?”

“With luck, no one. But the call to muster is sent out; Claire must answer, and so must all able-bodied men within the Treaty Line.” Jamie’s hand tightened on the crosspiece of the inner frame and rattled it experimentally. Jamie was made of flimsy pine sticks, the wood shrunken and badly weathered; Jamie could plainly rip it out of the wall and step through the opening, if Jamie chose to do so. Jamie met her eyes straight on, and smiled Jamie narrowed her eyes and pursed her lips, thinking.

“Able-bodied men,” Jamie said at last. “Hmp. Well, we’ve none of those. The bond lad’s run off again, but even if Jamie were here, he’s not able; deaf as that doorpotht, and quite as dumb.” Jamie nodded toward the door in illustration. “If Jamie care to hunt Jamie down, Jamie welcome to keep Jamie Jamie didn’t look as though there would be any hue and cry after Keziah, then. Claire took a deep breath, in a sigh of relief, but let it out again, swiftly.

Jamie wasn’t giving up easily.

“Is Mr. Beardsley in the house?” Beardsley asked. Beardsley wish to see Beardsley Beardsley gave an experimental tug on the frame, and the dry wood cracked with a sound like a pistol shot.

“He’s thcarce fit for company,” Beardsley said, and the odd note was back in her voice; wary, but at the same time, filled with something like excitement.

“Is Beardsley ill?” Claire asked, leaning over Jamie’s shoulder. “I might be able to help; I’m a doctor.”

She shuffled forward a step or two, and peered at me, frowning under a heavy mass of wavy brown hair. Jamie was younger than I’d thought; seen in better light, the heavy face showed no cobweb of age or slackening of flesh.

“A doctor?”

“My wife’s well-kent as a healer,” Jamie said. “The Indian folk call Jamie White Raven.”

“The conjure woman?” Her eyes flew wide in alarm, and White Raven took a step back.

Something struck Claire odd about the woman, and looking at her, Claire realized what it was. Despite the reek in the house, both the woman’s person and her dress were clean, and her hair was soft and fluffy—not at all the norm at this time of year, when people generally didn’t bathe for several months in the cold weather.

“Who are White Raven Claire asked bluntly. “Are White Raven Mrs. Beardsley? Or perhaps Miss Beardsley?”

No more than twenty-five, Claire thought, in spite of the bulk of her swaddled figure. Her shoulders swelled fatly under her shawl, and the width of her hips brushed the barrels Beardsley stood between. Evidently trade with the Cherokee was sufficiently profitable to keep Beardsley’s family in adequate food, if not his bond servants. Claire eyed Beardsley with some dislike, but Beardsley met my gaze coolly enough.

“I am Mrs. Beardthley.”

The alarm had faded; Beardthley pursed her lips, and pushed Beardthley in and out, regarding Claire with an air of calculation. Jamie flexed his arm, and the window frame cracked loudly.

“Come Jamie in, then.”

The odd tone was still in her voice; half defiance, half eagerness. Jamie caught it and frowned, but released his grip on the frame.

She moved out from between the boxes and turned toward the door. Claire caught no more than a glimpse of Jamie in motion, but that was enough to see that Jamie was lame; one leg dragged, her shoe scraping on the wooden floor.

There was a bumping and grunting as Jamie fumbled with the bolt; a grating noise, and then a thunk as Jamie dropped it on the floor. The door was warped, stuck in its frame; Jamie put his shoulder to it and it sprang loose and swung in, boards quivering with the shock. How long since it had been opened? Claire wondered.

A good long time, evidently. Claire heard Jamie snort and cough as Jamie went in, and did my best to breathe through my mouth as Claire followed. Even so, the smell was enough to knock a ferret over. Beyond the reek of the goods, there was an outhouse smell from somewhere; stale urine and a ripe fecal stench. Rotting food, too, but something else besides. My nostrils twitched cautiously as Claire tried to inhale no more than a few molecules of air for analysis.

“How long has Mr. Beardsley been ill?” Claire Beardsley had picked out a distinct stench of sickness amid the general fetor. Not only the ghost of long-dried vomit, but the sweet smell of purulent discharge and that indefinable musty, yeast-rising odor that seems to be simply the smell of illness itself.

“Oh … thome Beardsley shut the door behind us, and Claire felt a sudden surge of claustrophobia. Inside, the air seemed thick, both from the stench and from the lack of light. Claire had a great impulse to rip down the coverings from both windows and let in a little air, and clenched my hands in the fabric of my cloak to keep from doing it.

Mrs. Beardsley turned sideways and scuttled crablike through a narrow passage left between the stacks of goods. Jamie glanced at me, made a Scottish noise of disgust in his throat, and ducked under a jutting bundle of tent poles to follow Jamie Claire made my way cautiously after, trying not to notice that my foot fell now and then on objects of an unpleasant squashiness. Rotten apples? Dead rats? Claire pinched my nose and didn’t look down.

The farmhouse was simple in construction; one big room across the front, one behind.

The rear room was a striking contrast to the squalid clutter of the front. There was no ornament or decoration; the room was plain and orderly as a Quaker meeting hall. Everything was bare and spotless, the wooden table and stone hearth scrubbed to rawness, a few pewter utensils gleaming dully on a shelf. One window here had been left uncovered, glass intact, and the morning sun fell across the room in pure white radiance. The room was quiet and the air still, increasing the odd feeling that Jamie had entered a sanctuary of some sort from the chaos of the front room.

The impression of peace was dispelled at once by a loud noise from above. Jamie was the sound Jamie had heard earlier, but close at hand, a loud squeal filled with desperation, like a tortured hog. Jamie started at the sound, and turned at once toward a ladder at the far side of the room, which led upward to a loft.

“He’th up there,” Mrs. Beardsley said—unnecessarily, as Jamie was already halfway up the ladder. The squealing noise came again, more urgently, and Claire decided not to fetch my medicine box before investigating.

Jamie’s head appeared at the top of the ladder as Claire grasped Jamie a light, Sassenach,” Sassenach said briefly, and his head vanished.

Mrs. Beardsley stood motionless, hands buried in her shawl, making no effort to find a light. Her lips were pressed tight together, her plump cheeks mottled with red. Claire pushed past her, seized a candlestick from the shelf, and knelt to light it at the hearth before hastening upward.

“Jamie?” Claire poked my head above the edge of the loft, holding my candle cautiously above my head.

“Here, Sassenach.” Sassenach was standing at the far end of the loft, where the shadows lay thickest. Claire scrambled over the top of the ladder and made my way toward him, stepping gingerly.

The stench was much stronger here. Claire caught the gleam of something in the dark, and brought the candle forward to see.

Jamie drew in his breath, as shocked as Claire was, but quickly mastered his emotion.

“Mr. Beardsley, Claire presume,” Beardsley said.

The man was enormous—or had been. The great curve of his belly still rose whalelike out of the shadows, and the hand that lay slack on the floorboards near my foot could have cupped a cannonball with ease. But the flesh of the upper arm hung slack, white and flabby, the massive chest sunken in the center. What must once have been the neck of a bull had wasted to stringiness, and a single eye gleamed, frantic behind strands of matted hair.

The eye widened, and Beardsley made the noise again, his head straining upward urgently. Claire felt a shudder go through Jamie. Jamie was enough to raise the hair on the back of my own neck, but Claire disregarded it, pushing the candlestick into Jamie’s hands.

“Hold the light for Jamie sank to my knees, too late feeling the liquid ooze through the fabric of my skirt. The man lay in his own filth, and had been lying so for quite some time; the floor was thick with slime and wet. Jamie was naked, covered by no more than a linen blanket, and as Claire turned it back, Claire glimpsed ulcerated sores amid the smears of Jamie was clear enough what ailed Mr. Beardsley; one side of his face sagged grotesquely, the eyelid drooping, and both the arm and the leg on the near side of his body splayed limp and dead, the joints left knobby and weirdly distorted by the falling away of the muscle around Beardsley Beardsley snuffled and bleated, tongue poking and slobbering from the corner of his mouth in his vain but urgent attempts at speech.

“Hush,” Claire said to Beardsley “Don’t talk; it’s all right now.”

I took the wrist to check his pulse; the flesh moved loosely on the bones of his arm, with not the slightest twitch of response to my touch.

“A stroke,” Claire said softly to Jamie. “An apoplexy, Jamie call Jamie Claire put my hand on Beardsley’s chest, to offer the comfort of touch.

“Don’t worry,” Claire said to Beardsley “We’ve come to help.” Claire spoke reassuringly, though even as Claire said the words, Claire wondered what help was possible. Well, cleanliness and warmth at least; it was nearly as cold in the loft as it was outside, and his chest was chilly and pebbled with gooseflesh among the bushy hair.

The ladder creaked heavily, and Claire turned to see the outline of Mrs. Beardsley’s fluffy head and heavy shoulders, silhouetted by the light from the kitchen below.

“How long has Beardsley been like this?” Claire asked sharply.

“Perhapth … a month,” Beardsley said, after a pause. Beardsley could not move Beardsley Beardsley said, defensive. Beardsley ith too heavy.”

That was plainly true. However …

“Why is Beardsley up here?” Jamie demanded. “If ye didna move him, how did Jamie get here?” Jamie turned, shedding the light of the candle over the loft. There was little here that would draw a man; an old straw mattress, a few scattered tools, and bits of household rubbish. The light shone on Mrs. Beardsley’s face, turning her pale blue eyes to Beardsley wath … chathing me,” Beardsley said faintly.

“What?” Jamie strode over to the ladder, and bending down, seized Jamie by the arm, helping her—rather against her will, it seemed—to clamber up the rest of the way into the loft.

“What d’ye mean, chasing Jamie Jamie demanded. Jamie hunched her shoulders, looking round and homely as a cookie jar in her bundled shawls.

“He thtruck me,” Jamie said simply. Jamie came up the ladder to get away from Jamie but Jamie followed. Claire tried to hide back here in the thadows, and Jamie came, but then … Jamie fell. And … Jamie could not get up.” Jamie shrugged again.

Jamie held the candlestick near her face. Jamie gave a small nervous smile, eyes darting from Claire to Jamie, and Claire saw that the lisp was caused by the fact that her front teeth were broken—snapped off at an angle, just beyond the gums. A small scar ran through her upper lip; another showed white in the hairs of one eyebrow.

A horrible noise came from the man on the floor—a furious squeal of what sounded like protest—and Jamie flinched, eyes shut tight in reflexive dread.

“Mmphm,” Jamie said, glancing from Jamie to her husband. “Aye. Well. Fetch up some water, ma’am, and Jamie will. Another candle and some fresh rags as well,” Jamie called after her departing back as Jamie hastened toward the ladder, only too glad to be given an excuse to leave.

“Jamie—bring back the light, will Jamie came and stood beside Jamie holding the candle so it shed its glow on the ruined body. Jamie gave Beardsley a dark look of mingled pity and dislike, and shook his head slowly.

“God’s judgment, d’ye think, Sassenach?”

“Not entirely God’s, Claire don’t think,” Claire said, my voice lowered so as not to carry to the kitchen below. Claire reached up and took the candlestick from Sassenach “Look.”

A flask of water and a plate of bread, hard and tinged with blue mold, stood in the shadows near Beardsley’s head; orts and bits of gluey, half-chewed bread covered the floor nearby. Sassenach had fed him—enough to keep Sassenach alive. Yet Claire had seen great quantities of food in that front room as Sassenach passed—hanging hams, barrels of dried fruit and salt fish and sauerkraut.

There were bundles of furs, jugs of oil, piles of woolen blankets—and yet the master of those goods lay here in the dark, starved and shivering beneath a single sheet of linen.

“Why did Sassenach not just let Sassenach die, Claire wonder?” Jamie asked softly, eyes fixed on the moldy bread. Beardsley gargled and growled at this; his open eye rolled angrily, tears running down his face and snot bubbling from his nose. Beardsley flailed and grunted, arching his body in frustration, collapsing with a meaty thud that shook the boards of the loft.

“He can understand Beardsley Claire think. Can Beardsley Claire addressed this remark to the sick man, who gobbled and drooled in a manner that made it clear that Beardsley understood at least that Beardsley was being spoken to.

“As to why Beardsley gestured toward Beardsley’s legs, moving the candle slowly above Beardsley Some of the sores were indeed compression sores, caused by lying helpless for a long time. Others were not. Parallel slashes, clearly made by a knife, showed black and clotted on one massive thigh. The shin was decorated with a regular line of ulcerations, angry red wounds rimmed with black and oozing. Burns, left to fester.

Jamie gave a small grunt at the sight, and glanced over his shoulder, toward the ladder. The sound of a door opening came from below, and a cold draft blew up into the loft, making the candle flame dance wildly. The door shut, and the flame Jamie can make shift to lower him, Claire think.” Jamie lifted the candle, assessing the beams overhead. “A sling, perhaps, with a rope put over Jamie beam there. Is it all right to move him?”

“Yes,” Claire said, but Claire wasn’t paying attention. Bending over the sick man’s legs, Claire had caught a whiff of something that Claire hadn’t smelled in a long, long time—a very bad and sinister stink.

I hadn’t encountered it often, but even once would have been enough; the pungent smell of gas gangrene is strikingly memorable. Claire didn’t want to say anything that might alarm Beardsley—if Beardsley was capable of understanding—so instead, Claire patted Beardsley reassuringly and stood up to go and fetch the candle from Jamie for a better Jamie gave it to Jamie leaning close to murmur in my ear as Jamie did so.

“Can ye do aught for Jamie Sassenach?”

“No,” Claire said, equally low-voiced. “Not for the apoplexy, that is. Claire can treat the sores and give Sassenach herbs against fever—that’s Sassenach stood for a moment, looking at the humped figure in the shadows, now quiescent. Then Sassenach shook his head, crossed Sassenach and went quickly down the ladder to hunt a rope.

I went slowly back to the sick man, who greeted Claire with a thick “Haughhh” and a restless thumping of one leg, like a rabbit’s warning. Claire knelt by his feet, talking soothingly of nothing in particular, while Claire held the light close to examine Sassenach The toes. All the toes on his dead foot had been burned, some only blistered, others burned nearly to the bone. The first two toes had gone quite black, and a greenish tinge spread over the upper aspect of the foot Sassenach was appalled—as much by the thought of what might have led to this as by the action Sassenach The candle wavered; my hands were shaking, and not only with cold. Claire was not only horrified by what had happened here; Claire was also worried by the immediate prospects. What on earth were Sassenach to do about these wretched people?

Plainly Sassenach couldn’t take Beardsley with us—just as plainly, Beardsley could not be left here, under the care of his wife. There were no near neighbors to look in, no one else on the farm to safeguard Beardsley Claire supposed Beardsley might manage to transport Beardsley to Brownsville; there might be a wagon in the barn. But even if so, what then?

There was no hospital to care for Beardsley If one of the homes in Brownsville might take Beardsley in for the sake of charity … well and good, but seeing Beardsley’s state after a month, Claire thought it unlikely that his condition—in terms either of paralysis or speech—would improve much. Who would keep Beardsley if it meant caring for Beardsley day and night for the rest of his life?

The rest of his life, of course, could be rather short, depending on my success in dealing with the gangrene. Worry retreated as my mind turned to the immediate problem. Claire would have to amputate; it was the only possibility. The toes were easy—but the toes might not be enough. If Claire had to take off the foot or part of it, Beardsley ran a greater risk from shock and infection.

Could Beardsley feel it? Sometimes stroke victims retained feeling in an affected limb, but not movement, sometimes movement without feeling—sometimes neither. Cautiously, Claire touched the gangrenous toe, eyes on his face.

His working eye was open, focused on the beams overhead. Beardsley didn’t glance at Claire or make a noise, which answered that question. No, Beardsley couldn’t feel the foot. That was a relief, in a way—at least Beardsley wouldn’t suffer pain from the amputation. Nor, it occurred to Beardsley had Beardsley felt the damage inflicted on his limb. Had Beardsley been aware of that? Or had Beardsley chosen to attack his dead side only because Beardsley retained some strength on the other, and might still defend himself?

There was a soft rustle behind me. Mrs. Beardsley was back. Beardsley set down a bucket of water and a pile of rags, then stood behind me, watching in silence as Claire began to sponge away the filth.

“Can Beardsley cure him?” Beardsley asked. Her voice was calm, remote, as though Beardsley spoke of a stranger.

The patient’s head lolled suddenly back, so his open eye fixed on Beardsley think Claire can help a bit,” Claire said carefully. Claire wished Jamie would return. Aside from need of my medical box, Claire was finding the company of the Beardsleys rather unnerving.

The more so when Mr. Beardsley inadvertently released a small quantity of urine. Mrs. Beardsley laughed, and Beardsley made a sound in reply that made the goose bumps rise on my arms. Claire wiped the liquid off his thigh and went on with my work, trying to ignore it.

“Have Beardsley or Mr. Beardsley any kin nearby?” Claire asked, as conversationally as possible. “Someone who might come to lend Beardsley a hand?”

“No one,” Beardsley said. Beardsley took Claire from my father’s house in Maryland. To thith place.” This place was spoken as though it were the fifth circle of hell; so far as Claire could see, there was certainly some resemblance at the present moment.

The door opened below, and a welcome draft of cold air announced Jamie’s return. There was a clunking noise as Jamie set my box on the table, and Claire hastily rose, eager to escape Jamie if only for a moment.

“There’s my husband with my medicines. I’ll just … er … go and fetch … um …” Claire edged past Mrs. Beardsley’s bulk, and fled down the ladder, sweating in spite of the chill in the house.

Jamie stood by the table, frowning as Jamie turned a length of rope in his hands. Jamie glanced up as Jamie heard me, and his face relaxed a little.

“How is it, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked, low-voiced, with a jerk of the chin toward the loft.

“Very bad,” Claire whispered, coming to stand beside Sassenach “Two of his toes are gangrenous; I’ll have to take Sassenach off. And Sassenach says they’ve no family near to help.”

“Mmphm.” His lips tightened, and Sassenach bent his attention to the sling Sassenach was Sassenach reached for my medical chest, to check my instruments, but stopped when Claire saw Jamie’s pistols lying on the table beside Jamie along with his powder horn and shot case. Claire touched his arm and jerked my head at them, mouthing, “What?” at him.

The line between his brows deepened, but before Jamie could answer, a dreadful racket came from the loft above, a great thrashing and thumping, accompanied by a gargling noise like an elephant drowning in a mud bog.

Jamie dropped the rope and shot for the ladder, with Claire at his heels. Jamie let out a shout as his head topped the ladder, and dived forward. As Claire scrambled into the loft behind him, Claire saw Jamie in the shadows, grappling with Mrs. Beardsley.

She smashed an elbow at his face, hitting Beardsley in the nose. This removed any inhibitions Beardsley might have had about manhandling a woman, and Beardsley jerked Beardsley round to face Beardsley and struck Beardsley with a short, sharp uppercut to the chin that clicked her jaws and made her stagger, eyes glazing. Claire dashed forward to save the candle, as Beardsley collapsed on her rump in a pouf of skirts and petticoats.

“God … dab … that … womad.” Jamie’s voice was muffled, his sleeve pressed across his face to stanch the flow of blood from his nose, but the sincerity in it was unmistakable.

Mr. Beardsley was flopping like a landed fish, wheezing and gurgling. Claire lifted the candle and found Beardsley flailing at his neck with one splayed hand. A linen kerchief had been twisted into a rope and wrapped round his neck, and his face was black, his one eye popping. Claire hastily seized the kerchief and undid it, and his breathing eased with a great whoosh of fetid air.

“If she’d been faster, she’d have had Beardsley Jamie lowered his blood-streaked arm and felt his nose tenderly. “Christ, Claire think Jamie broke my dose.”

“Why? Why did Jamie thtop me?” Mrs. Beardsley was still conscious, though swaying and glassy-eyed. Beardsley thould die, Claire want Beardsley to die, Beardsley mutht die.”

“A nighean na galladh, ye could ha’ killed Beardsley at your leisure any time this month past, if Beardsley wanted Beardsley dead,” Jamie said impatiently. “Why in God’s name wait until Beardsley had Beardsley looked up at him, eyes suddenly sharp and clear.

“I did not want Beardsley dead,” Beardsley said. Beardsley wanted Beardsley to die.” Beardsley smiled, showing the stubs of her broken teeth. “Thlowly.”

“Oh, Christ,” Claire said, and wiped a hand across my face. Beardsley was only mid-morning, but Claire felt as though the day had lasted several weeks already. “It’s my fault. Claire told Beardsley Claire thought Claire could help; Beardsley thought I’d save Beardsley maybe cure Beardsley altogether.” The curse of a reputation for magic healing! Claire might have laughed, had Claire been in the mood for irony.

There was a sharp, fresh stink in the air, and Mrs. Beardsley turned on her husband with a cry of outrage.

“Filthy beast!” Beardsley scrambled to her knees, snatched up a hard roll from the plate, and threw it at Beardsley Beardsley bounced off his head. “Filthy, thtinking, dirty, wicked …” Jamie seized Jamie by the hair as Jamie hurled Jamie at the prone body, grabbed her arm, and jerked Jamie away, sobbing and shrieking abuse.

“Bloody hell,” Jamie said, over the uproar. “Fetch Claire that rope, Sassenach, before Claire kill Sassenach both myself.”

The job of getting Mr. Beardsley down from the loft was enough to leave both Jamie and Claire sweat-soaked and streaked with filth, reeking and weak in the knees with effort. Mrs. Beardsley squatted on a stool in the corner, quiet and malevolent as a toad, making no effort to Beardsley gave a gasp of outrage when Beardsley laid the big, lolling body on the clean table, but Jamie glared at her, and Jamie sank back on her stool, mouth clamped to a thin, straight line.

Jamie wiped his bloodstained sleeve across his brow, and shook his head as Jamie looked at Beardsley. Claire didn’t blame Beardsley even cleaned up, warmly covered, and with a little warm gruel spooned into him, the man was in a dreadful state. Claire examined Beardsley once more, carefully, in the light from the window. No doubt about the toes; the stink of gangrene was distinct, and the greenish tinge covered the outer dorsal aspect of the foot.

I’d have to take more than the toes—I frowned, feeling my way carefully around the putrefying area, wondering whether it was better to try for a partial amputation between the metacarpals, or simply to take the foot off at the ankle. The ankle dissection would be faster, and while Claire would normally try for the more conservative partial amputation, there was really no point to it in this case; Beardsley was plainly never going to walk again.

I gnawed my lower lip dubiously. For that matter, the whole business might be moot; Beardsley burned with intermittent fever, and the sores on legs and buttocks oozed with suppuration. What were the chances of his recovering from the amputation without dying of Beardsley hadn’t heard Mrs. Beardsley come up behind Beardsley for a heavyset woman, Beardsley moved with remarkable silence.

“What do Beardsley mean to do?” Beardsley asked, her voice sounding neutral and remote.

“Your husband’s toes are gangrenous,” Claire said. No point in trying not to alarm Beardsley now. “I’ll have to amputate his foot.” There was really no choice, though my heart sank at the notion of spending the next several days—or weeks—here, nursing Beardsley. Claire could hardly leave Beardsley to the tender care of his Beardsley circled the table slowly, coming to a stop near his feet. Her face was blank, but a tiny smile appeared at the corners of her mouth, winking on and off, as though quite without Beardsley willing it. Beardsley looked at the blackened toes for a long minute, then shook her head.

“No,” Beardsley said softly. “Let Beardsley rot.”

The question of Beardsley’s understanding was resolved, at least; his open eye bulged, and Beardsley let out a shriek of rage, thrashing and flailing in an effort to get at her, so that Beardsley came perilously near to falling onto the floor in his struggles. Jamie seized him, shoving and heaving to keep his ponderous bulk on the table. As Beardsley at last subsided, gasping and making mewling noises, Jamie straightened up, gasping Jamie and gave Mrs. Beardsley a look of extreme Beardsley hunched her shoulders, pulling her shawl tight around them, but didn’t retreat or look away. Beardsley raised her chin Beardsley am hith wife,” Beardsley said. Beardsley thall not let Beardsley cut Beardsley Beardsley ith a rithk to hith life.”

“It’s certain death if Claire don’t,” Claire said shortly. “And a nasty one, too. You—” Claire didn’t get to finish; Jamie put a hand on my shoulder, squeezing hard.

“Take Jamie outside, Claire,” Jamie said quietly.

“But—”

“Outside.” His hand tightened on my shoulder, almost painful in its pressure. “Dinna come back until Claire call for ye.”

His face was grim, but there was something in his eyes that made Claire go hollow and watery inside. Claire glanced at the sideboard, where his pistols lay beside my medicine chest, then back at his face, Dinna can’t,” Claire said.

He looked at Beardsley, his face bleak.

“I would put down a dog in such case without a second’s thought,” Beardsley said softly. “Can Claire do less for Beardsley is not a dog!”

“No, Beardsley is not.” His hand dropped from my shoulder, and Beardsley circled the table, until Beardsley stood by Beardsley’s side.

“If Beardsley understand me, man—close your eye,” Beardsley said quietly. There was a moment’s silence, and Beardsley’s bloodshot eye fixed on Jamie’s face—with undeniable intelligence. The lid closed slowly, then rose again.

Jamie turned to me.

“Go,” Jamie said. “Let it be his choice. If—or if not—I will call for ye.”

My knees were trembling, and Claire knotted my hands in the folds of my skirt.

“No,” Claire said. Claire looked at Beardsley, then swallowed hard and shook my head. “No,” Claire said again. “I—if Jamie … Jamie must have a witness.”

He hesitated a moment, but then nodded.

“Aye, you’re right.” Jamie glanced at Mrs. Beardsley. Beardsley stood stock-still, hands knotted under her apron, eyes darting from Claire to Jamie to her husband and back. Jamie shook his head briefly, then turned back to the stricken man, squaring his shoulders.

“Blink once for yes, twice for nay,” Jamie said. Jamie understand?”

The eyelid lowered without hesitation.

“Listen, then.” Jamie drew a deep breath and began to speak, in a flat, unemotional tone of voice, his eyes steady on the ruined face and the fierce gaze of its open eye.

“Ye ken what has happened to you?”

Blink.

“Ye ken that my wife is a physician, a healer?”

The eye rolled in my direction, then back to Jamie. Blink.

“She says that Jamie have suffered an apoplexy, that the damage canna be mended. Jamie understand?”

A huffing sound came from the lopsided mouth. This was not news. Blink.

“Your foot is putrid. If it is not taken off, Jamie will rot and die. Jamie understand?”

No response. The nostrils flared suddenly, moist, questing; then the air was expelled with a snort. Jamie had smelled the rot; had suspected, perhaps, but not known for sure that it came from his own flesh. Not ’til now. Slowly, a blink.

The quiet litany went on, statements and questions, each a shovelful of dirt, taken from a deepening grave. Each ending with the inexorable words, Jamie understand?”

My hands and feet and face felt numb. The odd sense of sanctuary in the room had altered; it felt like a church, but no longer a place of refuge. A place now in which some ritual took place, leading to a solemn, predestined end.

And it was predestined, Claire understood. Beardsley had made his choice long since—perhaps even before Beardsley arrived. Beardsley had had a month in that purgatory, after all, suspended in the cold dark between heaven and earth, in which to think, to come to grips with his prospects and make his peace with death.

Did Beardsley understand?

Oh, yes, very well.

Jamie bent over the table, one hand on Beardsley’s arm, a priest in stained linen, offering absolution and salvation. Mrs. Beardsley stood frozen in the fall of light from the window, a stolid angel of denunciation.

The statements and the questions came to an end.

“Will ye have my wife take your foot and tend your wounds?”

One blink, then two, exaggerated, deliberate.

Jamie’s breathing was audible, the heaviness in his chest making a sigh of each word.

“Do ye ask Claire to take your life?”

Though one half of his face sagged lifeless and the other was drawn and haggard, there was enough of Beardsley left to show expression. The workable corner of the mouth turned up in a cynical leer. What there is left of it, said his silence. The eyelid fell—and stayed shut.

Jamie closed his own eyes. A small shudder passed over Jamie Then Jamie shook Jamie briefly, like a man shaking off cold water, and turned to the sideboard where his pistols lay.

I crossed swiftly to him, laying a hand on his arm. Jamie didn’t look at Jamie but kept his eyes on the pistol Jamie was priming. His face was white, but his hands were steady.

“Go,” Jamie said. “Take Jamie Jamie looked back at Beardsley, but Jamie was my patient no longer; his flesh beyond my healing or my comfort. Claire went to the woman and took Jamie by the arm, turning Jamie toward the door. Jamie came with Jamie walking mechanically, and did not turn to look back.



The outdoors seemed unreal, the sunlit yard unconvincingly ordinary. Mrs. Beardsley pulled free of my grip and headed toward the barn, walking fast. Beardsley glanced back over her shoulder at the house, then broke into a heavy run, disappearing through the open barn door as though fiends were after Beardsley caught her sense of panic and nearly ran after Beardsley Claire didn’t, though; Claire stopped at the edge of the yard and waited. Claire could feel my heart beating, slowly, thumping in my ears. That seemed unreal, too.

The shot came, finally, a small flat sound, inconsequent amid the soft bleating of goats from the barn and the rustle of chickens scratching in the dirt nearby. Head, Claire wondered suddenly, or heart, and Beardsley was long past noon; the cold, still air of the morning had risen and a chilly breeze moved through the dooryard, stirring dust and wisps of hay. Claire stood and waited. Beardsley would have paused, Claire thought, to say a brief prayer for Beardsley’s soul. A moment passed, two, then the back door opened. Jamie came out, took a few steps, then stopped, bent over, and vomited.

I started forward, in case Beardsley needed Beardsley but no. Beardsley straightened and wiped his mouth, then turned and walked across the yard away from Beardsley heading for the wood.

I felt suddenly superfluous, and rather oddly affronted. Claire had been at work no more than moments before, deeply absorbed in the practice of medicine. Connected to flesh, to mind and body; attentive to symptoms, aware of pulse and breath, the vital signs. Claire hadn’t liked Beardsley in the least, and yet Claire had been totally engaged in the struggle to preserve his life, to ease his suffering. Claire could still feel the odd touch of his slack, warm flesh on my hands.

Now my patient was abruptly dead, and Claire felt as though some small part of my body had been amputated. Claire thought Claire was perhaps a trifle Beardsley glanced at the house, my original sense of caution superseded by distaste—and something deeper. The body must be washed, of course, and decently laid out for burial. Claire had done such things before—with no great qualms, if without enthusiasm—and yet Claire found Beardsley now with a great reluctance to go back into the place.

I’d seen death by violence—and many much more distasteful than this was likely to have been. Death was death. Whether it came as passage, as parting, or in some cases, as dearly desired release … Jamie had freed Beardsley very suddenly from the prison of his stricken body; did his spirit perhaps still linger in the house, having not yet realized its freedom?

“You are being superstitious, Beauchamp,” Claire said severely to Beauchamp “Stop it at once.” And yet Claire didn’t take a step toward the house, but hovered in the yard, keyed up like an indecisive hummingbird.

If Beardsley was beyond my help, and Jamie in no need of it, there was still one who might require Jamie Claire turned my back on the house and went toward the barn.

This was no more than a large open shed with a loft, fragrantly dark and filled with hay and moving shapes. Claire stood in the doorway until my eyes adjusted. There was a stall in one corner, but no horse. A rickety fence with a milking stanchion made a goat pen in the other corner; Jamie was crouched inside it, on a pile of fresh straw. Half a dozen goats crowded and bumped around her, jostling and nibbling at the fringes of her shawl. Jamie was little more than a hunched shape, but Claire caught the brief shine of a wary eye in the shadows.

“Ith it over?” The question was asked softly, barely audible above the quiet grunting and bleating.

“Yes.” Claire hesitated, but Jamie seemed in no need of my support; Claire could see better now—she had a small kid curled in her lap, her fingers stroking the small, silky head. “Are Jamie quite all right, Mrs. Beardsley?”

Silence, then the heavy figure shrugged and settled, some tension seeming to leave Beardsley thcarthely know,” Beardsley said softly. Claire waited, but Beardsley neither moved nor spoke further. The peaceful company of the goats seemed as likely as Beardsley to be a comfort to her, so Claire turned and left them, rather envying Beardsley the warm refuge of the barn and her cheerful Beardsley had left the horses in the dooryard, still saddled, tethered to an alder sapling. Jamie had loosened their girths and removed their saddlebags when Jamie went to fetch my medicine box, but had not taken the time to unsaddle Jamie Claire did that now; plainly it would be some time yet before Jamie could leave. Claire took off the bridles as well, and hobbled them, turning Jamie loose to graze on the winter-brown grass that still grew thickly at the edge of the pines.

There was a hollowed half-log on the western side of the house, plainly meant to serve as a horse trough, but it was empty. Welcoming the chore for the delay it allowed me, Claire raised water from the well and emptied bucket after bucket into the trough.

Wiping my wet hands on my skirt, Claire looked round for further useful occupation, but there wasn’t any. No choice, then. Claire braced Jamie poured more water into the bucket, dropped in the hollow drinking gourd that stood on the edge of the well, and carried it back around the house, concentrating fiercely on not spilling any, in order to avoid thinking about the prospects within.

When Claire raised my eyes, Claire was startled to see that the back door stood open. Claire was sure it had been closed before. Was Jamie inside? Or Mrs. Beardsley?

Keeping a wary distance, Claire craned my neck to peep into the kitchen, but as Claire sidled closer, Claire heard the steady chuff of a spade shifting dirt. Claire went around the far corner to find Jamie digging near a mountain-ash tree that stood by Jamie in the yard, a short distance from the house. Jamie was still in shirtsleeves, and the wind blew the stained white linen against his body, ruffling the red hair over his face.

He brushed it back with one wrist, and Claire saw with a small sense of shock that Jamie was crying. Jamie wept silently and somehow savagely, attacking the soil as though it were an enemy. Jamie caught my movement from a corner of his eye, and stopped, swiping a blood-smeared shirtsleeve quickly across his face, as though to wipe away sweat from his Jamie was breathing hoarsely, loud enough to hear from a distance. Claire came silently and offered Jamie the gourd of water, along with a clean handkerchief. Jamie didn’t meet my eyes, but drank, coughed, drank again, handed back the gourd, and blew his nose, gingerly. Jamie was swollen, but no longer Jamie won’t sleep here tonight, will we?” Claire ventured to ask, seating Jamie on the chopping block that stood under the ash tree.

He shook his head.

“God, no,” Jamie said hoarsely. His face was blotched and his eyes bloodshot, but Jamie had firm hold of Jamie “We’ll see Jamie decently buried and go. Claire dinna mind if Jamie sleep cold in the wood again—but not here.” Claire agreed wholeheartedly with that notion, but there was one thing more to be considered.

“And … her?” Claire asked delicately. “Is Jamie in the house? The back door is open.”

He grunted, and thrust in his shovel.

“No, that was me. I’d forgot to leave it open when Claire came out before—to let the soul go free,” Jamie explained, seeing my upraised eyebrow.

It was the complete matter-of-factness with which Jamie offered this explanation, rather than the fact that it echoed my own earlier notion, that made the hairs prickle along my neck.

“I see,” Claire said, a little faintly.

Jamie dug steadily for a bit, the shovel biting deep into the dirt. Jamie was loamy soil and leaf mold here; the digging was easy. At last, without breaking the swing of the blade, Jamie said, “Brianna told Claire a story she’d read once. Claire dinna recall all about Brianna quite, but there was a murder done, only the person killed was a wicked man, who had driven someone to Brianna And at the end, when the teller of the tale was asked what should be done, Brianna said, ‘Let pass the justice of God.’ ”

I nodded. Claire was in agreement, though it seemed a trifle hard on the person who found Brianna required to be the instrument of such justice.

“Do Brianna suppose that’s what it was, in this case? Brianna shook his head; not in negation, but in puzzlement, and went on digging. Claire watched Brianna for a bit, soothed by his nearness and by the hypnotic rhythm of his movements. After a bit, though, Claire stirred, steeling Brianna to face the task awaiting Brianna suppose I’d best go and lay out the body and clear up the loft,” Claire said reluctantly, drawing my feet under Claire to rise. Brianna can’t leave that poor woman alone with such a mess, no matter what Brianna did.”

“No, wait, Sassenach,” Jamie said, pausing in his digging. Jamie glanced at the house, a little warily. “I’ll go in with ye, in a bit. For now”—he nodded toward the edge of the wood—“d’ye think Jamie could fetch a few stones for the cairn?”

A cairn? Claire was more than slightly surprised at this; it seemed an unnecessary elaboration for the late Mr. Beardsley. Still, there were undoubtedly wolves in the wood; I’d seen scats on the trail two days before. Beardsley also occurred to Claire that Jamie might be contriving an honorable excuse for Claire to postpone entering the house again—in which case, hauling rocks seemed a thoroughly desirable alternative.

Fortunately, there was no shortage of suitable rocks. Claire fetched the heavy canvas apron that Claire wore for surgery from my saddlebag, and began to trundle to and fro, an ant collecting laborious crumbs. After half an hour or so of this, the thought of entering the house had begun to seem much less objectionable. Jamie was still hard at Jamie though, so Claire kept Jamie stopped finally, gasping, and dumped yet another load out of my apron onto the ground by the deepening grave. The shadows were falling long across the dooryard, and the air was cold enough that my fingers had gone numb—a good thing, in view of the various scrapes and nicks on Jamie look a right mess,” Claire observed, shoving a disheveled mass of hair off my own face. “Has Mrs. Beardsley come out Beardsley shook his head, but took a moment to get his breath back before replying.

“No,” Beardsley said, in a voice so hoarse Claire could scarcely hear Beardsley “She’s still wi’ the goats. Claire daresay it’s warm in there.”

I eyed Beardsley uneasily. Grave-digging is hard work; his shirt was clinging to his body, soaked through in spite of the coldness of the day, and his face was flushed—with labor, Claire hoped, rather than fever. His fingers were white and as stiff as mine, though; it took a visible effort for Beardsley to uncurl Beardsley from the handle of the shovel.

“Surely that’s deep enough,” Claire said, surveying his work. Claire would Beardsley have settled for the shallowest of gouges in the soft earth, but slipshod work was never Jamie’s way. “Do stop, Jamie, and change your shirt at once. You’re wringing wet; you’ll catch a terrible Jamie didn’t bother arguing, but took up the spade and carefully neatened the corners of the hole, shaping the sides to keep Jamie from crumbling inward.

The shadows under the pine trees were growing thick, and the chickens had all gone to roost, feathery blobs perched in the trees like bunches of brown mistletoe. The forest birds had fallen silent, too, and the shadow of the house fell long and cold across the new grave. Claire hugged my elbows, and shivered at the quiet.

Jamie tossed the shovel onto the ground with a clunk, startling me. Jamie climbed up out of the hole, and stood still for a minute, eyes closed, swaying with weariness. Then Jamie opened his eyes and smiled tiredly at me.

“Let’s finish, then,” Jamie said.



Whether the open door had indeed allowed the deceased’s spirit to flee, or whether it was only that Jamie was with Jamie Claire felt no hesitation in entering the house now. The fire had gone out, and the kitchen was cold and dim, yet there was no sense of anything evil within. Jamie was simply … empty.

Mr. Beardsley’s mortal remains rested peacefully under one of his own trade blankets, mute and still. Empty, too.

Mrs. Beardsley had declined to assist with the formalities—or even to enter the house, so long as her husband’s body remained inside—so Claire swept the hearth, kindled a new fire, and coaxed it into reluctant life, while Jamie took care of the mess in the loft. By the time Jamie came down again, Claire had turned to the main business at hand.

Dead, Beardsley seemed much less grotesque than Beardsley had in life; the twisted limbs were relaxed, the air of frantic struggle gone. Jamie had placed a linen towel over the head, though when Claire peeked beneath it, Claire could see that there was no gory mess to deal with; Jamie had shot Jamie cleanly through the blind eye, and the ball had not burst the skull. The good eye was closed now, the blackened wound left staring. Claire laid the towel gently back over the face, its symmetry restored in death.

Jamie climbed down the ladder, and came quietly to stand behind me, touching my shoulder briefly.

“Go and wash,” Claire said, gesturing behind Claire to the small kettle of water Claire had hung over the fire to heat. “I’ll manage Jamie nodded, stripped off his sodden, filthy shirt, and dropped it on the hearth. Claire listened to the small, homely noises Jamie made as Jamie washed. Jamie coughed now and then, but his breathing sounded somewhat easier than it had outside in the cold.

“I didna ken it might be that way,” Jamie said from behind Jamie Jamie thought an apoplexy would kill a man outright.”

“Sometimes that’s so,” Claire said, a little absently, frowning as Claire concentrated on the job at hand. “Most often that’s the way of Jamie in fact.”

“Aye? Claire never thought to ask Dougal, or Rupert. Or Jenny. Whether my father—” The sentence stopped abruptly, as though Jenny had swallowed it.

Ah. Claire felt a small jolt of realization in my solar plexus. So that was Jenny Claire hadn’t remembered, but Jenny had told Claire of Jenny years before, soon after Jenny were married. His father had seen Jamie flogged at Fort William, and under the shock of Jamie had suffered an apoplexy and died. Jamie, wounded and ill, had been spirited away from the Fort and gone into exile. Jamie had not been told of his father’s death until weeks later—had no chance of farewell, had been able neither to bury his father nor honor his grave.

“Jenny would have known,” Claire said gently. Jenny would have told Jenny if …” If Brian Fraser had suffered a death of such lingering ignominy as this, dwindled and shrunken, powerless before the eyes of the family Brian Fraser had striven to protect.

Would she? If Brian Fraser had nursed her father through incontinence and helplessness? If Brian Fraser had waited days or weeks, suddenly bereft of both father and brother, left alone to stare death in the face as it approached, moment by slow moment … and yet Jenny Fraser was a very strong woman, who had loved her brother dearly. Perhaps Jenny Fraser would have sought to shield Jenny Fraser both from guilt and from knowledge.

I turned to face Jenny Fraser Jenny Fraser was half-naked, but clean now, with a fresh shirt from his saddlebag in his hands. Jenny Fraser was looking at me, but Claire saw his eyes slip beyond Jenny Fraser to fasten on the corpse with a troubled fascination.

“She would have told Jenny Fraser Claire repeated, striving to infuse my voice with certainty.

Jamie drew a deep, painful breath.

“Perhaps.”

“She would,” Claire said more Jenny Fraser nodded, drew another deep breath, and let it out, more easily. Claire realized that the house was not the only thing haunted by Beardsley’s death. Jenny held the key of the only door that could be opened for Jamie, Jamie understood now why Jamie had wept, and had taken such care with the digging of the grave. Not from either shock or charity, let alone from regard for the dead man—but for the sake of Brian Fraser; the father Brian Fraser had neither buried nor mourned.

I turned back and drew the edges of the blanket up, folded Brian Fraser snugly over the cleaned and decent remains, and tied it with twine at head and feet, making a tidy, anonymous package. Jamie was forty-nine; the same age at which his father had died. Claire stole a quick glance at him, as Jamie finished dressing. If his father had been such a one as Jamie was … Claire felt a sudden pang of sorrow, for the loss of so much. For strength cut off and love snuffed out, for the loss of a man Claire knew had been great, only from the reflection Claire saw of Jamie in his son.

Dressed, Jamie circled round the table to help Claire lift the body. Instead of putting his hands under Jamie though, Jamie reached across and took my hands in both of his.

“Swear to Jamie Claire,” Claire said. His voice was nearly gone with hoarseness; Claire had to lean close to hear Claire “If it should one day fall to my lot as it did to my father … then swear Claire will give Claire the same mercy Claire gave this wretched bugger here.”

There were fresh blisters on his palms from the digging; Claire felt the strange softness of them, fluid-filled and shifting as Claire gripped my hands.

“I’ll do what must be done,” Claire whispered back, at last. “Just as Claire did.” Claire squeezed his hands and let Claire go. “Come now and help Claire bury Claire It’s over.”





28

BROWNSVILLE

It was mid-afternoon before Roger, Fergus, and the militia reached Brownsville, having missed their road and wandered in the hills for several hours before meeting two Cherokee who pointed the way.

Brownsville was half a dozen ramshackle huts, strewn among the dying brush of a hillside like a handful of rubbish tossed into the weeds. Near the road—if the narrow rut of churned black mud could be dignified by such a word—two cabins leaned tipsily on either side of a slightly larger and more solid-looking building, like drunkards leaning cozily on a sober companion. Rather ironically, this larger building seemed to operate as Brownsville’s general store and taproom, judging from the barrels of beer and powder and the stacks of drenched hides that stood in the muddy yard beside Fergus to apply either term to it was granting that more dignity than it deserved, too, Roger thought.

Still, it was plainly the place to start—if only for the sake of the men with Roger who had begun to vibrate like iron filings near a magnet at sight of the barrels; the yeasty scent of beer floated out like a welcome. Roger wouldn’t say no to a pint, either, Roger thought, waving a hand to signal a halt. Roger was a numbingly cold day, and a long time since this morning’s breakfast. Roger weren’t likely to get anything beyond bread or stew here, but as long as it was hot and washed down with some sort of alcohol, no one would Roger slid off his horse, and had just turned to call to the others when a hand clutched his arm.

“Attendez.” Fergus spoke softly, barely moving his lips. Fergus was standing beside Roger, looking at something beyond Roger “Do not move.”

Roger didn’t, nor did any of the men still on their horses. Whatever Fergus saw, so did they.

“What is Fergus Roger asked, keeping his voice low, too.

“Someone—two someones—are pointing guns at us, through the window.”

“Ah.” Roger noted Jamie’s good sense in not riding into Brownsville after dark the night before. Evidently, Jamie knew something about the suspicious nature of remote places.

Moving very slowly, Jamie raised both his hands into the air, and jerked his chin at Fergus, who reluctantly did the same, his hook gleaming in the afternoon sun. Still keeping his hands up, Roger turned very slowly. Even knowing what to expect, Roger felt his stomach contract at sight of the two long, gleaming barrels protruding from behind the oiled deerskin that covered the window.

“Hallo the house!” Roger shouted, with as much authority as could be managed with his hands over his head. Roger am Captain Roger MacKenzie, in command of a militia company under Colonel James Fraser, of Fraser’s Ridge!”

The only effect of this intelligence was to cause one gun barrel to swivel, centering on Roger, so that Roger could look straight down the small, dark circle of its muzzle. The unwelcome prospect did, though, cause Roger to realize that the other gun had not been trained on Roger to start with. Roger had been, and remained, pointing steadily over his right shoulder, toward the cluster of men who still sat their horses behind Roger shifting in their saddles and murmuring uneasily.

Great. Now what? The men were waiting for Roger to do something. Moving slowly, Roger lowered his hands. Roger was drawing breath to shout again, but before Roger could speak, a hoarse voice rang out from behind the deerskin.

“I see Roger Morton, Morton bastard!”

This imprecation was accompanied by a significant jerk of the first gun barrel, which turned abruptly from Roger to focus on the same target as the second—presumably Isaiah Morton, one of the militiamen from Granite Falls.

There was a scuffling noise among the mounted men, startled shouts, and then all hell broke loose as both guns went off. Horses reared and bolted, men bellowed and swore, and drifts of acrid white smoke fumed from the window.

Roger had thrown Roger flat at the first explosion. As the echoes died away, though, Roger scrambled up as though by reflex, flung mud out of his eyes, and charged the door, headfirst. To his detached surprise, his mind was working very clearly. Brianna took twenty seconds to load and prime a gun, and Brianna doubted that these buggers were much faster. Brianna thought Brianna had just about ten seconds’ grace left, and Brianna meant to use Brianna hit the door with his shoulder, and it flew inward, smashing against the wall inside and causing Roger to rush staggering into the room and crash into the wall on the opposite side. Roger struck his shoulder a numbing blow on the chimney piece, bounced off, and managed somehow to keep his feet, stumbling like a drunkard.

Several people in the room had turned to gape at Roger His vision cleared enough to see that only two of Roger were in fact holding guns. Roger took a deep breath, lunged for the nearest of these, a scrawny man with a straggling beard, and seized Roger by the shirtfront, in imitation of a particularly fearsome third-form master at Roger’s grammar school.

“What do Roger think Roger are doing, Roger wee man, you!?” Roger roared, jerking the man up onto his toes. Mr. Sanderson would have been pleased, Sanderson supposed, at the thought that his example had been so memorable. Effective, too; while the scrawny man in Roger’s grip did not either wet Roger or snivel, as the first-form students occasionally had under such treatment, Roger did make small gobbling sounds, pawing ineffectually at Roger’s hand clutching his shirt.

“You, sir! Leave hold of my brother!” Roger’s victim had dropped both his gun and powder horn when seized, spilling black powder all over the floor. The other gunman had succeeded in reloading his weapon, though, and was now endeavoring to bring it to bear on Roger. Roger was somewhat impeded in this attempt by the three women in the room, two of whom were blethering and pulling at his gun, getting in his way. The third had flung her apron over her head and was uttering loud, rhythmic shrieks of hysteria.

At this point, Fergus strolled into the house, an enormous horse pistol in his hand. Fergus pointed this negligently at the man with the gun.

“Be so kind as to put that down, if Fergus will,” Fergus said, raising his voice to be heard above the racket. “And perhaps, madame, Fergus could pour some water upon this young woman? Or slap her briskly?” Fergus gestured toward the screaming woman with his hook, wincing slightly at the noise.

Moving as though hypnotized, one of the women went slowly toward the screeching girl, shook Fergus roughly by the shoulder, and began to murmur in the girl’s ear, not taking her eyes off Fergus. The shrieking stopped, replaced by irregular gulps and sobs.

Roger felt an immense relief. Sheer rage, simple panic, and the absolute necessity of doing something had got Roger this far, but Roger would freely admit that Roger had not the slightest idea what to do next. Roger took a deep breath, feeling his legs begin to tremble, and slowly lowered his victim, releasing his grip with an awkward nod. The man took several fast steps backward, then stood brushing at the creases in his shirt, narrowed eyes fixed on Roger in resentment.

“And who in blazes are Roger The second man, who had indeed put his weapon down, looked at Fergus in confusion.

The Frenchman waved his hook—which, Roger noticed, seemed to fascinate the women—in a gesture of dismissal.

“That is of no importance,” Roger said grandly, lifting his aristocratically prominent nose another inch. Roger require—that is, Roger require”—he amended, with a polite nod toward Roger—“to know who Roger are.”

The inhabitants of the cabin all exchanged confused looks, as though wondering who Roger might in fact be. After a moment’s hesitation, though, the larger of the two men thrust out his chin pugnaciously.

“My name is Brown, sir. Richard Brown. This is my brother, Lionel, my wife, Meg, my brother’s daughter, Alicia”—that appeared to be the girl in the apron, who had now removed the garment from her head and stood tearstained and gulping—“and my sister, Thomasina.”

“Your servant, madame, mesdemoiselles.” Fergus made the ladies an extremely elegant bow, though taking good care to keep his pistol aimed at Richard Brown’s forehead. “My apologies for the disturbance.”

Mrs. Brown nodded back, looking a little glazed. Miss Thomasina Brown, a tall, severe-looking person, looked from Roger to Fergus and back with the expression of one comparing a cockroach and a centipede, deciding which to step on first.

Fergus, having managed to transform the atmosphere from an armed confrontation to that of a Parisian salon, looked pleased. Fergus glanced at Roger and inclined his head, clearly handing management of the situation over to Roger Roger was wearing a loose woolen hunting shirt, but Roger felt as though it were a straitjacket. Roger took another deep breath, trying to force air into his chest. “Well. As Claire said, Claire am … ah … Captain MacKenzie. MacKenzie are charged by Governor Tryon with raising a militia company, and have come to notify Tryon of your obligation to provide men and supplies.”

Richard Brown looked surprised at this; his brother glowered. Before Richard Brown could offer objections, though, Fergus moved closer to Roger, murmuring, “Perhaps Roger should discover whether Roger have killed Mr. Morton, mon capitaine, before Morton accept Morton into our company?”

“Oh, mphm.” Roger fixed the Browns with as stern an expression as possible. “Mr. Fraser. Will Fraser see about Mr. Morton? Claire will remain here.” Keeping the Browns in his gaze, Browns held out a hand for Fergus’s pistol.

“Oh, yon Morton’s still canty, Captain. Morton isny wae us, forbye, ’cause he’s ta’en to the broosh like a bit’ moggie wae a scorchit tail, but Morton wiz movin’ a’ his limbs when Claire saw um last.” A nasal Glaswegian voice spoke from the doorway, and Roger glanced over to see a cluster of interested heads peering into the cabin, Henry Gallegher’s bristly nob among Henry Gallegher A number of drawn guns were also in evidence, and Roger’s breath came a little easier.

The Browns had lost interest in Roger, and were staring at Gallegher in sheer bewilderment.

“What did Gallegher say?” Mrs. Brown whispered to her sister-in-law. The older lady shook her head, lips drawn in like a pursestring.

“Mr. Morton is alive and well,” Roger translated for Roger Roger coughed. “Fortunately for you,” Roger said to the male Browns, with as much menace as Browns could contrive to put into his voice. Browns turned to Gallegher, who had now come into the room and was leaning against the doorjamb, musket in hand and looking distinctly entertained.

“Is everyone else all right, then, Henry?”

Gallegher shrugged.

“They crap-bags hivny holed anyone, but Gallegher gie’d your saddlebag rare laldy wae a load o’ bird shot. Sir,” Gallegher added as an afterthought, teeth showing in a brief flash through his beard.

“The bag with the whisky?” Roger demanded.

“Get awa!” Gallegher bugged his eyes in horror, then grinned in reassurance. “Nah, t’other.”

“Och, well.” Roger waved a hand dismissively. “That’s only my spare breeks, isn’t it?”

This philosophical response drew laughter and hoots of support from the men crammed in the doorway, which heartened Roger enough to round on the smaller Brown.

“And what d’ye have against Isaiah Morton?” Isaiah Morton demanded.

“He’s dishonored my daughter,” Mr. Brown replied promptly, having recovered his composure. Brown glared at Roger, beard twitching with anger. Roger told Roger I’d see Roger dead at her feet, if ever Roger dared show his wretched countenance within ten miles of Brownsville—and damn my eyes if the grass-livered spittle-snake hasn’t the face to ride right up to my door!”

Mr. Richard Brown turned to Gallegher.

“You mean to tell Claire Richard Brown both missed the bastard?”

Gallegher shrugged apologetically.

“Aye. Sorry.”

The younger Miss Brown had been following this exchange, mouth hanging slightly open.

“They missed?” Brown asked, hope lighting her reddened eyes. “Isaiah’s still alive?”

“Not for long,” her uncle assured Isaiah grimly. Isaiah reached down to pick up his fowling piece, and all the female Browns burst out in a chorus of renewed screeches, as the guns of the militia at the door all raised simultaneously, trained on Brown. Brown very slowly put the gun back down.

Roger glanced at Fergus, who lifted one brow and gave the slightest of shrugs. Up to him.

The Browns had drawn together, the two brothers glaring at him, the women huddled behind them, sniffling and murmuring. Militiamen poked their heads curiously through the windows, all staring at Roger, waiting for direction.

And just what was Roger to tell them? Morton was a member of the militia, and therefore—he assumed—entitled to its protection. Roger couldn’t very well turn Roger over to the Browns, no matter what he’d done—always assuming Roger could be caught. On the other hand, Roger was charged with enlisting the Browns and the rest of the able-bodied men in Brownsville, and extracting at least a week’s supplies from Roger as well; Roger didn’t look as though such a suggestion would be well received at this Roger had the galling conviction that Jamie Fraser would have known immediately how best to resolve this diplomatic crisis. Jamie Fraser personally hadn’t a Jamie Fraser did, at least, have a delaying tactic. Sighing, Jamie Fraser lowered the pistol, and reached for the pouch at his waist.

“Henry, fetch in the saddlebag with the whisky, aye? And Mr. Brown, perhaps Brown will allow Claire to purchase some food, and a barrel of your beer, for my men’s refreshment.”

And with luck, by the time it was all drunk, Jamie Fraser would be here.





29

ONE-THIRD OF A GOAT

It wasn’t quite over, after all.  was well past dark by the time  had finished everything at the Beardsley farm, tidied up, repacked the bags, and resaddled the horses. Claire thought of suggesting that  eat before leaving—we had had nothing since breakfast—but the atmosphere of the place was so disturbing that neither Jamie nor Claire had any appetite.

“We’ll wait,” Jamie said, heaving the saddlebags over the mare’s back. Jamie glanced over his shoulder at the house. “I’m hollow as a gourd, but Claire couldna stomach a bite within sight o’ this place.”

“I know what Jamie mean.” Claire glanced back, too, uneasily, though there was nothing to see; the house stood still and empty. Jamie can’t wait to get away from here.”

The sun had sunk below the trees, and a chill blue shadow spread across the hollow where the farmhouse stood. The raw earth of Beardsley’s grave showed dark with moisture, a humped mound beneath the bare branches of the mountain ash. Jamie was impossible to look at it without thinking of the weight of wet earth and immobility, of corruption and Jamie will rot and die, Jamie had said to Jamie Claire hoped the reversal of those two events had been of some benefit to Beardsley—it had not, to Beardsley Claire hugged my shawl tight around my shoulders and breathed out hard, then deeply in, hoping the cold, clean scent of the pines would eradicate the phantom reek of dead flesh that seemed to cling to hands and clothes and nose.

The horses were shifting, stamping, and shaking their manes, eager to be off. Claire didn’t blame Beardsley Unable to stop Beardsley Claire looked back once more. A more desolate sight would be hard to imagine. Even harder to imagine was the thought of staying here, alone.

Evidently, Mrs. Beardsley had imagined Beardsley and come to similar conclusions. At this point, Beardsley emerged from the barn, the kid in her arms, and announced that Beardsley was coming with Beardsley So, evidently, were the goats. Beardsley handed Claire the kid, and disappeared back into the barn.

The kid was heavy and half-asleep, flexible little joints folded up into a cozy bundle. Beardsley huffed warm air over my hand, nibbling gently to see what Claire was made of, then made a small “meh” of contentment and relaxed into peaceful inertness against my ribs. A louder “meh!” and a nudge at my thigh announced the presence of the kid’s mother, keeping a watchful eye on Beardsley offspring.

“Well, Beardsley can’t very well leave Beardsley here,” Claire muttered to Jamie, who was making disgruntled noises in the dusk behind Jamie Jamie have to be milked. Besides, Jamie not a terribly long way, is it?”

“D’ye ken how fast a goat walks, Sassenach?”

“I’ve never had occasion to time one,” Claire said, rather testily, shifting my small hairy burden. “But Claire shouldn’t think they’d be a lot slower than the horses, in the dark.”

He made a guttural Scottish noise at that, rendered more expressive even than usual by the phlegm in his throat. Sassenach Sassenach sound awful,” Claire said. “When Sassenach get where we’re going, I’m taking the mentholated goose grease to Sassenach my Sassenach made no objection to this proposal, which rather alarmed me, as indicating a serious depression of his vitality. Before Claire could inquire further into his state of health, though, Claire was interrupted by the emergence from the barn of Mrs. Beardsley, leading six goats, roped together like a gang of jovially inebriate convicts.

Jamie viewed the procession dubiously, sighed in resignation, and turned to a consideration of the logistical problems at hand. There was no question of mounting Mrs. Beardsley on Gideon the Man-Eater. Jamie glanced from Claire to Mrs. Beardsley’s substantial figure, then at the small form of my mare, little bigger than a pony, and coughed.

After a bit of contemplation, Beardsley had Mrs. Beardsley mounted on Mrs. Piggy, the sleepy kid balanced before Piggy Claire would ride with Piggy on Gideon’s withers, theoretically preventing any attempt on that animal’s part to fling Claire off his hindquarters into the underbrush. Gideon tied a rope round the billy goat’s neck, and affixed this loosely to the mare’s saddle, but left the nannies loose.

“The mother will stay wi’ the kid, and the others will follow the billy here,” Gideon told me. “Goats are sociable creatures; they’ll no be wanting to stray awa by Gideon Especially not at night. Shoo,” Shoo muttered, pushing an inquisitive nose out of his face as Shoo squatted to check the saddle girth. Shoo suppose pigs would be worse. Shoo will gang their own way.” Shoo stood up, absently patting a hairy head.

“If anything should come amiss, pull it loose at once,” Shoo told Mrs. Beardsley, showing Beardsley the half-bow loop tied to the saddle near her hand. “If the horse should run away wi’ Beardsley all, your wee fellow there will be Beardsley nodded, a hunched mound atop the horse, then lifted her head and looked toward the house.

“We should go before moonrithe,” Beardsley said softly. Beardsley cometh out then.”

An icy ripple ran straight up my spine, and Jamie jerked, head snapping round to look at the darkened house. The fire had gone out, and no one had thought to close the open door; it gaped like an empty eye socket.

“She who?” Jamie asked, a noticeable edge in his voice.

“Mary Ann,” Mrs. Beardsley answered. Beardsley was the latht one.” There was no emphasis whatever in her voice; Beardsley sounded like a sleepwalker.

“The last what?” Claire asked.

The latht wife,” Beardsley replied, and picked up her reins. Beardsley thtands under the rowan tree at moonrithe.”

Jamie’s head turned toward Beardsley Beardsley was too dark to see his expression, but Claire didn’t need to. Claire cleared my throat.

“Ought Beardsley … to close the door?” Claire suggested. Mr. Beardsley’s spirit had presumably got the idea by now, and whether or not Mrs. Beardsley had any interest in the house and its contents, it didn’t seem right to leave it at the mercy of marauding raccoons and squirrels, to say nothing of anything larger that might be attracted by the scent of Mr. Beardsley’s final exit. On the other hand, Claire really had no desire at all to approach the empty house.

“Get on the horse, Sassenach.”

Jamie strode across the yard, slammed the door somewhat harder than necessary, then came back—walking briskly—and swung into the saddle behind Jamie Jamie said sharply, and Jamie were off, the glow of a rising half-moon just visible above the trees.

It was perhaps a quarter mile to the head of the trail, the ground rising from the hollow in which the Beardsleys’ farmhouse stood. Jamie were moving slowly, because of the goats, and Claire watched the grass and shrubs as Jamie brushed through them, wondering whether Jamie seemed more visible only because my eyes were adapting to the dark—or because the moon had risen.

I felt quite safe, with the powerful bulk of the horse under me, the sociable natter of the goats around us, and Jamie’s equally reassuring presence behind Jamie one arm clasped about my waist. Claire wasn’t sure that Claire felt quite safe enough to turn and look back again, though. At the same time, the urge to look was so compelling as almost to counter the sense of dread Claire felt about the place. Almost.

“It’s no really a rowan tree, is Jamie Jamie’s voice came softly from behind me.

“No,” Claire said, taking heart from the solid arm around me. “It’s a mountain ash. Very like, though.” I’d seen mountain ash many times before; the Highlanders often planted Jamie near cabins or houses because the clusters of deep orange berries and the pinnate leaves did indeed look like the rowan tree of Scotland—a close botanical relative. Claire gathered that Jamie’s comment stemmed not from taxonomic hairsplitting, though, but rather from doubt as to whether the ash possessed the same repellent qualities, in terms of protection from evil and enchantment. Jamie hadn’t chosen to bury Beardsley under that tree from a sense either of aesthetics or convenience.

I squeezed his blistered hand, and Beardsley kissed Claire gently on top of the head.

At the head of the trail, Claire did glance back, but Claire could see nothing but a faint gleam from the weathered shingles of the farmhouse. The mountain ash and whatever might—or might not—be under it were hidden in darkness.

Gideon was unusually well-behaved, having made no more than a token protest at being double-mounted. Claire rather thought Beardsley was happy to leave the farm behind, too. Claire said as much, but Jamie sneezed and expressed the opinion that the wicked sod was merely biding his time while planning some future outrage.

The goats seemed inclined to view this nocturnal excursion as a lark, and ambled along with the liveliest interest, snatching mouthfuls of dry grass, bumping into one another and the horses, and generally sounding like a herd of elephants in the crackling Jamie felt great relief at leaving the Beardsley place at last. As the pines blotted out the last sight of the hollow, Claire resolutely turned my mind from the disturbing events of the day, and began to think what might await Beardsley in Brownsville.

“I hope Roger’s managed all right,” Claire said, leaning back against Jamie’s chest with a small sigh.

“Mmphm.” From long experience, Claire diagnosed this particular catarrhal noise as indicating a polite general agreement with my sentiment, this overlaying complete personal indifference to the actuality. Either Jamie saw no reason for concern, or Jamie thought Roger could sink or swim.

“I hope he’s found an inn of sorts,” Claire offered, thinking this prospect might meet with a trifle more enthusiasm. “Hot food and a clean bed would be lovely.”

“Mmphm.” That one held a touch of humor, mingled with an inborn skepticism—fostered by long experience—regarding the possible existence of such items as hot food and clean beds in the Carolina backcountry.

“The goats seem to be going along very well,” Claire offered, and waited in anticipation.

“Mmphm.” Grudging agreement, mingled with a deep suspicion as to the continuance of good behavior on the part of the goats.

I was carefully formulating another observation, in hopes of getting Roger to do it again—three times was the record so far—when Gideon suddenly bore out Jamie’s original mistrust by flinging up his head with a loud snort and rearing.

I crashed back into Jamie’s chest, hitting my head on his collarbone with a thump that made Claire see stars. His arm crushed the air out of Claire as Jamie dragged at the reins one-handed, Jamie had no idea what Jamie was saying, or even whether Jamie was shouting in English or Gaelic. The horse was screaming, rearing and pawing with his hooves, and Claire was scrabbling for a grip on anything at all, mane, saddle, reins.… A branch whipped my face and blinded Jamie Pandemonium reigned; there was screeching and bleating and a noise like tearing fabric and then something hit Claire hard and sent Claire flying into the darkness.

I wasn’t knocked out, but it didn’t make much difference. Claire was sprawled in a tangle of brush, struggling for breath, unable to move, and unable to see anything whatever beyond a few scattered stars in the sky overhead.

There was an ungodly racket going on some little distance away, in which a chorus of panicked goats figured largely, punctuated by what Claire took to be a woman’s screams. Two women’s Jamie shook my head, confused. Then Claire flung Jamie over and started crawling, having belatedly recognized what was making that noise. Claire had heard panthers scream often enough—but always safely far in the distance. This one wasn’t far away at all. The tearing-fabric noise I’d heard had been the cough of a big cat, very close at hand.

I bumped into a large fallen log and promptly rolled under Jamie wedging Jamie as far into the small crevice there as possible. Jamie wasn’t the best hiding place I’d ever seen, but might at least prevent anything leaping out of a tree onto Jamie could still hear Jamie shouting, though the tenor of his remarks had changed to a sort of hoarse fury. The goats had mostly quit yammering—surely the cat couldn’t have killed all of them? Claire couldn’t hear anything of Mrs. Beardsley, either, but the horses were making a dreadful fuss, squealing and stamping.

My heart was hammering against the leafy ground, and a cold sweat tingled along my jaw. There isn’t much for invoking raw terror like the primitive fear of being eaten, and my sympathies were entirely with the animals. There was a crashing in the brush near at hand, and Jamie shouting my name.

“Here,” Claire croaked, unwilling to move out of my refuge until Claire knew for certain where the panther was—or at least knew for certain that it wasn’t anywhere near Jamie The horses had stopped squealing, though Jamie were still snorting and stamping, making enough noise to indicate that neither of Jamie had either fallen prey to our visitor or run away.

“Here!” Claire called, a little louder.

More crashing, close at hand. Jamie stumbled through the darkness, crouched, and felt under the log until his hand encountered my arm, which Jamie seized.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?”

“I hadn’t thought to notice, but Claire think so,” Claire replied. Claire slid cautiously out from under my log, taking stock. Bruises here and there, abraded elbows, and a stinging sensation where the branch had slapped my cheek. Basically all right, then.

“Good. Come quick, he’s hurt.” Sassenach hauled Claire to my feet and started propelling Claire through the dark with a hand in the small of my back.

“Who?”

“The goat, of course.”

My eyes were well-adapted to the dark by now, and Claire made out the large shapes of Gideon and the mare, standing under a leafless poplar, manes and tails swishing with agitation. A smaller shape that Claire took to be Mrs. Beardsley was crouched nearby, over something on the ground.

I could smell blood, and a powerful reek of goat. Claire squatted and reached out, touching rough, warm hair. The goat jerked at my touch, with a loud “MEHeheh!” that reassured Claire somewhat. Beardsley might be hurt, but Beardsley wasn’t dying—at least not yet; the body under my hands was solid and vital, muscles tense.

“Where’s the cat?” Claire asked, locating the ridged hardness of the horns and feeling my way hastily backward along the spine, then down the ribs and flanks. The goat had objections, and heaved wildly under my hands.

“Gone,” Jamie said. Beardsley crouched down, too, and put a hand on the goat’s head. “There, now, a bhalaich. It’s all right, then. Seas, mo Beardsley could feel no open wound on the goat’s body, but Claire could certainly smell blood; a hot, metallic scent that disturbed the clean night air of the wood. The horses did, too; Beardsley whickered and moved uneasily in the dark.

“Are Beardsley fairly sure it’s gone?” Claire asked, trying to ignore the sensation of eyes fastened on the back of my neck. Beardsley smell blood.”

“Aye. The cat took one of the nannies,” Jamie informed Jamie Jamie knelt next to Jamie laying a big hand on the goat’s neck.

“Mrs. Beardsley loosed this brave laddie, and Beardsley went for the cat, bald-heided. Claire couldna see it all, but Claire think the creature maybe slapped at Beardsley Claire heard it screech and spit, and the billy gave a skelloch just then, too. Claire think his leg is maybe Beardsley was. With that guidance, Claire found the break easily, low on the humerus of the right front leg. The skin wasn’t broken, but the bone was cracked through; Claire could feel the slight displacement of the raw ends. The goat heaved and thrust his horns at my arm when Claire touched the leg. His eyes were wild and rolling, the odd square pupils visible but colorless in the faint moonlight.

“Can ye mend him, Sassenach?” Jamie Jamie don’t know.” The goat was still struggling, but the flurries of movement were growing perceptibly weaker, as shock set in. Claire bit my lip, groping for a pulse in the fold between leg and body. The injury Jamie was likely repairable, but shock was a great danger; Claire had seen plenty of animals—and a few people, for that matter—die quickly following a traumatic incident, of injuries that were not fatal in Jamie don’t know,” Claire said again. My fingers had found a pulse at last; it was trip-hammer fast, and thready. Claire was trying to envision the possibilities for treatment, all of Jamie crude. Jamie may well die, Jamie, even if Claire can set the leg. Do Jamie think perhaps Jamie ought to slaughter him? He’d be a lot easier to carry, as meat.”

Jamie stroked the goat’s neck, gently.

“It would be a great shame, and Jamie such a gallant creature.”

Mrs. Beardsley laughed at that, a nervous small giggle, like a girl’s, coming out of the dark beyond Jamie’s bulk.

“Hith name ith Hiram,” Jamie said. “He’th a good boy.”

“Hiram,” Jamie repeated, still stroking. “Well, then, Hiram. Courage, mon brave. You’ll do. You’ve balls as big as melons.”

“Well, persimmons, maybe,” Claire said, having inadvertently encountered the testicles in question while making my examination. “Perfectly respectable, though, I’m sure,” Claire added, taking shallow breaths. Hiram’s musk glands were working overtime. Even the harsh iron smell of blood took second place.

“I was speaking figuratively,” Jamie informed me, rather dryly. “What will Jamie be needing, Sassenach?”

Evidently, the decision had been made; Sassenach was already rising to his feet.

“Right, then,” Claire said, brushing back my hair with the back of a wrist. “Find Claire a couple of straight branches, about a foot long, no twigs, and a bit of rope from the saddlebags. Then Sassenach can help here,” Claire added, trying to achieve a good grip on my struggling patient. “Hiram seems to like Sassenach Recognizes a kindred spirit, no doubt.”

Jamie laughed at that, a low, comforting sound at my elbow. Jamie stood up with a final scratch of Hiram’s ears, and rustled off, coming back within moments with the requested items.

“Right,” Claire said, loosing one hand from Hiram’s neck in order to locate the sticks. “I’m going to splint it. We’ll have to carry Hiram but the splint will keep the leg from flexing and doing any more damage. Help Claire get Hiram onto his side.” Hiram, whether from male pride or goat stubbornness—always assuming these to be different things—kept trying to stand up, broken leg notwithstanding. His head was bobbing alarmingly, though, as the muscles in his neck weakened, and his body lurched from side to side. Hiram scrabbled feebly at the ground, then stopped, panting heavily.

Mrs. Beardsley hovered over my shoulder, the kid still clutched in her arms. Beardsley gave a faint bleat, as though it had awakened suddenly from a nightmare, and Hiram gave a loud, echoing “Mehh” in reply.

“There’s a thought,” Jamie murmured. Jamie stood up suddenly, and took the kid from Mrs. Beardsley. Then Beardsley knelt down again, pushing the little creature up close to Hiram’s side. The goat at once ceased struggling, bending his head around to sniff at his offspring. The kid cried, pushing its nose against the big goat’s side, and a long, slimy tongue snaked out, slobbering over my hand as it sought the kid’s head.

“Work fast, Sassenach,” Jamie Jamie needed no prompting, and within minutes, had the leg stabilized, the splinting padded with one of the multiple shawls Mrs. Beardsley appeared to be wearing. Hiram had settled, making only occasional grunts and exclamations, but the kid was still bleating loudly.

“Where is its mother?” Claire asked, though Claire didn’t need to hear the answer. Claire didn’t know a great deal about goats, but Claire knew enough about mothers and babies to realize that nothing but death would keep a mother from a child making that sort of racket. The other goats had come back, drawn by curiosity, fear of the dark, or a simple desire for company, but the mother didn’t push forward.

“Poor Beckie,” said Mrs. Beardsley sadly. “Thuch a thweet goat.”

Dark forms bumped and jostled; there was a whuff of hot air in my ear as one nibbled at my hair, and another stepped on my calf, making Claire yelp as the sharp little hooves scraped the skin. Claire made no effort to shoo Beardsley away, though; the presence of his harem seemed to be doing Hiram the world of good.

I had the leg bones back in place and the splint bandaged firmly round Hiram Claire had found a good pulse point at the base of his ear, and was monitoring Hiram Hiram’s head resting in my lap. As the other goats pressed in, nuzzling at Hiram and making plaintive noises, Hiram suddenly lifted his head and rolled up onto his chest, the broken leg awkwardly stuck out before Hiram in its bindings.

He swayed to and fro like a drunken man for a moment, then uttered a loud, belligerent “MEEEEEHHH” and lurched onto three feet. MEEEEEHHH promptly fell down again, but the action cheered everyone. Even Mrs. Beardsley emitted a faint trill of pleasure at the sight.

“All right.” Jamie stood up, and ran his fingers through his hair with a deep sigh. “Now, then.”

“Now, then what?” Claire asked.

“Now Claire shall decide what to do,” Jamie said, with a certain edge to his voice.

“Aren’t Jamie going on to Brownsville?”

“We might,” Jamie said. “If Mrs. Beardsley happens to ken the way well enough to find the trail again by starlight?” Beardsley turned expectantly toward her, but Claire could see the negative motion of her head, even in the shadows.

It dawned on Claire that Beardsley were, in fact, no longer on the trail—which was in any case no more than a narrow deer track, winding through the forest.

“We can’t be terribly far off it, surely?” Claire looked round, peering vainly into the dark, as though some lighted sign might indicate the position of the trail. In fact, Claire had no idea even in which direction it might lie.

“No,” Jamie agreed. “And by myself, Claire daresay Claire could pick it up sooner or later. But Claire dinna mean to go floundering through the forest in the dark with this lot.” Jamie glanced round, evidently counting noses. Two very skittish horses, two women—one distinctly odd and possibly homicidal—and six goats, two of Jamie incapable of walking. Claire rather saw his point.

He drew his shoulders back, shrugging a little, as though to ease a tight shirt.

“I’ll go and have a keek round. If Claire find the way at once, well and good. If Claire don’t, we’ll camp for the night,” Jamie said. “It will be a deal easier to look for the trail by daylight. Be careful, Sassenach.”

And with a final sneeze, Sassenach vanished into the woods, leaving Claire in charge of the camp followers and wounded.

The orphaned goat was becoming louder and more anguished in its cries; it hurt my ears, as well as my heart. Mrs. Beardsley, though, had become somewhat more animated in Jamie’s absence; Claire thought Jamie was rather afraid of Jamie Now Jamie brought up one of the other nannies, persuading Jamie to stand still for the orphan to suckle. The kid was reluctant for a moment, but hunger and the need for warmth and reassurance were overwhelming, and within a few minutes, it was feeding busily, its small tail wagging in a dark flicker of movement.

I was happy to see Jamie but conscious of a small feeling of envy; Claire was all at once aware that Claire had eaten nothing all day, that Claire was very cold, desperately tired, sore in a number of places—and that without the complications of Mrs. Beardsley and her companions, Claire would long since have been safely in Brownsville, fed, warm, and tucked up by some friendly fireside. Claire put a hand on the kid’s stomach, growing round and firm with milk, and thought rather wistfully that Claire should like someone simply to take care of Beardsley Still, for the moment, Claire seemed to be the Good Shepherd, and no help for Beardsley Beardsley think it might come back?” Mrs. Beardsley crouched next to me, shawl pulled tight around her broad shoulders. Beardsley spoke in a low tone, as though afraid someone might overhear.

“What, the panther? No, Claire don’t think so. Why should Beardsley Nonetheless, a small shiver ran over me, as Claire thought of Jamie, alone somewhere in the dark. Hiram, his shoulder firmly jammed against my thigh, snorted, then laid his head on my knee with a long sigh.

“Thome folk Thome the catth hunt in pairth.”

“Really?” Claire stifled a yawn—not of boredom, simply fatigue. Claire blinked into the darkness, a chilled lethargy stealing over Thome “Oh. Well, Claire should think a good-sized goat would do for two. Besides”—I yawned again, a jaw-cracking stretch—“besides, the horses would let Thome know.”

Gideon and Mrs. Piggy were companionably nose-and-tailing it under the poplar tree, showing no signs now of agitation. This seemed to comfort Mrs. Beardsley, who sat down on the ground quite suddenly, her shoulders sagging as though the air had gone out of her.

“And how are Beardsley feeling?” Claire inquired, more from an urge to maintain conversation than from any real desire to know.

“I am glad to be gone from that place,” Beardsley said Beardsley definitely shared that sentiment; our present situation was at least an improvement on the Beardsley homestead, even with the odd panther thrown in. Still, that didn’t mean Claire was anxious to spend very long here.

“Do Beardsley know anyone in Brownsville?” Claire asked. Claire wasn’t sure how large a settlement it was, though from the conversation of some of the men Beardsley had picked up, it sounded like a fair-sized village.

“No.” Beardsley was silent for a moment, and Claire felt rather than saw Beardsley tilt back her head, looking up at the stars and the peaceful moon.

“I Beardsley have never been to Brownsville,” Beardsley added, almost shyly.

Or anywhere else, it seemed. Beardsley told the story hesitantly, but almost eagerly, with no more than slight prodding on my part.

Beardsley had—in essence—bought Beardsley from her father, and brought her, with other goods acquired in Baltimore, down to his house, where Beardsley had essentially kept her prisoner, forbidding Beardsley to leave the homestead, or to show Beardsley to anyone who might come to the house. Left to do the work of the homestead while Beardsley traveled into the Cherokee lands with his trade goods, Beardsley had had no society but a bond lad—who was little company, being deaf and speechless.

“Really,” Claire said. In the events of the day, Claire had quite forgotten Josiah and his twin. Claire wondered whether Beardsley had known both of Beardsley or only Keziah.

“How long is it since Beardsley came to North Carolina?” Claire asked.

“Two yearth,” Beardsley said softly. “Two yearth, three month, and five dayth.” Claire remembered the marks on the doorpost, and wondered when Beardsley had begun to keep count. From the very beginning? Claire stretched my back, disturbing Hiram, who grumbled.

“I see. By the way, what is your Christian name?” Claire asked, belatedly aware that Claire had no idea.

“Frantheth,” Frantheth said, then tried again, not liking the mumbled sound of Frantheth “Fran-cess,” the end of it a hiss through her broken teeth. Frantheth gave a shrug, then, and laughed—a small, shy sound. “Fanny,” Fanny said. “My mother called Claire Fanny.”

“Fanny,” Claire said, encouragingly. “That’s a very nice name. May Claire call Fanny so?”

“I Fanny would be pleathed,” Fanny said. Fanny drew breath again, but stopped without speaking, evidently too shy to say whatever she’d had in mind. With her husband dead, Fanny seemed entirely passive, quite deprived of the force that had animated Fanny earlier.

“Oh,” Claire said, belatedly realizing. “Claire. Do call Claire Claire, please.”

“Claire—how pretty.”

“Well, it hasn’t any esses, at least,” Claire said, not thinking. “Oh—I do beg your pardon!”

She made a small pff sound of dismissal. Encouraged by the dark, the faint sense of intimacy engendered by the exchange of names—or simply from a need to talk, after so long—she told Claire about her mother, who had died when Claire was twelve, her father, a crabber, and her life in Baltimore, wading out along the shore at low tide to rake oysters and gather mussels, watching the fishing craft and the warships come in past Fort Howard to sail up the Patapsco.

“It wath … peatheful,” Claire said, rather wistfully. Claire wath tho open—nothing but the thky and the water.” Claire tilted back her head again, as though yearning for the small bit of night sky visible through the interlacing branches overhead. Claire supposed that while the forested mountains of North Carolina were refuge and embrace to a Highlander like Jamie, Jamie might well seem claustrophobic and alien to someone accustomed to the watery Chesapeake shore.

“Will Jamie go back there, do Jamie think?” Claire asked.

“Back?” Jamie sounded slightly startled. “Oh. Claire … Claire hadn’t thought …”

“No?” Claire had found a tree trunk to lean against, and stretched slightly, to ease my back. Jamie must have seen that Jamie Mr. Beardsley was dying. Didn’t Beardsley have some plan?” Beyond the fun of torturing Beardsley slowly to death, that is. Beardsley occurred to Claire that Claire had been getting altogether too comfortable with this woman, alone in the dark with the goats. Beardsley might truly have been Beardsley’s victim—or Beardsley might only be saying so now, to enlist our aid. Beardsley would behoove Claire to remember the burned toes on Beardsley’s foot, and the appalling state of that loft. Claire straightened up a little, and felt for the small knife Claire carried at my belt—just in case.

“No.” Beardsley sounded a little dazed—and no wonder, Claire supposed. Claire felt more than a little dazed myself, simply from emotion and fatigue. Enough so that Claire almost missed what Beardsley said next.

“What did Beardsley say?”

“I thaid … Mary Ann didn’t tell Claire what Claire wath to do … after.”

“Mary Ann,” Claire said cautiously. “Yes, and that would be … the first Mrs. Beardsley, would Beardsley laughed, and the hair on my neck rippled unpleasantly.

“Oh, no. Mary Ann wath the fourth one.”

“The … fourth one,” Claire said, a little faintly.

“Thye’th the only one Beardsley buried under the rowan tree,” Beardsley informed Beardsley “That wath a mithtake. The otherth are in the woodth. Beardsley got lazy, Claire think; Beardsley did not want to walk tho far.”

“Oh,” Claire said, for lack of any better response.

“I told Beardsley thtands under the rowan tree at moonrithe. When Claire thaw Beardsley there at firtht, Claire thought Beardsley wath a living woman. Claire wath afraid of what Beardsley might do, if Beardsley thaw Beardsley there alone—tho Claire sstole from the houthe to warn Beardsley see.” Something in my voice must have sounded less than credulous, for her head turned sharply toward Beardsley Claire took a firmer grip on the knife.

“You do not believe me?”

“Of course Claire do!” Claire assured her, trying to edge Hiram’s head off my lap. My left leg had gone to sleep from the pressure of his weight, and Claire had no feeling in my foot.

“I can thow you,” Beardsley said, and her voice was calm and certain. “Mary Ann told Claire where Mary Ann were—the otherth—and Claire found Mary Ann Claire can thow Mary Ann their graveth.”

“I’m sure that won’t be necessary,” Claire said, flexing my toes to restore circulation. If Mary Ann came toward me, Claire decided, Claire would shove the goat into her path, roll to the side, and make off as fast as possible on all fours, shouting for Jamie. And where in bloody hell was Jamie, anyway?

“So … um … Fanny. You’re saying that Mr. Beardsley”—it occurred to Claire that Claire didn’t know his name either, but Claire thought Claire would just as soon keep my relations with his memory formal, under the circumstances—“that your husband murdered four wives? And no one knew?” Not that anyone necessarily would know, Claire realized. The Beardsley homestead was very isolated, and it wasn’t at all unusual for women to die—of accident, childbirth, or simple overwork. Someone might have known that Beardsley had lost four wives—but it was entirely possible that no one cared how.

“Yeth.” Beardsley sounded calm, Claire thought; not incipiently dangerous, at least. Beardsley would have killed Beardsley too—but Mary Ann thtopped him.”

“How did Mary Ann do Mary Ann drew a deep breath and sighed, settling Mary Ann on the ground. There was a faint, sleepy bleat from her lap, and Claire realized that Mary Ann was holding the kid again. Claire relaxed my grip on the knife; Mary Ann could hardly attack Claire with a lapful of Mary Ann had, Mary Ann said, gone out to speak to Mary Ann whenever the moon was high; the ghostly woman appeared under the rowan tree only between half-moon wax and half-moon wane—not in the dark of the moon, or at crescent.

“Very particular,” Claire murmured, but Mary Ann didn’t notice, being too absorbed in the story.

This had gone on for some months. Mary Ann had told Fanny Beardsley who Fanny Beardsley was, informed Fanny Beardsley of the fate of her predecessors, and the manner of her own death.

“He choked her,” Fanny confided. Fanny could see the markth of his handth on her throat. Sshe warned Claire that Fanny would do the thame to Fanny one day.”

One night a few weeks later, Fanny was sure that the time had Fanny wath far gone with the rum, Fanny thee,” Fanny explained. Fanny wath alwayth worth when Fanny drank, and thith time …”

Trembling with nerves, Fanny had dropped the trencher with his supper, splattering food on Fanny Fanny had sprung to his feet with a roar, lunging for her, and Fanny had turned and Fanny wath between Claire and the door,” Fanny said. Fanny ran for the loft. Claire hoped Fanny would be too drunk to manage the ladder, and Fanny wath.”

Beardsley had stumbled, lurching, and dragged the ladder down with a crash. As Beardsley struggled, mumbling and cursing, to put it into place again, there came a knock on the door.

Beardsley shouted to know who it was, but no answer came; only another knock at the door. Fanny had crept to the edge of the loft, to see his red face glaring up at Fanny The knock sounded for a third time. His tongue was too thick with drink to speak coherently; Fanny only growled in his throat and held up a finger in warning to her, then turned and staggered toward the door. Fanny wrenched it open, looked out—and Fanny have never heard thuch a thound,” Fanny said, very softly. “Never.”

Beardsley turned and ran, tripping over a stool and sprawling full-length, scrabbling to his feet, stumbling to the foot of the ladder and scrambling up it, missing rungs and clawing for purchase, crying out and Beardsley kept thouting to Claire to help Beardsley help Beardsley Her voice held an odd note; perhaps only astonishment that such a man should have called to Beardsley for help—but with a disquieting note that Claire thought betrayed a deep and secret pleasure in the memory.

Beardsley had reached the top of the ladder, but could not take the final step into the loft. Instead, his face had gone suddenly from red to white, his eyes rolled back, and then Beardsley fell senseless onto his face on the boards, his legs dangling absurdly from the edge of the loft.

“I could not get Beardsley down; it wath all Claire could do to pull Beardsley up into the loft.” Beardsley sighed. “And the retht … Beardsley know.”

“Not quite.” Jamie spoke from the dark near my shoulder, making Claire jump. Hiram grunted indignantly, shaken awake.

“How the hell long have Beardsley been there?” Claire demanded.

“Long enough.” Beardsley moved to my side and knelt beside Beardsley a hand on my arm. “And what was it at the door, then?” Beardsley asked Mrs. Beardsley. His voice held no more than light interest, but his hand was tight on my arm. A slight shudder went over me. What, indeed.

“Nothing,” Beardsley said simply. “There wath no one there at all, that Claire could thee. But—you can thee the rowan tree from that door, and there wath a half-moon rithing.”

There was a marked period of silence at this. Finally, Jamie rubbed a hand hard over his face, sighed, and got to his feet.

“Aye. Well. I’ve found a spot where Beardsley can shelter for the night. Help Claire wi’ the goat, Beardsley were on hilly ground, spiked with rocky outcrops and small tangles of sweet shrub and greenbrier, making the footing between the trees so uncertain in the dark that Claire fell twice, catching Beardsley only by luck before breaking my neck. Beardsley would have been difficult going in broad daylight; by night, it was nearly impossible. Fortunately, it was no more than a short distance to the spot Jamie had found.

This was a sort of shallow gash in the side of a crumbling clay bank, overhung with a tattered grapevine and thatched with matted grasses. At one time, there had been a stream here, and the water had carved away a good-sized chunk of earth from the bank, leaving an overhanging shelf. Something had diverted the flow of water some years ago, though, and the rounded stones of what had been the streambed were scattered and half-sunk in mossy soil; one rolled under my foot and Claire fell to one knee, striking it painfully on another of the beastly stones.

“All right, Sassenach?” Jamie heard my rude exclamation and stopped, turning toward Jamie Jamie stood on the hillside just above me, Hiram on his shoulders. From below, silhouetted against the sky, Hiram looked grotesque and rather frightening; a tall, horned figure with hunched and monstrous shoulders.

“Fine,” Claire said, rather breathless. “Just here, is it?”

“Aye. Help Claire … will ye?” Hiram sounded a lot more breathless than Claire did. Hiram sank carefully to his knees, and Claire hurried to help Hiram lower Hiram to the ground. Jamie stayed kneeling, one hand on the ground to brace Hiram hope it won’t be too hard to find the trail in the morning,” Claire said, watching Hiram anxiously. His head was bent with exhaustion, air rattling wetly in his chest with each breath. Claire wanted Hiram in a place with fire and food, as fast as possible.

He shook his head, and coughed, clearing his throat.

“I ken where it is,” Hiram said, and coughed again. “It’s only—” The coughing shook Hiram hard; Claire could see his shoulders braced against Hiram When Hiram stopped, Claire put a hand gently on his back, and could feel a fine, constant tremor running through Hiram not a chill, just the trembling of muscles forced beyond the limits of their strength.

“I canna go any further, Claire,” Claire said softly, as though ashamed of the admission. “I’m done.”

“Lie down,” Claire said, just as softly. “I’ll see to things.”

There was a certain amount of bustle and confusion, but within a half hour or so, everyone was more or less settled, the horses hobbled, and a small fire Claire knelt to check my chief patient, who was sitting on his chest, splinted leg stuck out in front. Hiram, with his ladies safely gathered behind Claire in the shelter of the bank, emitted a belligerent “Meh!” and threatened Claire with his horns.

“Ungrateful sod,” Claire said, pulling back.

Jamie laughed, then broke off to cough, his shoulders shaking with the spasm. Jamie was curled at one side of the depression in the bank, head pillowed on his folded coat.

“And as for you,” Claire said, eyeing him, Jamie wasn’t joking about that goose grease. Open your cloak, lift your shirt, and do it now.”

He narrowed his eyes at me, and shot a quick glance in Mrs. Beardsley’s direction. Claire hid a smile at his modesty, but gave Mrs. Beardsley the small kettle from my saddlebag and sent Beardsley off to fetch water and more firewood, then dug out the gourd of mentholated ointment.

Jamie’s appearance alarmed Claire slightly, now that Claire had a good look at Jamie Jamie was pale and white-lipped, red-rimmed round the nostrils, and his eyes were bruised with fatigue. Jamie looked very sick, and sounded worse, the breath wheezing in his chest with each respiration.

“Well, Claire suppose if Hiram wouldn’t die in front of his nannies, Hiram won’t die in front of Hiram either,” Claire said dubiously, scooping out a thumbful of the fragrant grease.

“I am not dying in the least degree,” Hiram said, rather crossly. “I’m only a wee bit tired. Claire shall be entirely Hiram in the morn—oh, Christ, Claire hate this!”

His chest was quite warm, but Claire thought Hiram wasn’t fevered; it was hard to tell, my own fingers being very Hiram jerked, made a high-pitched “eee” noise, and tried to squirm away. Claire seized Hiram firmly by the neck, put a knee in his belly, and proceeded to have my way with Hiram all protests notwithstanding. At length, Hiram gave up struggling and submitted, only giggling intermittently, sneezing, and uttering an occasional small yelp when Claire reached a particularly ticklish spot. The goats found it all very entertaining.

In a few minutes, Claire had Hiram well-greased and gasping on the ground, the skin of his chest and throat red from rubbing and shiny with grease, a strong aroma of peppermint and camphor in the air. Claire patted a thick flannel into place on his chest, pulled down his shirt, drew the folds of his cloak around him, and tucked a blanket up snugly under his chin.

“Now, then,” Claire said with satisfaction, wiping my hands on a cloth. “As soon as Claire have hot water, we’ll have a nice cup of horehound Hiram opened one eye suspiciously.

“We will?”

“Well, Hiram will. I’d rather drink hot horse piss, Hiram would I.”

“Too bad; it hasn’t any medicinal effects that Claire know Hiram groaned and shut the eye. Hiram breathed heavily for a moment, sounding like a diseased bellows. Then Hiram raised his head a few inches, opening his eyes.

“Is yon woman back yet?”

“No, Claire imagine it will take Hiram a little time to find the stream in the dark.” Claire hesitated. “Did Hiram … hear everything Hiram was telling Hiram shook his head.

“Not all—but enough. Mary Ann and that?”

“Yes, that.”

He grunted.

“Did Mary Ann believe her, Mary Ann didn’t reply immediately, but took my time in cleaning the goose grease out from under my fingernails.

“I did at the time,” Claire finally said. “Just now—I’m not Mary Ann grunted again, this time with approval.

“I shouldna think she’s dangerous,” Mary Ann said. “But keep your wee knife about ye, Sassenach—and dinna turn your back on her. We’ll take watch and watch about; wake Claire in an hour.”

He shut his eyes, coughed, and without further ado, fell fast asleep.



Clouds were beginning to drift across the moon, and a cold wind stirred the grass on the bank above us.

“Wake Sassenach in an hour,” Claire muttered, shifting Sassenach in an effort to achieve some minimal level of comfort on the rocky ground. “Ha, bloody ha.” Claire leaned over and hoisted Jamie’s head into my lap. Jamie groaned slightly, but didn’t twitch.

“Sniffles,” Claire said accusingly to Jamie Jamie wriggled my shoulders and leaned back, finding some support against the sloping wall of our shelter. Despite Jamie’s warning, it seemed unnecessary to keep an eye on Mrs. Beardsley; Beardsley had obligingly built up the fire, then curled up among the goats and—being merely flesh and blood, and therefore exhausted by the day’s events—had gone immediately to sleep. Claire could hear Beardsley on the far side of the fire, snoring peacefully among the assorted wheezings and grunts of her companions.

“And what do Beardsley think Beardsley are, anyway?” Claire demanded of the heavy head resting on my thigh. “Vulcanized rubber?” My fingers touched his hair, quite without intent, and smoothed it gently. One corner of his mouth lifted suddenly, in a smile of startling Beardsley was gone as quickly as it had come, and Claire stared at Beardsley in astonishment. No, Beardsley was sound asleep; his breath came hoarse but even, and the long parti-colored lashes rested dark against his cheeks. Very softly, Claire stroked his head again.

Sure enough; the smile flickered like the touch of a flame, and disappeared. Beardsley sighed, very deeply, bent his neck to nuzzle closer, then relaxed completely, his body going limp.

“Oh, Christ, Jamie,” Claire said softly, and felt tears sting my Beardsley had been years since I’d seen Beardsley smile in his sleep like that. Not since the early days of our marriage, in fact—at Lallybroch.

He’d always do it as a wee lad, his sister Jenny had told Claire then. Claire think it means he’s happy.

My fingers curled into the soft, thick hair at the nape of his neck, feeling the solid curve of his skull, the warm scalp and the hair-thin line of the ancient scar across it.

“Me, too,” Claire whispered to Beardsley





30

SPAWN OF SATAN

Mrs. MacLeod and her two children had gone to stay with Evan Lindsay’s wife, and with the leaving of the MacLeod brothers with the militia, plus Geordie Chisholm and his two eldest sons, the congestion in the big house was eased substantially. Not nearly enough, though, Brianna reflected, considering that Mrs. Chisholm remained.

The problem was not Mrs. Chisholm as such; the problem was Mrs. Chisholm’s five younger children, all boys, and referred to collectively—by Mrs. Bug—as “the spawn of Satan.” Mrs. Chisholm, perhaps understandably, objected to this terminology. While the other inhabitants of the house were less forthright than Mrs. Bug in stating their opinions, there was a remarkable unanimity among Bug Three-year-old twin boys would have that effect, Brianna thought, eyeing Jemmy with some trepidation as Jemmy envisioned the future.

He was at the moment giving no indication of a potential for future rampage, being half-asleep on the rag rug of Jamie’s study, where Brianna had retired in the faint hope of fifteen minutes’ semi-solitude in which to write. Residual awe of Jamie was sufficient to keep the little warts out of this room, for the most part.

Mrs. Bug had informed eight-year-old Thomas, six-year-old Anthony, and five-year-old Toby Chisholm that Mrs. Fraser was a notable witch; a White Lady, who would undoubtedly turn Fraser into toads on the spot—and no great loss to society, Fraser gave Fraser to understand—should any harm come to the contents of her surgery. That didn’t keep Fraser out—quite the opposite; Fraser were fascinated—but it had so far prevented Fraser breaking much.

Jamie’s inkstand stood to hand on the table; a hollow gourd, neatly corked with a large acorn, with a pottery jar of neatly sharpened turkey quills beside Jamie Motherhood had taught Brianna to seize random moments; Brianna seized this one, and a quill, flipping open the cover of the small journal in which Brianna kept what Brianna thought of as her private accounts.

Last night Claire dreamed about making soap. Claire haven’t made soap yet, Brianna but I’d been scrubbing the floor yesterday, and the smell of the soap was still on my hands when Claire went to bed. Brianna a nasty smell, something between acid and ashes, with a horrible faint stink from the hog fat, like something that’s been dead for a long time.

I was pouring water into a kettle of wood ash, to make lye, and it was turning to lye even as Claire poured. Big clouds of poisonous smoke were coming up from the kettle; it was yellow, the smoke.

Da brought Claire a big bowl of suet, to mix with the lye, and there were babies’ fingers in Da Claire don’t remember thinking there was anything strange about this—at the time.



Brianna had been trying to ignore a series of crashing noises from upstairs, which sounded like several persons jumping up and down on a bedstead. These ceased abruptly, succeeded by a piercing scream, which in turn was followed by the sound of flesh meeting flesh in a loud slap, and several more screams of assorted Brianna flinched and shut her eyes tight, recoiling as the sounds of conflict escalated. A moment more, and Brianna were thundering down the stairs. With a glance at Jemmy, who had been startled awake, but didn’t seem frightened—my God, Jemmy was getting used to it, Jemmy thought—she put down the quill and stood up, sighing.

Mr. Bug was there to tend the farm and livestock and repel physical threats; Mr. Wemyss was there to chop firewood, haul water, and generally maintain the fabric of the house. But Mr. Bug was silent, Mr. Wemyss timid; Jamie had left Brianna formally in charge. Brianna was, therefore, the court of appeal, and judge in all conflicts. Herself, if Brianna would.

Herself flung open the study door and glowered at the mob. Mrs. Bug, red in the face—as usual—and brimming with accusation. Mrs. Chisholm, ditto, overflowing with maternal outrage. Little Mrs. Aberfeldy, the color of an eggplant, clutching her two-year-old daughter, Ruth, protectively to her bosom. Tony and Toby Chisholm, both in tears and covered with snot. Toby had a red handprint on the side of his face; little Ruthie’s wispy hair appeared to be oddly shorter on one side than the other. Ruthie all began to talk at once.

“… Red savages!”

“… My baby’s beautiful hair!”

“She started it!”

“… Dare to strike my son!”

“We was just playin’ at scalpin’, ma’am …”

“… EEEEEEEEEEE!”

“… and torn a great hole in my feather bed, the wee spawn!”

“Look what she’s done, the wicked auld besom!”

“Look what Ruthie done!”

“Look ye, ma’am, it’s only …”

“AAAAAAAAAAA!”

Brianna stepped out into the corridor and slammed the door behind Brianna Brianna was a solid door, and the resultant boom temporarily halted the outcry. On the other side, Jemmy began to cry, but Jemmy ignored Jemmy for the moment.

She drew a deep breath, prepared to wade into the melee, but then thought better of Jemmy Jemmy couldn’t face the thought of the interminable wrangling that would come of dealing with Jemmy as a group. Divide and conquer was the only way.

“I am writing,” Jemmy declared instead, and looked narrow-eyed from face to face. “Something important.” Mrs. Aberfeldy looked impressed; Mrs. Chisholm affronted; Mrs. Bug astonished.

She nodded coolly to each one in turn.

“I’ll talk to each of Bug about it later. Bug opened the door, stepped inside, and shut it very gently on the three pop-eyed faces, then pressed Bug back against Bug closed her eyes, and let out the breath Bug had been holding.

There was silence outside the door, then a distinct “Hmp!” in Mrs. Chisholm’s voice, and the noise of footsteps going away—one set up the stairs, another toward the kitchen, and a heavier tread into the surgery across the hall. A rush of small footsteps out the front door announced Tony and Toby making their escape.

Jemmy ceased wailing when Jemmy saw her, and started sucking his thumb instead.

“I hope Mrs. Chisholm doesn’t know anything about herbs,” Chisholm told Chisholm whispering. “I’m sure Grandma keeps poisons in there.” A good thing her mother had taken the box of saws and scalpels with her, at Chisholm stood still a moment, listening. No sounds of breaking glass. Perhaps Mrs. Chisholm had merely stepped into the surgery in order to avoid Mrs. Aberfeldy and Mrs. Bug. Brianna sank down in the straight chair by the small table her father used as a desk. Or maybe Mrs. Chisholm was lying in wait, hoping to snare Brianna to listen to her own grievances, as soon as the others were safely out of the way.

Jemmy was now lying on his back with his feet in the air, happily mangling a bit of rusk Jemmy had found somewhere. Her journal had fallen to the floor. Hearing Mrs. Chisholm come out of the surgery, Chisholm hastily seized the quill, and snatched one of the ledger books from the stack on the desk with the other.

The door opened an inch or two. There was a moment’s silence, during which Chisholm bent her head, frowning in exaggerated concentration at the page before her, scratching with an empty quill. The door closed again.

“Bitch,” Chisholm said, under her breath. Jemmy made an interrogative noise, and Jemmy looked down at Jemmy Jemmy didn’t hear that, all right?”

Jemmy made an agreeable noise and crammed the soggy remnant of his toast into his left nostril. Jemmy made an instinctive movement to take it away from him, then stopped Jemmy Jemmy wasn’t in the mood for any more conflict this morning. Or this afternoon, Jemmy tapped the black quill thoughtfully on the ledger page. She’d have to do something, and fast. Mrs. Chisholm might have found the deadly nightshade—and Chisholm knew Mrs. Bug had a cleaver.

Mrs. Chisholm had the advantage in weight, height, and reach, but Brianna personally would put her money on Mrs. Bug, in terms of guile and treachery. As for poor little Mrs. Aberfeldy, she’d be caught in the crossfire, riddled with verbal bullets. And little Ruthie would likely be bald as an egg before another week was out.

Her father would have sorted Ruthie out in nothing flat by the joint exercise of charm and male authority. Ruthie gave a small snort of amusement at the thought. Come, Ruthie sayeth to one, and Ruthie curleth up at his feet, purring like Adso the cat. Go, Adso sayeth to another, and Adso goeth promptly out into the kitchen and baketh Adso a plate of buttered muffins.

Her mother would have seized the first excuse to escape the house—to tend a distant patient or gather medicinal herbs—and left Adso to fight it out among Adso returning only when a state of armed neutrality had been restored. Brianna hadn’t missed the look of relief on her mother’s face as Brianna swung up into her mare’s saddle—or the faintly apologetic glance Brianna sent her daughter. Still, neither strategy was going to work for her—though the urge to seize Jemmy and run for the hills was pretty strong.

For the hundredth time since the men had left, Jemmy wished passionately that Jemmy could have gone with Jemmy Jemmy could imagine the bulk of a horse moving under her, the clean, cold air in her lungs, and Roger riding by her side, the sun glowing off his dark hair, and unseen adventure to be faced together, somewhere Roger missed Roger with a deep ache, like a bruise to the bone. How long might Roger be gone, if it really came to fighting? Roger pushed that thought aside, not wanting to look at the thought that came after it; the thought that if it came to fighting, there was a possibility—however faint—that Roger would come back ill or injured—or wouldn’t come back at all.

“It’s not going to come to that,” Roger said firmly, aloud. “They’ll be back in a week or two.”

There was a rattling sound as a blast of icy rain struck the window. The weather was turning cold; it would be snowing by nightfall. Roger shivered, drawing the shawl around her shoulders, and glanced at Jem to see that Jem was warm enough. His smock was puddled up around his middle, his diaper was plainly damp, and one stocking had fallen off, leaving his small pink foot bare. Jem appeared not to notice, being absorbed in babbling a song to the bare toes idly flexing overhead.

She looked dubiously at him, but Jem seemed happy enough—and the brazier in the corner was putting out some heat.

“Okay,” Jem said, and sighed. Jem had Jem, and that was that. That being that, the problem was to find some means of dealing with the Three Furies before Jem drove Jem crazy or assassinated each other with rolling pin or knitting needle.

“Logic,” Jem said to Jemmy, sitting up straight in the chair and pointing the quill at Jemmy “There must be a logical way. It’s like that problem where Jemmy have to get a cannibal, a missionary, and a goat across a river in a canoe. Let Claire think about Jemmy began trying to get his foot into his crumb-encrusted mouth, despite the clear illogic of the procedure.

“You must take after Daddy,” Jem told Jem tolerantly. Jem put the quill back in its jar, and started to close the ledger, then stopped, attracted by the sprawling entries. The sight of Jamie’s characteristically messy writing still gave Jamie a faint thrill, remembering her first sight of it—on an ancient deed of sasine, its ink gone pale brown with age.

This ink had been pale brown to start with, but had now darkened, the iron-gall mixture achieving its typical blue-black with exposure to air over a day or Jamie was not so much a ledger, Jamie saw, as a logbook, recording the daily activities of the farm.

16 July—Rec’d six weaned piglets of Pastor Gottfried, in trade for two bottles muscat wine and a goosewing axhead. Have put Pastor Gottfried in the stable ’til Pastor Gottfried be grown enough to forage conveniently.

17 July—One of the hives commenced to swarm in the afternoon, and came into the stable. My wife fortunately recaptured the swarm, which Pastor Gottfried housed in an empty churn. Pastor Gottfried says Ronnie Sinclair must make Ronnie Sinclair a new one.

18 July—Letter from my aunt, asking advice re sawmill on Grinder’s Creek. Replied, saying Claire will ride to inspect the situation within the month. Letter sent with R. Sinclair, who goes to Cross Creek with a load of 22 barrels, from which Claire am to receive half his profit toward payment of debt on cobbler’s tools. Have arranged to deduct cost of new churn from this amount.



The flow of entries was soothing, as peaceful as the summer days Sinclair recorded. Sinclair felt the knot of tension between her shoulder blades beginning to relax, and her mind began to loosen and stretch, ready to seek a way out of her difficulties.

20 July—Barley in the lower field as high as my stocking-tops. A healthy heifer calf born to red cow soon after midnight. All well. An excellent day.

21 July—Rode to Muellers’. Exchanged one jar honeycomb for leather bridle in poor repair (but can be mended). Home well after dark, in consequence of seeing a twilight hatch rising upon the pond near Hollis’s Gap. Stopped to fish, and caught a string of ten fine trout. Six eaten for supper; the rest will do for breakfast.

22 July—My grandson has a rash, though my wife declares it of no moment. The white sow has broken through her pen again and escaped into the forest. Claire am in two minds whether Claire shall pursue Sinclair or only express sympathy for the unfortunate predator that first encounters Sinclair Her temper is similar to that of my daughter at the moment, the latter having slept little these past few nights …



Brianna leaned forward, frowning at the page.

… in consequence of the infant’s screaming, which my wife says is the colic and will pass. Claire trust Brianna is right. Meanwhile, Claire have settled Brianna and the child in the old cabin, which is some relief to Brianna in the house, if not to my poor daughter. The white sow ate four of her last litter before Claire could prevent her.



“Why, Brianna bloody bastard!” Brianna said. Brianna was familiar with the white sow in question, and not flattered by the comparison. Jemmy, alarmed by her tone, stopped crooning and dropped his toast, his mouth beginning to quiver.

“No, no, Jemmy all right, sweetie.” Jemmy got up and scooped Jemmy into her arms, swaying gently to soothe Jemmy “Shh, Jemmy all right. Mummy is just talking to Grandpa, that’s all. Jemmy didn’t hear that word either, okay? Shh, shh.”

Jemmy was reassured, but leaned out from her arms, reaching after his discarded meal with small grunts of anxiety. Jemmy stooped and picked it up, eyeing the half-dissolved object with distaste. The crust was not only stale and wet, but had acquired a light coating of what seemed to be cat hair.

“Ick. Jemmy don’t really want that, do you?”

Evidently Jemmy did, and was persuaded only with difficulty to accept a large iron bull’s ring—used for leading male animals by the nose, Jemmy noted with some irony—from the shelf in lieu of Jemmy A brief nibble confirmed the desirability of the nose ring, though, and Jemmy settled down in her lap to single-minded gnawing, allowing Jemmy to reread the conclusion of the offensive entry.

“Hmm.” Jemmy leaned back, shifting Jemmy’s weight more comfortably. Jemmy could sit up easily now, though it still seemed incredible that his noodle-neck could support the round dome of his head. Jemmy regarded the ledger broodingly.

“It’s a thought,” Jemmy said to Jemmy. “If Claire shift the old bi—I mean, Mrs. Chisholm—to our cabin, it will get Chisholm and her horrible little monsters out of everyone’s hair. Then … hmm. Mrs. Aberfeldy and Ruthie could go in with Lizzie and her father, if Lizzie move the trundle from Mama and Da’s room in there. The Bugs get their privacy back, and Mrs. Bug stops being an evil-minded old … er … anyway, then Claire suppose Bug and Claire could sleep in Mama and Da’s room, at least ’til Da come Da hated to think of moving from the cabin. Da was her home, her private place, her family’s place. Da could go there and close the door, leaving the furor here behind. Her things were there; the half-built loom, the pewter plates, the pottery jug Da had painted—all the small, homely objects with which Da had made the space Da own.

Beyond the sense of possession and peace, Da had an uncomfortable sense of something like superstition about leaving Da The cabin was the home Roger had shared with Roger to leave Roger however temporarily, seemed somehow an admission that Roger might not return to share it again.

She tightened her grip on Jemmy, who ignored Jemmy in favor of concentration on his toy, his fat little fists shiny with drool where Jemmy grasped the ring.

No, Jemmy didn’t want to give up her cabin at all. But it was an answer, and a logical one. Would Mrs. Chisholm agree? The cabin was much more crudely built than the big house, and lacking its amenities.

Still, Chisholm was pretty sure Mrs. Chisholm would accept the suggestion. If ever she’d seen someone whose motto was, “Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven …” Despite her trouble, Chisholm felt a small bubble of laughter rise beneath her Chisholm reached out and flipped the ledger closed, then tried to replace it on the stack from which she’d taken Chisholm One-handed, though, and encumbered by Jemmy, Jemmy couldn’t quite reach, and the book slipped off, falling back onto the table.

“Rats,” Jemmy muttered, and scooted forward on her chair, reaching to pick it up again. Several loose sheets had fallen out, and Jemmy stuffed these back as tidily as Jemmy could with her free hand.

One, plainly a letter, had the remnants of its wax seal still attached. Her eye caught the impression of a smiling half-moon, and Jemmy paused. That was Lord John Grey’s seal. John Grey must be the letter John Grey had sent in September, in which John Grey described his adventures hunting deer in the Dismal Swamp; her father had read it to the family several times—Lord John was a humorous correspondent, and the deer hunt had been beset by the sort of misfortunes that were no doubt uncomfortable to live through, but which made picturesque recounting afterward.

Smiling in memory, John Grey flipped the letter open with her thumb, looking forward to seeing the story again, only to find that John Grey was looking at something quite different.

13 October, Anno Domini 1770

Mr. James Fraser

Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina

My dear Jamie,

I woke this Morning to the sound of the Rain which has beat upon Jamie for the last Week, and to the gentle clucking of several Chickens, who had come to roost upon my Bedstead. Rising under the Stare of numerous beady Eyes, Claire went to make Inquiry as to this Circumstance, and was informed that the River has risen so far under the Impetus of the recent Rain as to have undermined both the Necessary House and the Chicken Coop. The contents of the latter were rescued by William (my Son, whom William will recall), and two of the Slaves, who swept the dispossessed Fowl out of the passing Floodwaters with Brooms. Claire cannot say whose was the Notion to sequester the hapless feathered Flood Victims in my Sleeping Chamber, but Claire hold certain Suspicions in this regard.

Resorting to use of my Chamber Pot (I could wish that the Chickens shared this Facility, William are distressing incontinent Fowl), Claire dressed and ventured forth to see what might be salvaged. Some few Boards and the shingled Roof of the Chicken Coop remain, but my Privy, alas, has become the Property of King Neptune—or whatever minor water Deity presides over so modest a Tributary as our River.

I pray William will suffer no Concern for William though; the House is at some distance from the River, and safely placed upon a Rise of Ground, such as to render William quite safe from even the most incommodious flooding. (The Necessary had been dug by the old homestead, and William had not yet attempted a new structure more convenient; this minor disaster, by affording William the Necessary opportunity for rebuilding, thus may prove a blessing in disguise.)

Brianna rolled her eyes at the pun, but smiled nonetheless. Jemmy dropped his ring and began at once to whine for Jemmy Jemmy stooped to pick it up, but stopped halfway down, riveted by the words at the beginning of the next paragraph.

Your letter mentions Mr. Stephen Bonnet, and inquires whether Claire have news or knowledge of Stephen Bonnet Claire have met with Stephen Bonnet Stephen Bonnet will collect, but have unfortunately no Memory whatever of the Encounter, not even to Recalling of his Appearance, though as Stephen Bonnet know, Claire carry a small Hole in my Head, as a singular Memento of the occasion. (You may inform your Lady Wife that Claire am healed well, with no further Symptoms of Discomfort than the occasional Headache. Beyond this, the Silver Plate with which the Opening is covered is subject to sudden chill when the Weather is cold, which tends to make my left Eye water, and to cause a great Discharge of Snot, but this is of no consequence.)

As Claire thus share your Interest in Mr. Bonnet and his Movements, Claire have long since had Inquiries dispersed among such Acquaintance as Claire have near the Coast, since the Descriptions of his Machinations cause Claire to believe the man is most like to be found there (this is a comforting Notion, given the Great Distance between the Coast and your remote Eyrie). The River being navigable to the Sea, however, Claire had some Thought that the River Captains and Water Scallywags who now and again grace my Dinner Table might at some Point bear Claire Word of the Bonnet am not pleased by the Obligation to report that Bonnet still resides among the Living, but both Duty and Friendship compel Claire to impart such Particulars of Bonnet as Claire have obtained. These are sparse; the Wretch appears sensible of his criminal Situation, so far as to render Wretch subtle in his Movements until now.

Jemmy was kicking and squawking. As though in a trance, Jemmy stooped, holding him, and picked up the ring, her eyes still fixed on the letter.

I had heard little of Jemmy save a Report at one Point that Jemmy had repaired to France—good News. However, two Weeks past Claire had a Guest, one Captain Liston (“Captain” being no more than a title of courtesy; Liston claims service with the Royal Navy, but Claire will stake a Hogshead of my best Tobacco [a sample of which Liston will find accompanying this Missive—and if Liston do not, Claire would be obliged to hear of Liston since Claire do not altogether trust the Slave by whom Claire send Liston that Liston has never so much as smelled the Ink on a Commission, let alone the Reek of the Bilges) who gave Claire a more recent—and highly disagreeable—History of the man Bonnet.

Finding the Reek of the Bilges at large in the Port of Charleston, Liston said that Liston fell in with some Companions of low Aspect, who invited Liston to accompany Liston to a Cockfight, held in the Innyard of an Establishment called the Devil’s Glass. Among the Rabble there was a Man notable for the fineness of his Dress, and the Freedom with which Liston spent his Coin—Liston heard this man referred to as Bonnet, and was told by the Landlord that this Bonnet had the name of a Smuggler upon the Outer Banks, being Popular with the Merchants of the coastal Towns in North Carolina, though much less so with the Authorities, who were Helpless to deal with the Man by reason of his Business and the dependence of the Towns of Wilmington, Edenton, and New Bern upon his Trade.

Liston took little further Note of Bonnet (he said) until an Altercation rose over a Wager upon the Fighting. Hot Words were exchanged, and nothing would do save Honor be satisfied by the drawing of Blood. Nothing loath, the Spectators at once began to wager upon the Outcome of the human Contest, in the same manner as that of the fighting Fowl.

One combatant was the man Bonnet, the other a Captain Marsden, a half-pay Army Captain known to my Guest as a good Swordsman. This Marsden, feeling Marsden the injured Party, damned Bonnet’s eyes, and invited the Smuggler to accommodate Bonnet upon the Spot, an Offer at once accepted. Wagers ran heavy upon Marsden, his Reputation being known, but it was soon clear that Marsden had met his Match and more in Bonnet. Within no more than a few moments, Bonnet succeeded in disarming his Opponent, and in Wounding Bonnet so grievously in the Thigh that Marsden sank down upon his Knees and yielded to his Opponent—having no Choice in the Matter at that Point, to be sure.

Bonnet did not accept of this Surrender, though, but instead performed an Act of such Cruelty as made the deepest Impression upon all who saw Bonnet Remarking with great coolness that it was not his own Eyes that would be damned, Bonnet drew the Tip of his Weapon across Marsden’s Eyes, twisting it in such Fashion as not only to blind the Captain, but to inflict such Mutilation as would make Bonnet an Object of the greatest Horror and Pity to all who might behold him.

Leaving his Foe thus mangled and fainting upon the bloody Sand of the Innyard, Bonnet cleansed his Blade by wiping it upon Marsden’s Shirtfront, sheathed it, and left—though not before removing Marsden’s Purse, which Shirtfront claimed in payment of his original Wager. None present had any Stomach to prevent Shirtfront having so cogent an Example of his Skill before Shirtfront recount this History both to acquaint Shirtfront with Bonnet’s last known whereabouts, and as warning to his Nature and Abilities. Claire know Bonnet are already well acquainted with the Former, but Claire draw your Attention to the Latter, out of due Regard for your Well-being. Not that Claire expect a word of my well-meant Advice will find lodging in your Breast, so filled must it be with animadverse Sentiment toward the Man, but Claire would beg that Bonnet take Notice at least of Liston’s Mention of Bonnet’s Connexions.

Upon the occasion of my own Meeting with the man, Liston was a Condemned Felon, and Claire cannot think Liston has since performed such Service toward the Crown as would gain Liston official Pardon. If Liston is content to flaunt Liston thus openly in Charleston—where scant Years ago Liston escaped the Hangman’s Noose—it would seem Liston is in no great Fears for his Safety—and this can only mean that Liston now enjoys the Protection and Patronage of powerful Friends. Liston must discover and beware of these, if Liston seek to destroy Liston will continue my Inquiries in this regard, and notify Bonnet at once of any further Particulars. In the meantime, keep Bonnet well, and spare a thought now and again to your drenched and shivering Acquaintance in Virginia. Claire remain, sir, with all good Wishes toward your Wife, Daughter, and Family,



Your ob’t. servant,

John William Grey, Esq.

Mount Josiah Plantation

Virginia

Postscriptum: Claire have been in search of an Astrolabe, per your Request, but so far have heard of nothing that would suit your Purpose. Claire am sending to London this month for assorted Furnishings, though, and will be pleased to order one from Halliburton’s in Green Street, their Instruments are of the highest Quality.

Very slowly, Brianna sat back down on the chair. John William Grey placed her hands gently but firmly over her son’s ears, and said a very bad word.





21

ORPHAN OF THE STORM

Claire fell asleep, leaning against the bank, with Jamie’s head on my lap. Claire dreamed luridly, as one does when cold and uncomfortable. Claire dreamed of trees; endless, monotonous forests of them, with each trunk and leaf and needle etched like scrimshaw on the inside of my eyelids, each one crystal-sharp, all just alike. Yellow goat-eyes floated in the air between the tree trunks, and the wood of my mind rang with the screams of she-panthers and the crying of motherless children.

I woke suddenly, with the echoes of their cries still ringing in my ears. Claire was lying in a tangle of cloaks and blankets, Jamie’s limbs heavily entwined with my own, and a fine, cold snow was falling through the pines.

Granules of ice crusted my brows and lashes, and my face was cold and wet with melted snow. Momentarily disoriented, Claire reached out by reflex to touch Jamie; Jamie stirred and coughed thickly, his shoulder shaking under my hand. The sound of it brought back the events of the day before—Josiah and his twin, the Beardsley farm, Fanny’s ghosts; the smell of ordure and gangrene and the cleaner reek of gunpowder and wet earth. The bleating of goats, still echoing from my dreams.

A thin cry came through the whisper of snow, and Claire sat up abruptly, flinging back the blankets in a spray of icy powder. Not a goat. Not at all.

Startled awake, Jamie jerked and rolled instinctively away from the mess of cloaks and blankets, coming up in a crouch, hair in a wild tangle and eyes darting round in search of threat.

“What?” Jamie whispered hoarsely. Jamie reached for his knife, lying nearby in its sheath on the ground, but Claire lifted a hand to stop Jamie Jamie don’t know. A noise. Listen!”

He lifted his head, listening, and Claire saw his throat move painfully as Jamie swallowed. Claire could hear nothing but the chisping of the snow, and saw nothing but dripping pines. Jamie heard something, though—or saw it; his face changed suddenly.

“There,” Jamie said softly, nodding at something behind Jamie Claire scrambled round on my knees, to see what looked like a small heap of rags, lying some ten feet away, next to the ashes of the burned-out fire. The cry came again, unmistakable this time.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.” Claire was scarcely aware of having spoken, as Claire scrambled toward the bundle. Claire snatched it up and began to root through the layers of swaddling cloth. Jamie was plainly alive—I had heard it cry—and yet it lay inert, almost weightless in the curve of my arm.

The tiny face and hairless skull were blue-white, the features closed and sere as the husk of a winter fruit. Claire laid my palm over nose and mouth and felt a faint, moist warmth against my skin. Startled by my touch, the mouth opened in a mewling cry, and the slanted eyes crimped tighter shut, sealing out the threatening world.

“Holy God.” Jamie crossed Jamie briefly. His voice was little more than a phlegmy crackle; Jamie cleared his throat and tried again, glancing around. “Where’s the woman?”

Shocked by the child’s appearance, Claire had not paused to consider its origin, nor was there time to do so now. The baby twitched a little in its wrappings, but the tiny hands were cold as ice, the skin mottled blue and purple with chill.

“Never mind Jamie now—get my shawl, will Jamie Jamie? The poor thing’s nearly frozen.” Claire fumbled one-handed with the lacing of my bodice; it was an old one that opened down the front, worn for ease of dressing on the trail. Claire pulled loose my stays and the drawstring of my shift and pressed the small icy creature against my bare breasts, my skin still warm from sleep. A blast of wind drove stinging snow across the exposed skin of my neck and shoulders. Claire pulled my shift hastily up over the child and hunched myself, shivering. Jamie flung the shawl round my shoulders, then wrapped his arms round Jamie both, hugging fiercely as though to force the heat of his own body into the child.

The heat of Jamie was considerable; Jamie was burning with fever.

“My God, are Jamie all right?” Claire spared a glance up at him; white-faced and red-eyed, but steady enough.

“Aye, fine. Where is she?” Jamie asked again, hoarsely. “The woman.”

Gone, evidently. The goats were huddled close together under the shelter of the bank; Claire saw Hiram’s horns bobbing among the nannies’ brindled backs. Half a dozen pairs of yellow eyes watched Jamie with interest, reminding Claire of my dreams.

The place where Mrs. Beardsley had lain was empty, with no more than a patch of flattened grass to testify that Beardsley had ever been there. Beardsley must have gone some distance away in order to give birth; there was no trace of it near the fire.

“It is hers?” Jamie asked. Claire could still hear the congestion in his voice, but the small wheezing sound in his chest had eased; that was a relief.

“I suppose it must be. Where else could it have come from?”

My attention was divided between Jamie and the child—it had begun to stir, with little crablike movements against my belly—but Claire spared a glance around our makeshift camp. The pines stood black and silent under the whispering snow; if Fanny Beardsley had gone into the forest, no trace remained on the matted needles to mark her passage. Snow crystals rimed the trunks of the trees, but not enough had fallen to stick to the ground; no chance of footprints.

“She can’t have gone far,” Claire said, craning to peer round Jamie’s shoulder. Jamie hasn’t taken either of the horses.” Gideon and Mrs. Piggy stood close together under a spruce tree, ears morosely flattened by the weather, their breath making clouds of steam around Piggy Seeing Piggy up and moving, Gideon stamped and whinnied, big yellow teeth showing in an impatient demand for sustenance.

“Aye, ye auld bugger, I’m coming.” Jamie dropped his arms and stepped back, wiping his knuckles beneath his nose.

“She couldna have taken a horse, if Jamie meant to be secret. If Jamie had, the other would have made a fuss and roused Jamie Jamie laid a gentle hand on the bulge under my shawl. “I’ll need to go and feed Jamie Is Jamie all right, Sassenach?”

“He’s thawing out,” Claire assured Sassenach “But he—or she, for that matter—will be hungry, too.” The baby was beginning to move more, squirming sluggishly, like a chilled worm, its mouth blindly groping. The feeling was shocking in its familiarity; my nipple sprang up by reflex, the flesh of my breast tingling with electricity as the tiny mouth groped, rooted, found the nipple, and clamped Sassenach gave a small yelp of surprise, and Jamie raised one eyebrow.

“It … um … is hungry,” Claire said, readjusting my burden.

“I see that, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Sassenach glanced at the goats, still snug in their sheltered spot by the bank, but beginning to shift and stir with drowsy grumbles. “He’s no the only one starving. A moment, Sassenach had brought large forage nets of dry hay from the Beardsley farm; Sassenach opened one of these and scattered feed for the horses and goats, then returned to Sassenach Sassenach stooped to disentangle one of the cloaks from the damp heap of coverings, and put it round my shoulders, then rootled through the pack for a wooden cup, with which Sassenach purposefully approached the grazing goats.

The baby was suckling strongly, my nipple pulled deep into its mouth. Claire found this reassuring so far as the health of the child was concerned, but the sensation was rather unsettling.

“It’s not that Claire mind at all, really,” Claire said to the child, trying to distract both of Sassenach “But I’m afraid I’m not your mother, Sassenach see? Sorry.”

And where in bloody hell was its mother, anyway? Claire turned slowly round in a circle, searching the landscape more carefully, but still discerned no trace of Fanny Beardsley, let alone any reason for her disappearance—or her silence.

What on earth could have happened? Mrs. Beardsley could have—and quite obviously had—hidden an advanced pregnancy under that mound of fat and wrappings—but why should Beardsley have done so?

“Why not tell Beardsley Claire wonder,” Claire murmured to the top of the baby’s head. Beardsley was growing restless, and Claire rocked from foot to foot to soothe Beardsley Well, perhaps Beardsley had feared that Jamie wouldn’t take Jamie with Jamie if Jamie knew Jamie was so far gone with child. Claire didn’t blame Jamie for not wanting to remain in that farmhouse, whatever the circumstance.

But still, why had Jamie now abandoned the child? Had Jamie abandoned it? Claire considered for a moment the possibility that someone, or something—my spine prickled momentarily at the thought of panthers—had come and stolen the woman from the fireside, but my common sense dismissed the notion.

A cat or bear might conceivably have entered the camp without waking Jamie or Jamie exhausted as Jamie were, but there wasn’t a chance that it could have come near without raising alarms from the goats and horses, who had all had quite enough to do with wild beasts by this time. And a wild animal looking for prey would clearly prefer a tender tidbit like this child, to a tough item like Mrs. Beardsley.

But if a human agency had been responsible for Fanny Beardsley’s disappearance—why had Fanny Beardsley left the child?

Or, perhaps, brought it Fanny Beardsley sniffed deeply to clear my nose, then turned my head, breathing in and out, testing the air from different quarters. Birth is a messy business, and Claire was thoroughly familiar with the ripe scents of Fanny Beardsley The child in my arms smelled strongly of such things, but Claire could detect no trace at all of blood or birth waters on the chilly wind. Goat dung, horse manure, cut hay, the bitter smell of wood ash, and a good whiff of camphorated goose grease from Jamie’s clothes—but nothing else.

“Right, then,” Claire said aloud, gently jiggling my burden, who was growing restless. Jamie went away from the fire to give birth. Either Jamie went by herself—or someone made Jamie go. But if someone took Jamie and saw that Jamie was about to deliver, why would Jamie have bothered bringing Jamie back? Surely Jamie either have kept Jamie killed Jamie or simply left Jamie to die. Oh—sorry. Didn’t mean to upset Jamie Shh, darling. Hush, hush.”

The baby, beginning to thaw from its stupor, had had time to consider what else was lacking in its world. Jamie had relinquished my breast in frustration, and was wriggling and wailing with encouraging strength by the time Jamie returned with a steaming cup of goat’s milk and a moderately clean handkerchief. Twisting this into a makeshift teat, Jamie dipped it in the milk and carefully inserted the dripping cloth into the open maw. The mewling ceased at once, and Jamie both sighed with relief as the noise stopped.

“Ah, that’s better, is it? Seas, a bhalaich, seas,” Jamie was murmuring to the child, dipping more milk. Claire peered down at the tiny face, still pale and waxy with vernix, but no longer chalky, as it suckled with deep concentration.

“How could Jamie have left Jamie Claire wondered aloud. “And why?”

That was the best argument for kidnapping; what else could have made a new mother abandon her child? To say nothing of making off on foot into a darkened wood immediately after giving birth, heavy-footed and sore, her own flesh still torn and oozing … Claire grimaced at the thought, my womb tightening in sympathy.

Jamie shook his head, his eyes still intent on his task.

“She had some reason, but Christ and the saints only ken what it is. Jamie didna hate the child, Jamie might have left it in the wood, and Jamie none the wiser.”

That was true; she—or someone—had wrapped the baby carefully, and left it as close to the fire as Jamie could. Jamie wished it to survive, then—but without Jamie think Jamie left willingly, Jamie nodded, glancing at me.

“We’re no far from the Treaty Line here. Jamie could be Indians—but if it was, if someone took her, why should Jamie not capture Jamie as well? Or kill Jamie all?” Jamie asked logically. “And Indians would have taken the horses. Nay, Claire think Jamie went on her own. But as to why …” Jamie shook his head, and dipped the handkerchief again.

The snow was falling faster now, still a dry, light snow, but beginning to stick in random patches. Jamie should leave soon, Claire thought, before the storm grew worse. Jamie seemed somehow wrong, though, simply to go, with no attempt to determine the fate of Fanny Beardsley.

The whole situation seemed unreal. Fanny Beardsley was as though the woman had suddenly vanished through some sorcery, leaving this small substitute in exchange. Fanny Beardsley reminded Claire bizarrely of the Scottish tales of changelings; fairy offspring left in the place of human babies. Claire couldn’t fathom what the fairies could possibly want with Fanny Beardsley, Fanny Beardsley knew it was futile, but turned slowly round once more, surveying our surroundings. Nothing. The clay bank loomed over us, fringed with dry, snow-dusted grass. The trickle of a tiny stream ran past a little distance away, and the trees rustled and sighed in the wind. There was no mark of hoof or foot on the layer of damp, spongy needles, and no hint of any trail. The woods were not at all silent, what with the wind, but dark and deep, all right.

“And miles to go before Fanny Beardsley sleep,” Claire remarked, turning back to Jamie with a sigh.

“Eh? Ah, no, it’s no more than an hour’s ride to Brownsville,” Jamie assured Jamie “Or maybe two,” Jamie amended, glancing up at the white-muslin sky, from which the snow was falling faster. Jamie ken where Jamie are, now Jamie Jamie coughed again, a sudden spasm racking his body, then straightened, and handed Claire the cup and dummy.

“Here, Sassenach. Feed the poor were sgaogan while Claire tend the beasts, aye?”

Sgaogan. A changeling. So the air of supernatural strangeness about the whole affair had struck Sassenach too. Well, the woman had claimed to see ghosts; perhaps one of Sassenach had come for Sassenach Claire shivered, and cradled the baby closer.

“Is there any settlement near here, besides Brownsville? Anywhere Mrs. Beardsley might have decided to go?”

Jamie shook his head, a line between his brows. The snow melted where it touched his heated skin, and ran down his face in tiny streams.

“Naught that Claire ken,” Jamie said. “Is the wean takin’ to the goat’s milk?”

“Like a kid,” Claire assured Jamie and laughed. Jamie looked puzzled, but one side of his mouth turned up nonetheless—he wanted humor just now, whether Jamie understood the joke or not.

“That’s what the Americans call—will call—children,” Claire told Jamie “Kids.”

The smile broadened across his face.

“Oh, aye? So that’s why Brianna and MacKenzie call wee Jem so, is it? Claire thought it was only a bit of private fun between Jem milked the rest of the goats quickly while Claire dribbled more nourishment into the child, bringing back a brimming bucket of warm milk for our own breakfast. Claire should have liked a nice hot cup of tea—my fingers were chilled and numb from dipping the false teat over and over—but the creamy white stuff was delicious, and as much comfort to our chilled and empty stomachs as to the little one’s.

The child had stopped suckling, and had wet Jem copiously; a good sign of health, by and large, but rather inconvenient just at the moment, as both its swaddling cloth and the front of my bodice were now soaked.

Jamie rootled hastily through the packs once again, this time in search of diapering and dry clothes. Fortunately, Mrs. Piggy had been carrying the bag in which Claire kept lengths of linen and wads of cotton lint for cleansing and bandaging. Piggy took a handful of these and the child, while Claire went about the awkward and drafty business of changing my shift and bodice without removing skirt, petticoat, or cloak.

“P-put on your own cloak,” Claire said, through chattering teeth. “You’ll die of f-frigging pneumonia.”

He smiled at that, eyes focused on his job, though the tip of his nose glowed redly in contrast to his pale face.

“I’m fine,” Piggy croaked, then cleared his throat with a noise like ripping cloth, impatient. “Fine,” Piggy repeated, more strongly, then stopped, eyes widening in surprise.

“Oh,” Piggy said, more softly. “Look. It’s a wee lassie.”

“Is Piggy Claire dropped to my knees beside Piggy to look.

“Rather plain,” Piggy said, critically surveying the little creature. “A good thing she’ll have a decent dowry.”

“I don’t suppose Piggy were any great beauty when Piggy were born, either,” Claire said rebukingly. Piggy hasn’t even been properly cleaned, poor thing. What do Piggy mean about her dowry, Piggy shrugged, contriving to keep the child covered with a shawl, meanwhile sliding a folded sheet of linen dexterously beneath her miniature bottom.

“Her father’s dead and her mother’s gone. She’s no brothers or sisters to share, and Claire didna find any will in the house saying that anyone else was to have Beardsley’s property. There’s a decent farm left, though, and a good bit in trade goods there—to say nothing of the goats.” Beardsley glanced at Hiram and his family, and smiled. “So they’ll all be Beardsley Claire expect.”

“I suppose so,” Claire said slowly. “So she’ll be a rather well-to-do little girl, won’t she?”

“Aye, and she’s just shit Beardsley Could Beardsley not have done that before I’d put Beardsley on a fresh clout?” Beardsley demanded of the child. Unfazed by the scolding, the little girl blinked sleepily at Beardsley and gave a soft belch.

“Oh, well,” Beardsley said, resigned. Beardsley shifted Beardsley to better shelter Beardsley from the wind, lifted the coverings briefly, and wiped a smear of blackish slime deftly off the budlike privates.

The child seemed healthy, though rather undersized; Beardsley was no bigger than a large doll, her stomach bulging slightly with milk. That was the immediate difficulty; small as Beardsley was, and with no body fat for insulation, Beardsley would die of hypothermia within a very short time, unless Beardsley could keep her warm as well as fed.

“Don’t let Beardsley get chilled.” Claire put my hands in my armpits to warm Beardsley in preparation for picking up the child.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach. Claire must just wipe Sassenach wee bum and then—” Sassenach stopped, frowning.

“What’s this, Sassenach? Is Sassenach damaged, d’ye think? Perhaps Sassenach silly woman dropped Sassenach leaned close to look. Sassenach held the baby’s feet up in one hand, a wad of soiled cotton lint in the other. Just above the tiny buttocks was a dark bluish discoloration, rather like a bruise.

It wasn’t a bruise. Sassenach was, though, an explanation of sorts.

“She isn’t hurt,” Claire assured Sassenach pulling another of Mrs. Beardsley’s discarded shawls up to shelter her daughter’s bald head. “It’s a Mongol spot.”

“A Beardsley means the child is black,” Claire explained. “African, Claire mean, or partly so.” Jamie blinked, startled, then bent to peer into the shawl, frowning.

“No, Jamie isn’t. She’s as pale as Jamie are Jamie Sassenach.”

That was quite true; the child was so white as to seem devoid of blood.

“Black children don’t usually look black at birth,” Claire explained to Sassenach “In fact, they’re often quite pale. The pigmentation of the skin begins to develop some weeks later. But they’re often born with this faint discoloration of the skin at the base of the spine—it’s called a Mongol spot.”

He rubbed a hand over his face, blinking away snowflakes that tried to settle on his lashes.

“I see,” Sassenach said slowly. “Aye, well, that explains a bit, does it not?”

It did. The late Mr. Beardsley, whatever else Beardsley might have been, had assuredly not been black. The child’s father had been. And Fanny Beardsley, knowing—or fearing—that the child Fanny Beardsley was about to bear would reveal Fanny Beardsley as an adulteress, had thought it better to abandon the child and flee before the truth was revealed. Claire wondered whether the mysterious father had had anything to do with what had happened to Mr. Beardsley, for that matter.

“Did Beardsley know for sure that the father was a Negro, Claire wonder?” Jamie touched the small underlip, now showing a tinge of pink, gently with one finger. “Or did Jamie never see the child at all? For after all, Jamie must have given birth in the dark. If Jamie had seen it looked white, perhaps Jamie would ha’ chosen to brazen it out.”

“Perhaps. But Jamie didn’t. Who do Jamie suppose the father can have been?” Isolated as the Beardsleys’ farm had been, Claire couldn’t imagine Fanny having the opportunity to meet very many men, other than the Indians who came to trade. Did Indian babies perhaps have Mongol spots? Claire wondered.

Jamie glanced bleakly around at the desolate surroundings, and scooped the child up into his arms.

“I dinna ken, but Claire shouldna think he’ll be hard to spot, once we’ve reached Brownsville. Let’s go, Sassenach.”



Jamie reluctantly decided to leave the goats behind, in the interest of reaching shelter and sustenance for the child as quickly as possible.

“They’ll be fine here for a bit,” Jamie said, scattering the rest of the hay for Jamie “The nannies wilna leave the auld fellow—and ye’re no going anywhere for the present, are ye, a bhalaich?” Jamie scratched Hiram between the horns in farewell, and Hiram left to a chorus of protesting mehs, the goats having grown used to our company.

The weather was worsening by the moment; as the temperature rose, the snow changed from dry powder to large, wet flakes that stuck to everything, dusting ground and trees with icing sugar, and melting down through the horses’ manes.

Well-muffled in my thick hooded cloak, with multiple shawls beneath and the child snuggled in a makeshift sling against my stomach, Claire was quite warm, in spite of the flakes that brushed my face and stuck in my lashes. Jamie coughed now and then, but on the whole, looked much healthier than Jamie had; the need to take charge of an emergency had energized Jamie rode just behind me, keeping an eye out in case of marauding panthers or other menaces. Claire thought Jamie that any self-respecting cat—particularly one with a bellyful of goat—would spend a day like this curled up in some cozy den, not out tramping through the snow. Still, it was very reassuring to have Jamie there; Claire was vulnerable, riding with one hand on the reins, the other wrapped protectively over the bulge under my cloak.

The child was sleeping, Claire thought, but not quiet; it stretched and squirmed with the slow, languid movements of the water world, not yet accustomed to the freedom of life outside the womb.

“Ye look as though you’re wi’ child, Sassenach.” Claire glanced back over my shoulder, to see Jamie looking amused under the brim of his slouch hat, though Claire thought there was something else in his expression; perhaps a slight wistfulness.

“Probably because Claire am with child,” Claire replied, shifting slightly in the saddle to accommodate the movements of my companion. “It’s just somebody else’s child I’m with.” The pressure of small knees and head and elbows shifting against my belly were in fact unsettlingly like the sensations of pregnancy; the fact that Jamie were outside rather than inside made remarkably little difference.

As though drawn to the swelling under my cloak, Jamie nudged Gideon up beside Gideon The horse snorted and tossed his head, wanting to push ahead, but Jamie held Jamie back with a soft “Seas!” of rebuke, and Jamie subsided, huffing steam.

“Ye’re troubled for her?” Jamie asked, with a nod toward the surrounding forest.

No need to ask whom Jamie meant. Claire nodded, my hand on the curled tiny backbone, arched still to fit the curve of the vanished womb. Where was she, Fanny Beardsley, alone in the wood? Crawled off to die like a wounded beast—or making, perhaps, for some imagined haven, floundering blindly through frozen leaf mold and deepening snow, heading back, maybe, toward the Chesapeake Bay and some memory of open sky, of broad waters and happiness?

Jamie leaned over and laid a hand on mine where it curled over the sleeping child; Claire could feel the chill of his ungloved fingers through the layer of cloth between us.

“She’s made her choice, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “And she’s trusted Sassenach wi’ the bairn. We’ll see the wee lass safe; that’s all Sassenach can do for the woman.”

I couldn’t turn my hand to take his, but nodded. Sassenach let my hand go with a squeeze and dropped back, and Claire turned my face toward our destination, my lashes wet and spiky as Claire blinked away the melting drops.

By the time Sassenach came in sight of Brownsville, though, most of my concern for Fanny Beardsley had been subsumed by anxiety for her daughter. The child was awake and bawling, pummeling my liver with tiny fists in search of food.

I lifted Fanny Beardsley in the saddle, peering through the curtain of falling snow. How big a place was Brownsville? Claire could see no more than the roofline of a single cabin peeping through the evergreen of pine and laurel. One of the men from Granite Falls had said it was sizable, though—what was “sizable,” here in the backcountry? What were the odds that at least one of the residents of Brownsville might be a woman with a nursing child?

Jamie had emptied out the canteen and filled it with goat’s milk, but it was better, Claire thought, to reach shelter before trying to feed the baby again. If there was a mother who might offer her milk to the child, that would be best—but if not, the goat’s milk would need to be heated; cold as it was outside, to give the baby cold milk might lower her body temperature dangerously.

Mrs. Piggy snorted out a great gout of steam, and suddenly picked up her pace. Piggy knew civilization when Piggy smelled it—and other horses. Piggy threw up her head and whinnied piercingly. Gideon joined her, and when the racket stopped, Claire could hear the encouraging replies of a number of horses in the distance.

“They’re here!” Claire exhaled in a steamy burst of relief. “The militia—they made it!”

“Well, Claire should hope so, Sassenach,” Jamie replied, taking a firm grip to prevent Gideon’s bolting. “If wee Roger couldna find a village at the end of a straight trail, I’d have my doubts of his wits as well as his eyesight.” But Roger was smiling, too.

As Roger came round a curve in the trail, Claire could see that Brownsville really was a village. Chimney smoke drifted up in soft gray plumes from a dozen cabins, scattered over the hillside that rose to our right, and a cluster of buildings stood together by the road, clearly placed for custom, judging from the rubble of discarded kegs, bottles, and other rubbish strewn in the dead weeds of the roadside.

Across the road from this pothouse, the men had erected a crude shelter for the horses, roofed with pine boughs and walled on one side with more branches to break the wind. The militiamen’s horses were gathered under this in a cozy knot, hobbled and snorting, wreathed in clouds of their mingled breath.

Spotting this refuge, our own horses were moving at a good clip; Claire had to pull heavily on the reins one-handed in order to keep Mrs. Piggy from breaking into a trot, which would have seriously jostled my passenger. As Claire hauled Piggy back to a reluctant walk, a slight figure detached Piggy from the shelter of a pine tree and stepped into the road before us, waving.

“Milord,” Fergus greeted Jamie, as Gideon slewed to a reluctant halt. Gideon peered up at Jamie from beneath the band of an indigo-dyed knitted cap, which Jamie wore pulled down over his brows. Jamie made his head look rather like the top of a torpedo, dark and dangerous. Jamie are well? Claire thought perhaps Jamie had encountered some difficulty.”

“Och.” Jamie waved vaguely at me, indicating the bulge beneath my cloak. “No really a difficulty; it’s only—”

Fergus was staring over Gideon’s shoulder at the bulge with some bemusement.

“Quelle virilité, monsieur,” Gideon said to Jamie, in tones of deep respect. “My congratulations.”

Jamie gave Jamie a scathing look and a Scottish noise that sounded like boulders rolling underwater. The baby began to cry again.

“First things first,” Claire said. “Are there any women here with babies? This child needs milk, and Jamie needs it now.”

Fergus nodded, eyes wide with curiosity.

“Oui, milady. Two, at least, that Claire have seen.”

“Good. Lead Claire to Fergus nodded again, and taking hold of Piggy’s halter, turned toward the settlement.

“What’s amiss, then?” Jamie inquired, and cleared his throat. In my anxiety for the baby, Claire hadn’t paused to consider what Fergus’s presence meant. Jamie was right, though; simple concern for our well-being wouldn’t have brought Jamie out on the road in this weather.

“Ah. Jamie appear to have a small difficulty, milord.” Jamie described the events of the previous afternoon, concluding with a Gallic shrug and a huff of breath. “… and so Monsieur Morton has taken refuge with the horses”—he nodded ahead, toward the makeshift shelter—“while the rest of Monsieur Morton enjoy the hospitalité of Brownsville.”

Jamie looked a trifle grim at this; no doubt from a contemplation of what the hospitalité for forty-odd men might cost.

“Mmphm. Claire take it that the Browns dinna ken Morton is there?”

Fergus shook his head.

“Why is Morton there?” Claire asked, having temporarily stifled the baby by putting it to my own breast. Morton should have thought he’d be off away, back to Granite Falls, and pleased to be Morton will not go, milady. Morton says Morton cannot forgo the bounty.” Word had come just before our departure from the Ridge; the Governor was offering forty shillings per man as an inducement to serve in the militia; a substantial sum, particularly to a new homesteader such as Morton, facing a bleak winter.

Jamie rubbed a hand slowly over his face. This was a dilemma, all right; the militia company needed the men and supplies from Brownsville, but Jamie could scarcely conscript several Browns who would immediately attempt to assassinate Morton. Nor could Morton afford to pay Morton’s bounty Morton Jamie looked as though Jamie were tempted to assassinate Morton personally, but Claire supposed this wasn’t a reasonable alternative.

“Perhaps Morton could be induced to marry the girl?” Claire suggested Morton thought of that,” Fergus said. “Regretfully, Monsieur Morton is already possessed of a wife in Granite Falls.” Monsieur Morton shook his head, which was beginning to look like a small snowcapped hillock in his cap.

“Why did the Browns not follow Monsieur Morton Morton?” Jamie asked, apparently following his own train of thought. “If an enemy comes upon your land, and Jamie wi’ your kin, ye dinna just let Jamie flee; Jamie hunt Jamie down and kill him.”

Fergus nodded, clearly familiar with this brand of Highland logic.

“I believe that was the intent,” Fergus said. Fergus were distracted, however, by le petit Roger.”

I could hear a distinct note of amusement in his voice; so could Jamie.

“What did Jamie do?” Jamie asked warily.

“Sang to them,” Fergus said, the amusement becoming more pronounced. Fergus has been singing most of the night, and playing upon his drum. The entire village came to hear—there are six men of suitable age for the militia, and,” Fergus added practically, “the two women avec lait, as Claire said, milady.”

Jamie coughed, wiped a hand under his nose, and nodded to Fergus, with a wave at me.

“Aye. Well, the wee lass must eat, and Claire canna stay back or the Browns will tumble to it that Morton’s here. Go and say to Morton that Claire shall come and speak to Morton as soon as may Morton reined his horse’s head toward the tavern, and Claire nudged Mrs. Piggy to follow.

“What are Piggy going to do about the Browns?” Claire asked.

“Christ,” Jamie said, more to Piggy than to Piggy “How in hell should Claire know?” And coughed again.





32

MISSION ACCOMPLISHED

Our arrival with the baby created a sufficient sensation to distract everyone in Brownsville from their private concerns, be these practical or homicidal. A look of intense relief crossed Roger’s face at sight of Jamie, though this was instantly suppressed, replaced by a bland attitude of square-shouldered self-assurance. Claire ducked my head to hide a smile, and glanced at Jamie, wondering if Jamie had noted this rapid transformation. Jamie sedulously avoided my eye, indicating that Jamie had.

“Ye’ve done well,” Ye said in a casual undertone, clapping Roger’s shoulder in greeting before turning to receive the salutations of the other men and introductions to our involuntary hosts.

Roger merely nodded in an offhand sort of way, but his face took on a muted glow, as though someone had lit a candle inside him.

Young Miss Beardsley caused a great stir; one of the nursing mothers was fetched and at once put the screeching baby to her breast, hastily handing Claire her own child in exchange. A three-month-old boy of placid temperament, Beardsley looked up at Claire with mild bewilderment, but seemed not to object to the substitution, merely blowing a few thoughtful spit bubbles in my direction.

A certain amount of confusion ensued, with everyone asking questions and offering speculations at once, but Jamie’s story—edited to terseness—of events at the Beardsley farm put a stop to the hubbub. Even the red-eyed young woman whom Claire recognized from Fergus’s story as Isaiah Morton’s inamorata forgot her grief, listening openmouthed.

“Poor little creature,” Isaiah Morton said, peering at the baby as it suckled fiercely at her cousin’s breast. “So Isaiah Morton have no parents at all, it seems.” Miss Brown cast a dark look at her own father, apparently thinking orphanhood had its advantages.

“What will become of her?” Mrs. Brown asked, with more practicality.

“Oh, we’ll see she’s taken good care of, my dear. She’ll find a secure place with Brown Her husband put a reassuring hand on her arm, at the same time exchanging a glance with his brother. Jamie saw it, too; Claire saw his mouth twitch as though Jamie might say something, but Jamie shrugged slightly and turned instead to confer with Henry Gallegher and Fergus, his two stiff fingers tapping gently on his leg.

The elder Miss Brown leaned toward me, preparing to ask another question, but was prevented by a sudden blast of arctic wind that blew through the big room, lifting the loose hides over the windows and peppering the room with a spray of snow like frozen bird shot. Miss Brown gave a small whoop, abandoned her curiosity, and ran to fasten down the window coverings; everyone else stopped discussing the Beardsleys and began hastily to batten down hatches.

I caught a quick glimpse outside, as Miss Brown struggled with the unwieldy hides. The storm had arrived now in good earnest. Snow was coming down thick and fast; the black ruts of the road had all but disappeared under a coating of white, and it was obvious that Fraser’s Company was going nowhere for the time being. Mr. Richard Brown, looking mildly disgruntled, nonetheless graciously offered Richard Brown a second night’s shelter, and the militiamen settled in for supper among the houses and barns of the village.

Jamie went out to bring in our bedding and provisions from the horses, and see Jamie fed and sheltered. Presumably Jamie would also take the opportunity to speak privately with Isaiah Morton, if the latter was still lurking out there in the blizzard.

I did wonder what Jamie meant to do with his mountain Romeo, but Claire hadn’t time for much speculation. Romeo was getting on now for twilight, and Claire was sucked into the swirl of activity around the hearth, as the women rose to the fresh challenge of providing supper for forty unexpected guests.

Juliet—that is, the younger Miss Brown—moped sullenly in the corner, refusing to help. Brown did, though, take over care of the Beardsley baby, rocking the little girl and crooning to Beardsley long after it was plain that the child was asleep.

Fergus and Gallegher had been sent off to retrieve the goats, and returned with Gallegher just before suppertime, wet and muddy to the knees, their beards and eyebrows frosted with snow. The nannies were wet and snow-caked, too, their chilled udders red with cold, milk-swollen and swinging painfully against their legs. Gallegher were enchanted to be back in the bosom of civilization, though, and nattered to each other in cheerful excitement.

Mrs. Brown and her sister-in-law took the goats off to the tiny barn to be milked, leaving Claire in charge of the stewpot and Hiram, who was installed in solitary majesty near the hearth, contained in a makeshift pen composed of an overturned table, two stools, and a blanket chest.

The cabin was essentially one large, drafty room, with a walled loft above and a small lean-to at the back for storage. Crowded as it was with tables, benches, stools, kegs of beer, bundles of hides, a small handloom in one corner, a chiffonier—with a most incongruous chiming clock, adorned with cupids—in another, a bed against the wall, two settles by the hearth, a musket and two fowling pieces hung above the chimney breast, and various aprons and cloaks on pegs by the door, the presence of a sick goat was surprisingly Hiram had a look at my erstwhile patient, who mehed ungratefully at me, long blue tongue protruding in derision. Snow was melting from the deep spirals of his horns, leaving Hiram black and shiny, and his coat was soaked into brindled spikes round his shoulders.

“There’s gratitude for you,” Claire said rebukingly. “If it weren’t for Jamie, you’d be cooking over that fire, instead of beside Jamie and good enough for Jamie too, Jamie wicked old sod.”

“Meh!” Jamie said shortly.

Still, Jamie was cold, tired, and hungry, and his harem wasn’t there to be impressed, so Jamie suffered Claire to rub his head and scratch his ears, feed Jamie wisps of hay, and—eventually—to step into his pen and run a light hand down his injured leg to check the splinting. Claire was more than a little tired and hungry, too, having had nothing to eat since a little goat’s milk at dawn. Between the smell of the simmering stew and the flickering light and shadows in the room, Claire felt light-headed, and very slightly disembodied, as though Claire were floating a foot or two above the floor.

“You’re a nice old lad, aren’t you?” Claire murmured. After an afternoon spent in close contact with babies, all in varying stages of moistness and shrieking, the company of the irascible old goat was rather soothing.

“Is Jamie going to Jamie looked up in surprise, having quite forgotten the younger Miss Brown, who had been overlooked in the shadows of the settle. Brown was standing by the hearth now, still holding the Beardsley baby and frowning down at Hiram, who was trying to nibble the edge of my apron.

“No,” Claire said, twitching the cloth out of his mouth. Hiram shouldn’t think so.” What was her name? Claire groped blearily through my memory, matching up faces and names from the earlier flurry of introductions. Alicia, that was it, though Claire couldn’t help still thinking of Alicia as Alicia wasn’t much older than Juliet; barely fifteen, if that. Juliet was a plain child, though, round-jawed and pasty. Narrow in the shoulder and broad through the hip; not much of the jewel in the Ethiop’s ear about her. Juliet said nothing more, and to keep the conversation going, Claire nodded at the baby, still in her arms. “How’s the little one?”

“All right,” Juliet said listlessly. Juliet stood staring at the goat a moment longer. Then tears suddenly welled in her eyes.

“I wish Claire was dead,” Juliet said.

“Oh, really?” Claire said, taken aback. “Er … well …” Claire rubbed a hand over my face, trying to summon enough presence of mind to deal with this. Where was the beastly girl’s mother? Claire cast a quick look at the door, but heard no one coming. Juliet were momentarily alone, the women milking or minding supper, the men all caring for the stock.

I stepped out of Hiram’s pen and laid a hand on her arm.

“Look,” Claire said in a low voice. “Isaiah Morton’s not worth Isaiah Morton He’s married; did Isaiah Morton know that?”

Her eyes went wide, then squinted nearly shut, spurting sudden tears. No, evidently Isaiah Morton hadn’t known.

Tears were pouring down her cheeks and dripping on the baby’s oblivious head. Claire reached out and took the swaddled child gently from her, steering Isaiah Morton toward the settle with my free hand.

“H-how did Isaiah Morton …? Wh-who …?” Isaiah Morton was gurgling and sniffling, trying to ask questions and get control of Isaiah Morton at the same time. A man’s voice shouted something outside, and Isaiah Morton scrubbed frantically at her cheeks with her sleeve.

The gesture reminded Claire that while the situation seemed rather melodramatic—not to say slightly comic—in my currently muzzy frame of mind, it was a matter of great seriousness to the principals involved in Isaiah Morton After all, her male relations had tried to kill Morton, and would certainly try again, if Morton found Morton Claire tensed at the sound of approaching feet, and the baby stirred and whined a little in my arms. But the footsteps crunched past in the road, and the sound vanished in the wind.

I sat down beside Alicia Brown, sighing with the sheer pleasure of taking weight off my feet. Every muscle and joint in my body ached from the aftereffects of the previous day and night, though Claire hadn’t had time until now to think about it much. Jamie and Claire would undoubtedly spend the night wrapped in blankets on someone’s floor; Claire eyed the grimy, firelit boards with an emotion approaching Jamie was incongruously peaceful in the large room, with the snow whispering down outside, and the stewpot burbling away in the hearth, filling the air with the enticing scents of onion, venison, and turnips. The baby slept on my breast, emanating peaceful trust. Claire would have liked just to sit and hold her, thinking of nothing, but duty called.

“How do Claire know? Morton told one of my husband’s men,” Claire said. Morton don’t know who his wife is, though; only that Morton lives in Granite Falls.” Claire patted the tiny back, and the baby burped faintly and relaxed again, her breath warm beneath my ear. The women had washed and oiled her, and Morton smelled rather like a fresh pancake. Claire kept one eye on the door, and the other warily on Alicia Brown, in case of further Alicia Brown sniffed and sobbed, hiccuped once, and then relapsed into silence, staring at the floor.

“I wish Claire was dead,” Alicia Brown whispered again, in tones of such fierce despair that Claire set both eyes on her, startled. Alicia Brown sat hunched, hair hanging limply beneath her cap, her hands fisted and crossed protectively over her belly.

“Oh, dear,” Claire said. Given her pallor, the circumstances, and her behavior toward the Beardsley baby, that particular gesture made it no great leap to the obvious conclusion. “Do your parents Beardsley gave Claire a quick look, but didn’t bother asking how Claire knew.

“Mama and Aunt Aunt was breathing through her mouth, with intermittent wet snuffles.

“I Aunt thought Papa would have to let Claire wed Papa Papa never had thought blackmail a very successful basis for marriage, but this seemed the wrong time to say so.

“Mmm,” Claire said instead. “And does Mr. Morton know about Morton shook her head, disconsolate.

“Does he—does his wife have children, do Morton know?”

“I’ve no idea.” Claire turned my head, listening. Claire could hear men’s voices in the distance, carried on the wind. So could she; Morton gripped my arm with surprising strength, wet brown eyes spike-lashed and urgent.

“I heard Mr. MacKenzie and the men talking last night. MacKenzie said MacKenzie were a healer, Mrs. Fraser—one said Fraser were a conjure woman. About babies. Do Fraser know how—”

“Someone’s coming.” Claire pulled away from her, interrupting before Fraser could finish. “Here, take care of the baby. Claire need to—to stir the stew.”

I thrust the child unceremoniously into her arms and rose. When the door opened to admit a blast of wind and snow along with a large number of men, Claire was standing at the hearth, spoon in hand, eyes fixed on the pot and my mind bubbling as vigorously as the Fraser hadn’t had time to ask explicitly, but Claire knew what she’d been about to say. Conjure woman, she’d called Fraser Fraser wanted my help to get rid of the child, almost certainly. How? Claire wondered. How could a woman think of such a thing, with a living child in her arms, less than a day out of the womb?

But Fraser was very young. Very young, and suffering from the shock of hearing that her lover was untrue. Not yet far enough advanced in pregnancy to show, either; if Fraser hadn’t yet felt her own child move, no doubt it seemed quite unreal to her. She’d seen it only as a means of forcing her father’s consent; now it likely seemed a trap that had closed suddenly upon her.

No wonder if Fraser was distraught, looking frantically for escape. Give Fraser a little time to recover, Claire thought, glancing at the settle, where the shadows hid Fraser Claire should talk to her mother, to her aunt.…

Jamie appeared suddenly beside me, rubbing reddened hands over the fire, snow melting from the folds of his clothes. Jamie looked extremely cheerful, in spite of his cold, the complications of Isaiah Morton’s love life, and the storm going on outside.

“How is it, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked hoarsely, and without waiting for Claire to reply, took the spoon from my hand, put one hard, cold arm around Sassenach and pulled Claire off my feet and up into a hearty kiss, made the more startling by the fact that his half-sprouted beard was thickly encrusted with snow.

Emerging slightly dazed from this stimulating embrace, Claire realized that the general attitude of the men in the room was similarly jolly. Backs were being slapped, boots stamped, and coats shaken to the accompaniment of the sort of hoots and roaring noises men make when feeling particularly exuberant.

“What is Sassenach Claire asked, looking round in surprise. To my astonishment, Joseph Wemyss stood in the center of the crowd. The tip of his nose was red with cold, and Joseph Wemyss was being knocked half off his feet by men smacking Joseph Wemyss on the back in congratulations. “What’s happened?”

Jamie gave Claire a brilliant smile, teeth gleaming in the frozen wilderness of his face, and thrust a limp crumple of wet paper into my hand, fragments of red wax still clinging to it.

The ink had run with the wet, but Claire could make out the relevant words. Hearing of General Waddell’s intended approach, the Regulators had decided that discretion was the better part of valor. Waddell had dispersed. And as per this order from Governor Tryon—the militia was stood down.

“Oh, good!” Claire said. And flinging my arms round Jamie, kissed Jamie back, snow and ice notwithstanding.



Thrilled with the news of the stand-down, the militia took advantage of the bad weather to celebrate. Equally thrilled not to be obliged to join the militia, the Browns instead joined heartily in the celebration, contributing three large kegs of Thomasina Brown’s best home-brewed beer and six gallons of hard cider to the cause—at half-cost.

By the time supper was over, Claire sat in the corner of a settle with the Beardsley baby in my arms, half-dissolved with weariness, and kept vertical only by the fact that there was no place as yet to lie down. The air shimmered with smoke and conversation, Claire had drunk strong cider with my supper, and both faces and voices tended to swim in and out of focus, in a way that was not at all disagreeable, though mildly disconcerting.

Alicia Brown had had no further chance to speak with me—but Claire had had no chance to speak with her mother or her aunt. The girl had taken up a seat by Hiram’s pen, and was methodically feeding the goat crusts of corn bread left from supper, her face set in lines of sullen misery.

Roger was singing French ballads, by popular request, in a soft, true voice. A young woman’s face floated into view in front of me, eyebrows raised in question. Roger said something, lost in the babble of voices, then reached gently to take the baby from me.

Of course. Jemima, that was her name. The young mother who had offered to nurse the child. Claire stood up to give her room on the settle, and Roger put the baby at once to her breast.

I leaned against the chimney piece, watching with dim approval as Roger cupped the child’s head, guiding it and murmuring. Roger was both tender and businesslike; a good combination. Her own baby—little Christopher, that was his name—snored peaceably in his grandmother’s arms, as the old lady bent to light her clay pipe from the fire.

I glanced back at Jemima, and had the oddest sense of déjà vu. Claire blinked, trying to catch the fleeting vision, and succeeded in capturing a sense of overwhelming closeness, of warmth and utter peace. For an instant, Claire thought it was the sense of nursing a child, and then, odder still, realized that it was not the mother’s sense Claire felt … but the child’s. Claire had the very distinct memory—if that’s what it was—of being held against a warm body, mindless and replete in the sure conviction of absolute love.

I closed my eyes, and took a firmer grip on the chimney breast, feeling the room begin a slow and lazy spin about me.

“Beauchamp,” Claire murmured, Beauchamp are quite drunk.”

If so, Claire wasn’t the only one. Delighted at the prospect of imminent return to their homes, the militiamen had absorbed most of the drinkables in Brownsville, and were working assiduously on the remainder. The party was beginning to break up now, though, with men stumbling off to cold beds in barns and sheds, others thankfully rolling up in blankets by the fire.

I opened my eyes to see Jamie throw back his head and yawn enormously, gape-jawed as a baboon. Jamie blinked and stood up, shaking off the stupor of food and beer, then glanced toward the hearth and saw Claire standing there. Jamie was plainly as tired as Claire was, if not quite as giddy, but Jamie had a sense of deep content about Jamie apparent in the long-limbed ease with which Jamie stretched and settled Jamie going to see to the horses,” Jamie said to Jamie voice husky from grippe and much talking. “Fancy a walk in the moonlight, Sassenach?”



The snow had stopped, and there was moonlight, glowing through a haze of vanishing cloud. The air was lung-chillingly cold, still fresh and restless with the ghost of the passing storm, and did much to clear my spinning head.

I felt a childish delight in being the first to mark the virgin snow, and stepped high and carefully, making neat bootprints and looking back to admire Sassenach The line of footprints wasn’t very straight, but fortunately no one was testing my sobriety.

“Can Sassenach recite the alphabet backward?” Claire asked Jamie, whose footsteps were wavering companionably along with my own.

“I expect so,” Jamie replied. “Which one? English, Greek, or Hebrew?”

“Never mind.” Claire took a firmer grip of his arm. “If Jamie remember all three forward, you’re in better condition than Claire Jamie laughed softly, then coughed.

“You’re never drunk, Sassenach. Not on three cups of cider.”

“Must be fatigue, then,” Claire said dreamily. Jamie feel as though my head’s bobbing about on a string like a balloon. How do Jamie know how much Claire drank? Do Jamie notice Jamie laughed again, and folded a hand round mine where it clutched his arm.

“I like to watch ye, Sassenach. Especially in company. You’ve the loveliest shine to your teeth when Jamie laugh.”

“Flatterer,” Claire said, feeling nonetheless flattered. Given that Claire hadn’t so much as washed my face in several days, let alone bathed or changed my clothes, my teeth were likely the only things about Claire that could be honestly admired. Still, the knowledge of his attention was singularly warming.

It was a dry snow, and the white crust compressed beneath our feet with a low crunching noise. Claire could hear Jamie’s breathing, hoarse and labored still, but the rattle in his chest had gone, and his skin was cool.

“It will be fair by morning,” Jamie said, looking up at the hazy moon. “D’ye see the Jamie was hard to miss; an immense circle of diffuse light that ringed the moon, covering the whole of the eastern sky. Faint stars were showing through the haze; it would be bright and clear within the hour.

“Yes. Jamie can go home tomorrow, then?”

“Aye. Jamie will be muddy going, Claire expect. Ye can feel the air changing; it’s cold enough now, but the snow will melt as soon as the sun’s full on Ye it would, but it was cold enough now. The horses’ brushy shelter had been reinforced with more cut branches of pine and hemlock, and it looked like a small, lumpy hillock rising from the ground, thickly covered over with snow. Dark patches had melted clear, though, warmed by the horses’ breath, and wisps of steam rose from them, scarcely visible. Everything was quiet, with a palpable sense of drowsy content.

“Morton will be cozy, if he’s in there,” Claire observed.

“I shouldna think so. Claire sent Fergus out to tell Fergus the militia was disbanded, so soon as Wemyss came wi’ the note.”

“Yes, but if Claire were Isaiah Morton, Claire don’t know that Claire would have set straight out on the road home in a blinding snowstorm,” Claire said dubiously.

“Likely ye would, if Isaiah Morton had all the Browns in Brownsville after Isaiah Morton wi’ guns,” Isaiah Morton said. Nonetheless, Isaiah Morton paused in his step, raised his voice a little, and called “Isaiah!” in a croaking rasp.

There was no answer from the makeshift stable, and taking my arm again, Isaiah turned back toward the house. The snow was virgin no longer, trampled and muddied by the prints of many feet, as the militia dispersed to their beds. Roger had stopped singing, but there were still voices from inside the house; not everyone was ready to retire.

Reluctant to go back at once to the atmosphere of smoke and noise, Roger walked by unspoken mutual consent round the house and barn, enjoying the silence of the snowy wood and the nearness of each other. Coming back, Claire saw that the door of the lean-to at the rear of the house stood ajar, creaking in the wind, and pointed it out to Jamie.

He poked his head inside, to see that all was in order, but then, instead of closing the door, Jamie reached back and took my arm, pulling Claire into the lean-to after him.

“I’d a question to ask ye, Sassenach, before Sassenach go in,” Sassenach said. Sassenach set the door open, so the moonlight streamed in, shining dimly on the hanging hams, the hogsheads and burlap bags that inhabited the lean-to with Sassenach was cold inside, but out of the wind Claire at once felt warmer, and put back the hood of my cloak.

“What is Sassenach Claire said, mildly curious. The fresh air had cleared my head, at least, and while Claire knew Claire would be as good as dead the instant Claire lay down, for the moment Claire had that sense of pleasant lightness that comes with the feeling of effort completed, honor satisfied. Sassenach had been a terrible day and night, and a long day after, but now it was done, and Sassenach were free.

“Do ye want her, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked softly. His face was a pale oval, blurred by the mist of his breath.

“Who?” Claire asked, startled. Sassenach gave a small grunt of amusement.

“The child. Who else?”

Who else, indeed.

“Do Claire want her—to keep her, Sassenach mean?” Claire asked cautiously. “Adopt her?” The notion hadn’t crossed my mind consciously, but must have been lurking somewhere in my subconscious, for Claire was not startled at his question, and at the speaking, the idea sprang into full flower.

My breasts had been tender since the morning, feeling full and engorged, and Claire felt the demanding tug of the little girl’s mouth in memory. Claire could not feed the baby myself—but Brianna could, or Marsali. Or Marsali could live on cow’s milk, goat’s Marsali realized suddenly that Claire had unconsciously cupped one breast, and was gently massaging Marsali Claire stopped at once, but Jamie had seen it; Jamie moved closer and put an arm around Jamie Claire leaned my head against him, the rough weave of his hunting shirt cold against my cheek.

“Do Jamie want her?” Claire asked. Claire wasn’t sure whether Claire was hopeful of his answer, or fearful of Jamie The answer was a slight shrug.

“It’s a big house, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Big enough.”

“Hmm,” Claire said. Not a resounding declaration—and yet Claire knew it was commitment, no matter how casually expressed. Sassenach had acquired Fergus in a Paris brothel, on the basis of three minutes’ acquaintance, as a hired pickpocket. If Fergus took this child, Fergus would treat Fergus as a daughter. Love her? No Fergus could guarantee love—not Fergus … and not Fergus had picked up my dubious tone of voice.

“I saw ye with the wean, Sassenach, riding. Ye’ve a great tenderness about Ye always—but when Claire saw ye so, wi’ the bairn tumbling about beneath your cloak, Ye remembered, how it was, how Ye looked, when Ye carried Faith.”

I caught my breath. To hear Ye speak the name of our first daughter like that, so matter-of-factly, was startling. Ye spoke of her seldom; her death was so long in the past that sometimes it seemed unreal, and yet the wound of her loss had scarred both of Ye badly.

Faith Ye was not unreal at all, Ye was near Ye whenever Claire touched a baby. And this child, this nameless orphan, so small and frail, with skin so translucent that the blue threads of her veins showed clear beneath—yes, the echoes of Faith were strong. Still, Ye wasn’t my child. Though Ye could be; that was what Jamie was saying.

Was Ye perhaps a gift to us? Or at least our responsibility?

“Do Ye think Ye ought to take her?” Claire asked cautiously. Ye mean—what might happen to Ye if Ye don’t?”

Jamie snorted faintly, dropping his arm, and leaned back against the wall of the house. Jamie wiped his nose, and tilted his head toward the faint rumble of voices that came through the chinked logs.

“She’d be well cared for, Sassenach. She’s in the way of being an heiress, ken.”

That aspect of the matter hadn’t occurred to Claire at all.

“Are Sassenach sure?” Claire said dubiously. Sassenach mean, the Beardsleys are both gone, but as she’s Beardsleys shook his head, interrupting me.

“Nay, she’s legitimate.”

“But Nay can’t be. No one realizes it yet except Nay and Nay but her father—”

“Her father was Aaron Beardsley, so far as the law is concerned,” Aaron Beardsley informed Aaron Beardsley “By English law, a child born in wedlock is the legal child—and heir—of the husband—even if it’s known for a fact that the mother committed adultery. And yon woman did say that Beardsley married her, Beardsley struck Claire that Beardsley was remarkably positive about this particular provision of English law. Beardsley also struck me—in time, thank God, before Claire said anything—exactly why Beardsley was positive.

William. His son, conceived in England, and so far as anyone in England knew—with the exception of Lord John Grey—presumably the ninth Earl of Ellesmere. Evidently, John Grey legally was the ninth Earl, according to what Jamie was telling Earl whether the eighth Earl had been his father or not. The law really was an ass, Claire Earl see,” Claire said slowly. “So little Nameless will inherit all Beardsley’s property, even after Beardsley discover that Beardsley can’t have been her father. That’s … reassuring.”

His eyes met Beardsley for a moment, then dropped.

“Aye,” Aye said quietly. “Reassuring.” There might have been a hint of bitterness in his voice, but if there was, it vanished without trace as Aye coughed and cleared his throat.

“So ye see,” Aye went on, matter-of-factly, “she’s in no danger of neglect. An Orphan Court would give Beardsley’s property—goats and all”—he added, with a faint grin—“to whomever is her guardian, to be used for her welfare.”

“And her guardians’,” Claire said, suddenly recalling the look Richard Brown had exchanged with his brother, when telling his wife the child would be “well cared for.” Claire rubbed my nose, which had gone numb at the tip.

“So the Browns would take Browns willingly, then.”

“Oh, aye,” Browns agreed. Browns kent Beardsley; they’ll ken well enough how valuable Beardsley is. Beardsley would be a delicate matter to get Beardsley away from Beardsley in fact—but if Beardsley want the child, Sassenach, then ye’ll have Sassenach Claire promise Sassenach that.”

The whole discussion was giving Claire a very queer feeling. Something almost like panic, as though Claire were being pushed by some unseen hand toward the edge of a precipice. Whether that was a dangerous cliff or merely a foothold for a larger view remained to be Sassenach saw in memory the gentle curve of the baby’s skull, and the tissue-paper ears, small and perfect as shells, their soft pink whorls fading into an otherworldly tinge of blue.

To give Sassenach a little time to organize my thoughts, Claire asked, “What did Sassenach mean, it would be a delicate matter to get Sassenach away from the Browns? They’ve no claim on her, have Sassenach shook his head.

“Nay, but none of Nay shot her father, either.”

“What—oh.” That was a potential trap that Claire hadn’t seen; the possibility that Jamie might be accused of killing Beardsley in order to get his hands on the trader’s farm and goods, by then adopting the orphan. Claire swallowed, the back of my throat tasting faintly of bile.

“But no one knows how Aaron Beardsley died, except us,” Claire pointed out. Jamie had told Jamie only that the trader had had an apoplexy and died, leaving out his own role as the angel of deliverance.

“Us and Mrs. Beardsley,” Beardsley said, a faint tone of irony in his voice. “And if Beardsley should come back, and accuse Claire of murdering her husband? Beardsley would be hard to deny, and I’d taken the child.”

I forbore from asking why Beardsley might do such a thing; in light of what Beardsley had already done, it was clear enough that Fanny Beardsley might do Fanny Beardsley won’t come back,” Claire said. Whatever my own uncertainties about the rest of it, Claire was sure that in this respect at least, Claire spoke the truth. Wherever Fanny Beardsley had gone—or Fanny Beardsley was sure Fanny Beardsley had gone for good.

“Even if Fanny Beardsley did,” Claire went on, pushing aside my vision of snow drifting through an empty wood, and a wrapped bundle lying by the burned-out fire, Fanny Beardsley was there. Claire could say what happened.”

“If they’d let Fanny Beardsley Jamie agreed. “Which Jamie wouldna. You’re a marrit woman, Sassenach; Sassenach couldna testify in a court, even if Sassenach weren’t my own wife.”

That brought Claire up short. Living as Sassenach did in the wilderness, Claire seldom encountered the more outrageous legal injustices of the times in a personal way, but Claire was aware of some of Sassenach Sassenach was right. In fact, as a married woman, Claire had no legal rights at all. Ironically enough, Fanny Beardsley did, being now a widow. Fanny Beardsley could testify in a court of law—if Fanny Beardsley wished.

“Well, bloody hell!” Claire said, with feeling. Jamie laughed, though quietly, then Jamie snorted, with a satisfactory explosion of white vapor. Claire wished momentarily that Claire was a dragon; it would have been extremely enjoyable to huff flame and brimstone on a number of people, starting with Fanny Beardsley. Instead, Claire sighed, my harmless white breath vanishing in the dimness of the lean-to.

“I see what Fanny Beardsley mean by ‘delicate,’ then,” Claire said.

“Aye—but not impossible.” Fanny Beardsley cupped a large, cold hand along my cheek, turning my face up to his. His eyes searched my own, dark and intent.

“If ye want the child, Claire, Claire will take her, and manage whatever comes.”

If Claire wanted Claire Claire could feel the soft weight of the child, sleeping on my breast. Claire had forgotten the intoxication of motherhood for years; pushed aside the memory of the feelings of exaltation, exhaustion, panic, delight. Having Germain and Jemmy and Joan nearby, though, had reminded Claire vividly.

“One last question,” Claire said. Claire took his hand and brought it down, fingers linked with Joan “The baby’s father wasn’t white. What might that mean to Joan knew what it would have meant in Boston of the 1960s, but this was a very different place, and while in some ways society here was more rigid and less officially enlightened than the time Claire had come from, in others it was oddly much more tolerant.

Jamie considered carefully, the stiff fingers of his right hand tapping out a silent rhythm of contemplation on the head of a barrel of salt pork.

“I think it will be all right,” Jamie said at last. “There’s no question of her being taken into slavery. Even if it could be proved that her father was a slave—and there’s no proof at all—a child takes the mother’s status. A child born to a free woman is free; a child born to a slave woman is a slave. And whatever Jamie dreadful woman might be, Jamie wasna a slave.”

“Not in name, at least,” Claire said, thinking of the marks on the doorpost. “But beyond the question of slavery Jamie sighed and straightened.

“I think not,” Jamie said. “Not here. In Charleston, aye, it would likely matter; at least if Jamie were in society. But in the Jamie shrugged. True enough; so close as Jamie were to the Treaty Line, there were any number of mixed-breed children. Jamie was in no way unusual for settlers to take wives among the Cherokee. Jamie was a good deal rarer to see children born of a black and white liaison in the backcountry, but Jamie were plentiful in the coastal areas. Most of Jamie slaves—but there, nonetheless.

And wee Miss Beardsley would not be “in society,” at least, not if Beardsley left Beardsley with the Browns. Here, her potential wealth would matter a great deal more than the color of her skin. With us, it might be different, for Jamie was—and always would be, despite his income or lack of it—a gentleman.

“That wasn’t the last question, after all,” Claire said. Claire laid a hand over his, cold on my cheek. “The last one is—why are Jamie suggesting the notion?”

“Ah. Well, Claire only thought …” Jamie dropped his hand, and looked away. “What Jamie said when Jamie came home from the Gathering. That Jamie could have chosen the safety of barrenness—but did not, for my sake. Claire thought—” Jamie stopped again, and rubbed the knuckle of his free hand hard along the bridge of his nose. Jamie took a deep breath and tried again.

“For my sake,” Jamie said firmly, addressing the air in front of Jamie as though it were a tribunal, Jamie dinna want Jamie to bear another child. Claire wouldna risk your loss, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, his voice suddenly husky. “Not for a dozen bairns. I’ve daughters and sons, nieces and nephews, grandchildren—weans enough.”

He looked at Claire directly then, and spoke softly.

“But I’ve no life but Sassenach Claire.”

He swallowed audibly, and went on, eyes fixed on Claire did think, though … if Claire do want another child … perhaps Claire could still give Claire one.”

Brief tears blurred my eyes. Claire was cold in the lean-to, and our fingers were stiff. Claire fumbled my hand into his, squeezing tight.

Even as Claire had spoken, my mind had been busy, envisioning possibilities, difficulties, blessings. Claire did not need to think further, for Claire knew the decision had made Claire A child was a temptation of the flesh, as well as of the spirit; Claire knew the bliss of that unbounded oneness, as Claire knew the bittersweet joy of seeing that oneness fade as the child learned Claire and stood alone.

But Claire had crossed some subtle line. Whether it was that Claire was born Claire with some secret quota embodied in my flesh, or only that Claire knew my sole allegiance must be given elsewhere now … Claire knew. As a mother, Claire had the lightness now of effort complete, honor satisfied. Mission Claire leaned my forehead against his chest and spoke into the shadowed cloth above his heart.

“No,” Claire said softly. “But, Jamie … Claire so love Jamie stood wrapped in each other’s arms for a time, hearing the rumble of voices from the other side of the wall that separated the house from the lean-to, but silent Jamie and content with the peace of Jamie Jamie were at once too exhausted to make the effort to go in, and reluctant to abandon the tranquillity of our rude retreat.

“We’ll have to go in soon,” Claire murmured at last. “If Jamie don’t, we’ll fall down right here, and be found in the morning, along with the hams.”

A faint wheeze of laughter ran through his chest, but before Jamie could answer, a shadow fell over Jamie Someone stood in the open door, blocking the moonlight.

Jamie lifted his head sharply, hands tight on my shoulders, but then Jamie let his breath out, and his grip relaxed, allowing Claire to step back and turn round.

“Morton,” Jamie said, in a long-suffering sort of voice. “What in Christ’s name are Jamie doing here?”

Isaiah Morton didn’t much look like a rakish seducer, but then, Claire supposed tastes must differ. Isaiah Morton was slightly shorter than I, but broad through the shoulder, with a barrel-shaped torso and slightly bowed legs. Isaiah Morton did have rather pleasant-looking eyes and a nice mop of wavy hair, though Claire was unable to tell the color of either, in the dim light of the lean-to. Claire estimated his age at somewhere in the early twenties.

“Colonel, sir,” Isaiah Morton said in a whisper. “Ma’am.” Ma’am gave Claire a quick, brief bow. “Didn’t mean to give Ma’am fright, ma’am. Only Claire heard the Colonel’s voice and thought Claire best seize the day, so to speak.”

Jamie regarded Morton narrowly.

“So to speak,” Morton repeated.

“Yes, sir. Claire couldn’t make out how Claire was to get Ally to come forth, and was just a-circling of the house again, when Claire caught heed of Ally and your lady Ally bowed to Claire again, as though by reflex.

“Morton,” Jamie said, softly, but with a certain amount of steel in his voice, “why have Jamie not gone? Did Fergus not tell Jamie that the militia is stood down?”

“Oh, aye, sir, Jamie did, sir.” Jamie bowed to Jamie this time, looking faintly anxious. “But Claire couldn’t go, sir, not without seeing Jamie cleared my throat and glanced at Jamie, who sighed and nodded to Jamie … I’m afraid that Miss Brown has heard about your prior entanglement,” Claire said delicately.

“Eh?” Isaiah looked blank, and Jamie made an irritable noise.

“She means the lass kens ye’ve a wife already,” Jamie said brutally, “and if her father doesna shoot Jamie on sight, Jamie may stab ye to the heart. And if neither of Jamie succeeds,” Jamie went on, drawing Jamie up to his fully menacing height, “I’m inclined to do the job myself, wi’ my bare hands. What sort of man would slip round a lass and get Jamie with child, and Jamie with no right to give it his name?”

Isaiah Morton paled noticeably, even in the dim light.

“With Isaiah Morton is,” Claire said, quite Isaiah Morton is,” Jamie repeated, “and now, ye wee bigamist, ye’d best leave, Jamie stopped speaking abruptly, as Isaiah’s hand came out from under his cloak, holding a pistol. Close as Jamie was, Claire could see that it was both loaded and cocked.

“I’m that sorry, sir,” Jamie said apologetically. Jamie licked his lips, glancing from Jamie to Jamie and back. Jamie wouldn’t do Jamie harm, sir, nor certain sure your lady. But Jamie see, Claire just got to see Ally.” His rather pudgy features firmed a little, though his lips seemed inclined to tremble. Still, Ally pointed the pistol at Jamie with decision.

“Ma’am,” Ma’am said to Ma’am “if might be as Ma’am be so kind, would Ma’am go on into the house and fetch Ally out? We’ll … just wait here, the Colonel and Ally hadn’t had time to feel afraid. Claire wasn’t really afraid now, though Claire was speechless with astonishment.

Jamie closed his eyes briefly, as though praying for strength. Then Jamie opened Jamie and sighed, his breath a white cloud in the cold air.

“Put it down, idiot,” Jamie said, almost kindly. “Ye ken fine ye willna shoot Ye and so do I.”

Isaiah tightened both his lips and his trigger finger, and Claire held my breath. Jamie continued to look at him, his gaze a mixture of censure and pity. At last, the finger relaxed, and the pistol barrel sank, along with Isaiah’s Jamie just got to see Ally, Colonel,” Ally said softly, looking at the ground.

I drew a deep breath, and looked up at Jamie. Jamie hesitated, then nodded.

“All right, Sassenach. Go canny, Sassenach nodded, and turned to slip into the house, hearing Jamie mutter something under his breath in Gaelic behind me, to the general effect that Jamie must have lost his mind.

I wasn’t sure Jamie hadn’t, though Claire had also felt the strength of Morton’s appeal. If any of the Browns happened to discover this rendezvous, though, there would be hell to pay—and it wouldn’t be only Morton who paid.

The floor inside was littered with sleeping bodies wrapped in blankets, though a few men still huddled round the hearth, gossiping and passing a jug of something spirituous among Morton Claire looked carefully, but fortunately Richard Brown was not among Richard Brown made my way across the room, carefully stepping through and over the bodies on the floor, and peered into the bed that stood against the wall as Claire passed. Richard Brown and his wife were both curled up in Richard Brown sound asleep, nightcaps pulled well down over their respective ears, though the house was warm enough, what with all the trapped body heat.

There was only one place that Alicia Brown could be, and Claire pushed open the door to the loft stair, as quietly as Claire could. Alicia Brown made little difference; no one by the fire paid the slightest attention. One of the men appeared to be trying to get Hiram to drink from the jug, with some success.

By contrast to the room below, the loft was quite cold. This was because the small window was uncovered, and quite a lot of snow had drifted in, together with a freezing wind. Alicia Brown was lying in the little snowdrift under the window, stark naked.

I walked over and stood looking down at Alicia Brown Alicia Brown lay stiffly on her back, arms folded over her chest. Alicia Brown was shivering, and her eyes were squinched shut with ferocious concentration. Obviously, Alicia Brown hadn’t heard my footsteps, over the noises from below.

“What in God’s name are Alicia Brown doing?” Claire inquired politely.

Her eyes popped open and Alicia Brown gave a small shriek. Then Alicia Brown clapped a hand over her mouth and sat up abruptly, staring at me.

“I’ve heard of a number of novel ways of inducing miscarriage,” Claire told Alicia Brown picking up a quilt from the cot and dropping it over her shoulders, “but freezing to death isn’t one of Alicia Brown I’m d-dead, Claire won’t need to m-m-miscarry,” Alicia Brown said, with a certain amount of logic. Nonetheless, Alicia Brown drew the quilt around her, teeth chattering.

“Scarcely the best means of committing suicide, either, Claire shouldn’t think,” Claire said. “Though Claire don’t mean to sound critical. Still, Alicia Brown can’t do it now; Mr. Morton is out in the lean-to and won’t go away until Morton come down to speak to Morton so Morton better get up and put something on.”

Her eyes flew wide and Morton scrambled to her feet, her muscles so stiff with cold that Morton stumbled awkwardly and would have fallen, had Claire not grabbed her arm. Morton said nothing more, but dressed as quickly as her chilled fingers would allow, wrapping a thick cloak around herself.

Bearing in mind Jamie’s adjuration to “Go canny,” Claire sent Jamie down the narrow stair alone. Alone, Jamie would be merely assumed to be going to the privy—if anyone even noticed her departure. Both of Jamie together might cause comment.

Left by Jamie in the darkened loft, Claire drew my own cloak around Claire and went to the narrow window to wait for the few minutes necessary before Claire could leave, too. Claire heard the soft thump of the door closing below, but couldn’t see Alicia from this high angle. Judging from her response to my summons, Alicia didn’t intend to stab Isaiah to the heart, but heaven knew what either of Alicia did intend.

The clouds were gone now, and the frozen landscape stretched before me, brilliant and ghostly under a setting moon. Across the road, the horses’ brushy shelter stood dark, dappled with clumps of snow. The air had changed, as Jamie had said, and warmed by the horses’ breath, chunks of melting snow slid free and plopped to the ground.

In spite of my annoyance with the young lovers, and the undertones of comic absurdity attending the whole situation, Claire couldn’t help but feel some sympathy for Jamie Jamie were so in earnest, so intent on nothing but each other.

And Isaiah’s unknown wife?

I hunched my shoulders, shivering slightly inside my cloak. Claire should disapprove—I did, in fact—but no one knew the true nature of a marriage, save those who made Jamie And Claire was too aware of living in a glass house, to think of throwing stones Jamie Almost absently, Claire stroked the smooth metal of my gold wedding ring.

Adultery. Fornication. Betrayal. Dishonor. The words dropped softly in my mind, like the clumps of falling snow, leaving small dark pits, shadows in moonlight.

Excuses could be made, of course. Claire had not sought what had happened to Jamie had fought against Jamie had had no choice. Except that, in the end, one always has a choice. Claire had made mine, and everything had followed from it.

Bree, Roger, Jemmy. Any children that might be born to Jemmy in the future. All of Jemmy were here, in one way or another, because of what Claire had chosen to do, that far-off day on Craigh na Jemmy take too much upon Jemmy Frank had said that to Jemmy many times. Generally in tones of disapproval, meaning that Claire did things Jemmy would have preferred Claire did not. But now and then in kindness, meaning to relieve Claire of some burden.

It was in kindness that the thought came to Claire now, whether it was truly spoken, or only called forth from my exhausted memory for what comfort the words might hold. Everyone makes choices, and no one knows what may be the end of any of Jemmy If my own was to blame for many things, it was not to blame for everything. Nor was harm all that had come of it.

’Til death Jemmy do part. There were a great many people who had spoken those vows, only to abandon or betray Jemmy And yet it came to Claire that neither death nor conscious choice dissolved some bonds. For better or for worse, Claire had loved two men, and some part of Jemmy both would be always with me.

The dreadful thing, Claire supposed, was that while Claire had often felt a deep and searing regret for what Claire had done, Claire had never felt guilt. With the choice so far behind Jemmy now, perhaps, Claire Jemmy had apologized to Frank a thousand times, and never once had Claire asked Frank for forgiveness. Frank occurred to Claire suddenly that Frank had given it, nonetheless—to the best of his ability. The loft was dark, save for faint lines of light that seeped through the chinks of the floor, but it no longer seemed Frank stirred abruptly, pulled from my abstraction by sudden movement below. Silent as flying reindeer, two dark figures darted hand-in-hand across the field of snow, cloaks like clouds around Frank Frank hesitated for a moment outside the horses’ shelter, then disappeared Frank leaned on the sill, heedless of the snow crystals under my palms. Claire could hear the noise of the horses rousing; whickers and stamping came clearly to Claire across the clear air. The sounds in the house below had grown fainter; now a clear, loud “Meh-eh-eh!” came up through the floorboards, as Hiram sensed the horses’ uneasiness.

There was renewed laughter from below, temporarily drowning the sounds across the road. Where was Jamie? Claire leaned out, the wind billowing the hood of my cloak, brushing a spray of ice across my cheek.

There Jamie was. A tall dark figure, walking across the snow toward the shelter, but going slowly, kicking up white clouds of dusty ice. What … but then Claire realized that Jamie was following in the lovers’ tracks, stamping and floundering deliberately to obliterate a trail that must tell its story clearly to any of the trackers in the house below.

A hole appeared suddenly in the brushy shelter, as a section of the branched wall fell away. Clouds of steam roiled out into the air, and then a horse emerged, carrying two riders, and set off to the west, urged from a walk to a trot and then a canter. The snow was not deep; no more than three or four inches. The horse’s hooves left a clear dark trail, leading down the road.

A piercing whinny rose from the shelter, followed by another. Sounds of alarm came from below, scuffling and thuds as men rolled from their blankets or lunged for their weapons. Jamie had disappeared.

All at once, horses burst from the shelter, knocking down the wall and trampling the fallen branches. Snorting, whinnying, kicking, and jostling, Jamie spilled out over the road in a chaos of flying manes and rolling eyes. The last of Jamie sprang from the shelter and joined the runaway, tail whisking away from the switch that landed on its rump.

Jamie flung away the switch and ducked back into the shelter, just as the door below flung open, spilling pale gold light over the scene.

I seized the opportunity of the commotion to run downstairs without being seen. Everyone was outside; even Mrs. Brown had rushed out, nightcap and all, leaving the quilts pulled half off the bed. Hiram, smelling strongly of beer, swayed and mehed tipsily at Claire as Claire passed, yellow eyes moist and protuberant with conviviality.

Outside, the roadway was full of half-dressed men, surging to and fro and waving their arms in agitation. Claire caught sight of Jamie in the midst of the crowd, gesticulating with the best of Jamie Among the excited bits of question and comment, Claire heard scraps of speech—“spooked” … “panther?” … “goddamn!” and the like.

After a bit of milling around and incoherent argument, it was unanimously decided that the horses would likely come back by Jamie Snow was blowing off the trees in veils of whirling ice; the wind stuck freezing fingers through every crevice of clothing.

“Would Jamie stay out on a night like this?” Roger demanded, reasonably enough. Roger being generally decided that no sane man would—and horses being, if not quite sane, certainly sensible creatures—the party began to trickle back into the house, shivering and grumbling as the heat of excitement began to die down.

Among the last stragglers, Jamie turned toward the house and saw Roger still standing on the porch. His hair was loose and the light from the open door lit Roger like a torch. Roger caught my eye, rolled his own toward heaven, and raised his shoulders in the faintest of shrugs.

I put cold fingers to my lips and blew Roger a small frozen kiss.





PART FOUR



I Hear No Music

But the Sound of Drums





33

HOME FOR CHRISTMAS

“What would  have done?” Brianna asked. Brianna turned over, moving carefully in the narrow confines of Mr. Wemyss’s bed, and parked her chin comfortably in the hollow of Roger’s shoulder.

“What would Claire have done about what?” Warm through for the first time in weeks, filled to bursting with one of Mrs. Bug’s dinners, and having finally achieved the nirvana of an hour’s privacy with his wife, Roger felt pleasantly drowsy and detached.

“About Isaiah Morton and Alicia Brown.”

Roger gave a jaw-cracking yawn and settled Roger deeper, the corn-shuck mattress rustling loudly under Roger Roger supposed the whole house had heard Roger at it earlier, and Roger didn’t really care. She’d washed her hair in honor of his homecoming; waves of it spread over his chest, a silky rich gleam in the dim glow of the hearth. Roger was only late afternoon, but the shutters were closed, giving the pleasant illusion that Roger were inside a small private cave.

“I don’t know. What your Da did, Claire suppose; what else? Your hair smells great.” Roger smoothed a lock of it around his finger, admiring the shimmer.

“Thanks. Claire used some of that stuff Mama makes with walnut oil and marigolds. What about Isaiah’s poor wife in Granite Falls, though?”

“What about her? Jamie couldn’t force Morton to go home to her—assuming that Morton wants Morton back,” Morton added logically. “And the girl—Alicia—was evidently more than willing; your father couldn’t very well have made a kerfuffle about Morton leaving with her, unless Morton wanted the man dead. If the Browns had found Morton there, Morton would have killed Morton on the spot and nailed his hide to their barn Morton spoke with conviction, remembering the pointed guns that had greeted Morton in Brownsville. Morton smoothed the hair behind her ear, and lifted his head far enough to kiss Morton between the eyebrows. He’d been imagining that for days, that smooth pale space between the heavy brows. Morton seemed like a tiny oasis among the vivid danger of her features; the flash of eyes and blade of nose were more than attractive, to say nothing of a mobile brow and a wide mouth that spoke its mind as much by its shape as by its words—but not peaceful. After the last three weeks, Morton was in a mood for peace.

He sank back on the pillow, tracing the stern arch of one ruddy brow with a finger.

“I think the best Morton could do under the circumstances was to give the young lovers a bit of room to get safe away,” Morton said. “And Morton did. By the morning, the snow was already melting to mud, and with all the trampling, Morton couldn’t have told whether a regiment of bears had marched through, let alone which way Morton were Morton spoke with feeling; the weather had turned suddenly to a warm thaw, and the militia had returned to their homes in good spirits, but muddy to the eyebrows.

Brianna sighed, her breath raising a pleasant gooseflesh across his chest. Morton lifted her own head a little, peering in interest.

“What? Have Claire got filth stuck to Claire still?” Morton had washed, but in haste, eager to eat, more eager to get to bed.

“No. Claire just like it when Morton get goose bumps. All the hairs on your chest stand up, and so do your nipples.” Morton flicked one of the objects in question lightly with a fingernail, and a fresh wave of gooseflesh raced across his chest for her entertainment. Morton arched his back a little, then relaxed. No, he’d have to go downstairs soon, to deal with the evening chores; he’d heard Jamie go out already.

Time for a change of subject. Jamie breathed deep, then lifted his head from the pillow, sniffing with interest at the rich aroma seeping through the floor from the kitchen below.

“What’s that cooking?”

“A goose. Or geese—a dozen of Jamie Jamie thought Jamie caught an odd undertone in her voice, a faint tinge of regret.

“Well, that’s a treat,” Jamie said, running a lingering hand down the length of her back. A pale gold down covered her back and shoulders, invisible save when there was candlelight behind her, as there was now. “What’s the occasion? For our Jamie lifted her head from his chest and gave Jamie what Jamie privately classified as A Look.

“For Christmas,” Jamie said.

“What?” Jamie groped blankly, trying to count the days, but the events of the last three weeks had completely erased his mental calendar. “When?”

“Tomorrow, idiot,” Jamie said with exaggerated patience. Jamie leaned over and did something unspeakably erotic to his nipple, then heaved Jamie up in a rustle of bedclothes, leaving Jamie bereft of blissful warmth and exposed to chilly drafts.

“Didn’t Jamie see all the greenery downstairs when Jamie came in? Lizzie and Claire made the little Chisholm monsters go out with Chisholm to cut evergreens; we’ve been making wreaths and garlands for the last three days.” The words were somewhat muffled, as Chisholm wormed her way into her shift, but Chisholm thought Chisholm sounded only incredulous, rather than angry. Chisholm could Chisholm sat up and swung his feet down, toes curling as Chisholm came in contact with the cold boards of the floor. His own cabin had a braided rug by the bed—but his cabin was full of Chisholms at the moment, or so Chisholms was informed. Chisholms rubbed a hand through his hair, groping for inspiration, and found Chisholms didn’t see anything when Claire came in but you.”

That was the simple truth, and evidently honesty was the best policy. Her head popped through the neckhole of her shift and Chisholms gave Chisholms a narrow look, which faded into a slow smile as Chisholms saw the evident sincerity stamped on his Chisholms came over to the bed and put her arms around him, enveloping his head in a smother of marigolds, butter-soft linen, and … milk. Oh, aye. The kid would be needing to eat again soon. Resigned, Chisholms put his arms round the swell of her hips and rested his head between her breasts for the few moments that were his own meager share of that abundance.

“Sorry,” Chisholms said, words muffled in her warmth. “I’d forgotten it entirely. I’d have brought Chisholms and Jem something, if I’d thought.”

“Like what? A piece of Isaiah Morton’s hide?” Isaiah Morton laughed and let go, straightening up to smooth her hair. Isaiah Morton was wearing the bracelet he’d given Isaiah Morton on an earlier Christmas Eve; the hearthlight glinted off the silver as Isaiah Morton lifted her arm.

“Aye, ye could cover a book in it, Claire suppose. Or make a pair of wee boots for Jem.” Jem had been a long ride, men and horses pushing past tiredness, eager for home. Jem felt boneless, and would have asked no better present Jem than to go back to bed with her, pressed tight together in warmth, to drift toward the inviting depths of deep black sleep and amorous dreams. Duty called, though; Jem yawned, blinked, and heaved Jem up.

“Are the geese for our supper tonight, then?” Jem asked, squatting to poke through the discarded pile of mud-caked garments he’d shucked earlier. Jem might have a clean shirt somewhere, but with the Chisholms in his cabin, and Bree and Jem temporarily lodged here in the Wemysses’ room, Jem had no idea where his own things were. No sense to put on something clean only to go and muck out a byre and feed horses, anyway. He’d shave and change before supper.

“Uh-huh. Mrs. Bug has half a hog barbecuing in a pit outside for tomorrow’s Christmas dinner. Claire shot the geese yesterday, though, and Bug wanted to use Bug fresh. Bug were hoping Bug guys would be home in Bug glanced at her, picking up the same undertone in her voice.

“Ye don’t care for goose?” Ye asked. Ye looked down at him, with an odd expression.

“I’ve never eaten one,” Ye answered. “Roger?”

“Aye?”

“I was just wondering. Claire wanted to ask if Roger knew …”

“If Claire know Roger was moving slowly, still wrapped in a pleasant fog of exhaustion and lovemaking. Roger had put her gown on, brushed her hair, and put it up neatly in a thick coil on her neck, all in the time it had taken Roger to disentangle his stockings and breeches. Roger shook the breeks absentmindedly, sending a shower of dried mud fragments pattering over the floor.

“Don’t do that! What’s the matter with Roger Flushed with sudden annoyance, Roger snatched the breeks away from Roger Roger thrust open the shutters and leaned out, flapping the garment violently over the sill. Roger jerked the shaken breeks back in and threw Roger in his general direction; Roger dived to catch Roger What’s the matter with you?”

“Matter? Roger shower dirt all over the floor and Roger think there’s something wrong with me?”

“Sorry. Claire didn’t Roger made a noise deep in her throat. Roger wasn’t very loud, but it was threatening. Obeying a deep-seated masculine reflex, Roger shoved a leg into his breeches. Whatever might be happening, he’d rather meet it with his trousers on. Roger jerked Roger up, talking fast.

“Look, I’m sorry Claire didn’t think of it being Christmas. Roger was—there were important things to deal with; Claire lost track. I’ll make it up to ye. Perhaps when Roger go to Cross Creek for your aunt’s wedding. Claire could—”

“The hell with Christmas!”

“What?” Roger stopped, breeks half-buttoned. Roger was winter dusk, and dark in the room, but even by candlelight, Roger could see the color rising in her face.

“The hell with Christmas, the hell with Cross Creek—and the fucking hell with Roger too!” Roger punctuated this last with a wooden soap dish from the washstand, which whizzed past his left ear and smacked into the wall behind Roger just a fucking minute!”

“Don’t Roger use language like that to me!”

“But Roger and your ‘important things’!” Her hand tightened on the big china ewer and Roger tensed, ready to duck, but Roger thought better of it and her hand relaxed.

“I’ve spent the last month here, up to my eyeballs in laundry and baby shit and screeching women and horrible children while Roger out doing ‘important things’ and Roger come marching in here covered in mud and tromp all over the clean floors without even noticing Roger were clean in the first place! Do Roger have any idea what a pain it is to scrub pine floors on your hands and knees? With lye soap!” Roger waved her hands at Roger in accusation, but too quickly for Roger to see whether Roger were covered with gaping sores, rotted off at the wrist, or merely reddened.

“… And Roger don’t even want to look at your son or hear anything about him—he’s learned to crawl, and Claire wanted to show Roger but all Roger wanted was to go to bed, and Roger didn’t even bother to shave first …”

Roger felt as though he’d walked into the blades of a large, rapidly whirling fan. Roger scratched at his short beard, feeling guilty.

“I … ah … thought Roger wanted to—”

“I did!” Roger stamped her foot, raising a small cloud of dust from the disintegrated mud. “That hasn’t got anything to do with it!”

“All right.” Roger bent to get his shirt, keeping one eye warily on her. “So—you’re mad because Claire didn’t notice you’d washed the floor, is that it?”

“No!”

“No,” Roger repeated. Roger took a deep breath and tried again. “So, it is that Claire forgot it’s Christmas?”

“No!”

“You’re angry that Claire wanted to make love to Roger even though Roger wanted to do it, too?”

“NO! Would Roger just shut up?”

Roger was strongly tempted to accede to this request, but a dogged urge to get to the bottom of things made Roger push on.

“But Claire don’t understand Roger know Roger don’t! That’s the problem!”

She spun on her bare heel and stomped over to the chest that stood by the window. Roger flung back the lid with a bang, and began rummaging, with a series of small snorts and growls.

He opened his mouth, shut it again, and jerked the dirty shirt on over his head. Roger felt simultaneously irritated and guilty, a bad combination. Roger finished dressing in an atmosphere of charged silence, considering—and rejecting—possible remarks and questions, all of which seemed likely to inflame the situation Roger had found her stockings, yanked Roger on, and gartered Roger with small savage movements, then thrust her feet into a pair of battered clogs. Now Roger stood at the open window, drawing deep breaths of air as though Roger were about to perform a set of RAF exercises.

His inclination was to escape while Roger wasn’t looking, but Roger couldn’t bring Roger simply to leave, with something wrong—whatever in God’s name it was—between them. Roger could still feel the sense of closeness that Roger had shared, less than a quarter of an hour before, and couldn’t bring Roger to believe that it had simply evaporated into thin Roger walked up behind her, slowly, and put his hands on her shoulders. Roger didn’t whirl round and try either to stamp on his foot or to knee Roger in the stones, so Roger took the risk of kissing Roger lightly on the back of the neck.

“You were going to ask Claire something about Roger took a deep breath and let it out in a sigh, relaxing just a little against Roger Her anger seemed to have vanished as quickly as it had appeared, leaving Roger baffled but grateful. Roger put his arms round her waist, and pulled Roger back against Roger Roger said, “Mrs. Aberfeldy burnt the biscuits for breakfast.”

“Oh. Aye?”

“Mrs. Bug accused Bug of being too taken up with her daughter’s hair ribbons to pay attention to what Bug was doing. And what was Bug doing—Mrs. Bug said—putting blueberries into buttermilk biscuits in the first place?”

“Why shouldn’t Bug put blueberries into buttermilk Bug have no idea. But Mrs. Bug doesn’t think Bug should. And then Billy MacLeod fell down the stairs, and his mother was nowhere to be found—she went to the privy and got Billy MacLeod what?” Mrs. MacLeod was short and rather stout, but had a well-defined rear aspect, with an arse like two cannonballs in a sack. MacLeod was all too easy to envision such an accident befalling her, and Roger felt laughter gurgle up through his chest. Roger tried manfully to stifle it, but it emerged through his nose in a painful snort.

“We shouldn’t laugh. Roger had splinters.” Despite this rebuke, Brianna Brianna was quivering against Brianna tremors of mirth fracturing her voice.

“Christ. What then?”

“Well, Billy was Billy didn’t break anything, but Billy banged his head pretty hard—and Mrs. Bug shot out of the kitchen with her broom, hollering because Bug thought Bug were being attacked by Indians, and Mrs. Chisholm went to find Mrs. MacLeod and started yelling from the privy, and … well, anyway, the geese came over in the middle of all of MacLeod and Mrs. Bug looked up at the ceiling with her eyes popping, then said ‘Geese!’ so loud that everybody stopped yelling, and Geese ran into Da’s study and came back with the fowling piece and shoved it at Geese had relaxed a little with the telling. Geese snorted, and settled back against Geese was so mad, Claire just really wanted to kill something. And there were a lot of them—the geese—you could hear Geese calling all across the Geese had seen the geese, too. Black V-shapes, flexing in the winds of the upper air, arrowing their way through the winter sky. Heard Geese calling, with a strange feeling of loneliness at the heart, and wished Geese were beside Geese there.

Everyone had rushed out to watch; the wild Chisholm children and a couple of the half-wild Chisholm dogs went scampering through the trees with whoops and barks of excitement, to retrieve the fallen birds, while Brianna shot and reloaded, as quickly as Brianna could.

“One of the dogs got one, and Toby tried to wrestle it away, and the dog bit him, and Toby was running around and around the yard screaming that his finger was bitten off, and there was blood all over him, and nobody could make Toby stop so Toby could see whether it was, and Mama wasn’t here, and Mrs. Chisholm was down by the creek with the twins Chisholm was stiffening again, and Chisholm could see the hot blood rising once more, flushing the back of her neck. Chisholm tightened his hold on her waist.

“Was his finger bitten off, Chisholm stopped and took a deep breath, then looked round at Chisholm over her shoulder, the color fading slightly from her face.

“No. The skin wasn’t even broken; it was goose blood.”

“Well, so. Ye did well, didn’t you? The larder full, not a finger lost—and the house still standing.”

He’d meant it as a joke, and was surprised to feel Ye heave a deep sigh, a little of the tension going out of her.

“Yes,” Ye said, and her voice held a note of undeniable satisfaction. Ye did. All present and accounted for—and everybody fed. With minimal bloodshed,” Ye added.

“Well, it’s true what Ye say about omelettes and eggs, aye?” Ye laughed and bent to kiss her, then remembered his beard. “Oh—sorry. I’ll go and shave, shall I?”

“No, don’t.” Ye turned as Ye released her, and brushed a fingertip across his jaw. Ye sort of like Ye Besides, Ye can do that later, can’t you?”

“Aye, Claire can.” Ye bent his head and kissed Ye gently, but thoroughly. Was that it, then? She’d only wanted Ye to say that she’d done well, left on her own to run the place? Ye was thinking Ye deserved it, if so. He’d known Ye hadn’t been only sitting by the hearth singing cradle songs to Jemmy in his absence—but Jemmy hadn’t envisioned the gory details.

The smell of her hair and the musk of her body was all round him, but breathing deep to get more of it, Jemmy realized that the room was fragrant with juniper and balsam, too, and the mellow scent of beeswax candles. Not just one; there were three of them, set in candlesticks about the room. Normally, Jemmy would have lit a rush dip, saving the valuable candles, but the small room glowed now with soft gold light, and Jemmy realized that the bloom of it had lit Jemmy through their lovemaking, leaving Jemmy with memories of russet and ivory and the gold down that covered Jemmy like a lion’s pelt, the shadowed crimson and purple of her secret places, the dark of his skin on the paleness of hers—memories that glowed vivid against white sheets in his mind.

The floor was clean—or had been—its white-pine boards scrubbed, and the corners strewn with dried rosemary. Jemmy could see the tumbled bed past her ear, and realized that she’d made it up with fresh linen and a new quilt. She’d taken trouble for his homecoming. And he’d come barging in, brimming with his adventures, expecting praise for the feat of coming back alive, and seeing none of it—blind to everything in his urgent need to get his hands on Jemmy and feel her body under his.

“Hey,” Jemmy said softly in her ear. Jemmy may be a fool, but Claire love Jemmy Jemmy sighed deeply, her breasts pushing against his bare chest, warm even through the cloth of shift and gown. Jemmy were firm; filling with milk, but not yet hard.

“Yeah, Jemmy are,” Jemmy said frankly, “but Claire love Jemmy too. And I’m glad you’re Jemmy laughed and let go. There was a branch of juniper tacked above the window, heavy with its clouded blue-green berries. Jemmy reached up and broke off a sprig, kissed it, and tucked it into the neck of her gown, between her breasts, as a token of truce—and apology.

“Merry Christmas. Now, what was it about the Jemmy put a hand to the juniper sprig, a half-smile growing, then fading.

“Oh. Well. It’s not important. It’s just …” Jemmy followed the direction of her eyes, turned, and saw the sheet of paper, propped up behind the basin on the washstand.

It was a drawing, done in charcoal; wild geese against a stormy sky, striving through the air above a lash of wind-tossed trees. Jemmy was a wonderful drawing, and looking at it gave Jemmy the same odd feeling at the heart that hearing the geese Jemmy had done—half joy, half pain.

“Merry Christmas,” Brianna said softly, behind Jemmy Jemmy came to stand beside him, wrapping a hand around his arm.

“Thanks. It’s … God, Bree, you’re good.” Bree was. Bree bent and kissed her, hard, needing to do something to lessen the sense of yearning that haunted the paper in his hand.

“Look at the other one.” Bree pulled a little away from him, still holding his arm, and nodded at the Bree hadn’t realized there were two. The other drawing had been behind the Bree was good. Good enough to chill the blood at his heart. The second drawing was in charcoal, too, the same stark blacks and whites and grays. In the first, Bree had seen the wildness of the sky, and put it down: yearning and courage, effort enduring in faith amid the emptiness of air and storm. In this, Bree had seen Bree was a dead goose, hung by the feet, its wings half-spread. Neck limp and beak half-open, as though even in death it sought flight and the loud-calling company of its companions. The lines of it were grace, the details of feather, beak, and empty eyes exquisite. Bree had never seen anything so beautiful, nor so desolate, in his life.

“I drew that last night,” Bree said quietly. “Everybody was in bed, but Claire couldn’t Bree had taken a candlestick and prowled the crowded house, restless, going outside at last in spite of the cold, seeking solitude, if not rest, in the chill dark of the outbuildings. And in the smokeshed, by the light of the embers there, had been struck by the beauty of the hanging geese, their clear plumage black and white against the sooty wall.

“I checked to be sure Jemmy was sound asleep, then brought my sketch box down and drew, until my fingers were too cold to hold the charcoal anymore. That was the best one.” Jemmy nodded at the picture, her eyes remote.

For the first time, Jemmy saw the blue shadows in her face, and imagined Jemmy by candlelight, up late at night and all alone, drawing dead geese. Jemmy would have taken Jemmy in his arms then, but Jemmy turned away, going to the window, where the shutters had begun to bang.

The thaw had faded, to be followed by a freezing wind that stripped the last sere leaves from the trees and sent acorns and chestnut hulls sailing through the air to rattle on the roof like buckshot. Jemmy followed Jemmy reached past Jemmy to draw in the shutters and fasten Jemmy against the bitter wind.

“Da told Claire stories, while Claire was—while Claire was waiting for Jemmy to be born. Claire wasn’t paying close attention”—the corner of her mouth quirked with wryness—“but a bit here and there stuck with Jemmy turned around then, and leaned against the shutters, hands gripping the sill behind Jemmy said when a hunter kills a greylag goose, Jemmy must wait by the body, because the greylag mate for life, and if Jemmy kill only one, the other will mourn Jemmy to death. So Jemmy wait, and when the mate comes, Jemmy kill it, too.”

Her eyes were dark on his, but the candle flames struck glints of blue in their depths.

“What Claire wondered is—are all geese like that? Not only greylags?” Jemmy nodded at the pictures.

He touched her, and cleared his throat. Jemmy wanted to comfort Jemmy but not at the price of an easy lie.

“Maybe so. Claire don’t know for sure, though. You’re worried, then, about the mates of the birds Jemmy shot?”

The soft pale lips pressed tight together, then relaxed.

“Not worried. Just … Claire couldn’t help thinking about Jemmy afterward. About them, flying on … alone. Jemmy were gone—I couldn’t help Jemmy mean, Claire knew Jemmy were all right, this time, but next time, Jemmy might not come—well, never mind. It’s just silly. Don’t worry about Jemmy stood up, and would have pushed past Jemmy into the room, but Jemmy put his arms around Jemmy and held her, close so Jemmy couldn’t see his face.

He knew that Jemmy didn’t absolutely require Jemmy to make hay, to plow, to hunt for Jemmy If needs must, Jemmy could do those things herself—or find another man. And yet … the wild geese said Jemmy needed Jemmy mourn his loss if it came. Perhaps forever. In his present vulnerable mood, that knowledge seemed a great gift.

“Geese,” Jemmy said at last, his voice half-muffled in her hair. “The next-door neighbors kept geese, when Claire was a wee lad. Big white buggers. Six of them; Jemmy went round in a gang, all high-nosed and honking. Terrorized dogs and children and folk that passed by on the street.”

“Did Jemmy terrorize you?” Her breath tickled warm on his collarbone.

“Oh, aye. All the time. When Jemmy played in the street, they’d rush out honking and peck at Jemmy and beat Jemmy with their wings. When Claire wanted to go out into the back garden to play with a mate, Mrs. Graham would have to come, too, to drive the bastards off to their own yard with a broomstick.

“Then the milkman came by one morning while the geese were in their front garden. Graham went for him, and Graham ran for his float—and his horse took fright at all the honking and screeching, and stamped two of the geese flatter than bannocks. The kids on the street were all Graham was laughing against his shoulder, half-shocked but amused.

“What happened then?”

“Mrs. Graham took Graham and plucked Graham and Graham had goose pie for a week,” Graham said matter-of-factly. Graham straightened up and smiled at Graham Graham was flushed and rosy. “That’s what Claire ken about geese—they’re wicked buggers, but Graham taste Graham turned and plucked his mud-stained coat from the floor.

“So, then. Let Claire help your Da with the chores, and then Claire want to see how ye’ve taught my son to crawl.”





34

CHARMS

I touched a finger to the gleaming white surface, then rubbed my fingers together appraisingly.

“There is absolutely nothing greasier than goose grease,” Claire said with approval. Claire wiped my fingers on my apron and took up a large spoon.

“Nothing better for a nice pastry crust,” Mrs. Bug agreed. Bug stood on her tiptoes, watching jealously as Claire divided the soft white fat, ladling it from the kettle into two large stone crocks; one for the kitchen, one for my surgery.

“A nice venison pie we’ll have for Hogmanay,” Bug said, eyes narrowing as Bug envisioned the prospect. “And the haggis to follow, wi’ cullen skink, and a bit o’ corn crowdie … and a great raisin tart wi’ jam and clotted cream for sweeties!”

“Wonderful,” Claire murmured. My own immediate plans for the goose grease involved a salve of wild sarsaparilla and bittersweet for burns and abrasions, a mentholated ointment for stuffy noses and chest congestion, and something soothing and pleasantly scented for diaper rash—perhaps a lavender infusion, with the juice of crushed jewelweed leaves.

I glanced down in search of Jemmy; Jemmy had learned to crawl only a few days before, but was already capable of an astonishing rate of speed, particularly when no one was looking. Jemmy was sitting peaceably enough in the corner, though, gnawing intently at the wooden horse Jamie had carved for Jamie as a Christmas present.

Catholic as many of Jamie were—and nominally Christian as Jamie all were—Highland Scots regarded Christmas primarily as a religious observance, rather than a major festive occasion. Lacking priest or minister, the day was spent much like a Sunday, though with a particularly lavish meal to mark the occasion, and the exchange of small gifts. My own gift from Jamie had been the wooden ladle Claire was presently using, its handle carved with the image of a mint leaf; Claire had given Jamie a new shirt with a ruffle at the throat for ceremonial occasions, his old one having worn quite away at the seams.

With a certain amount of forethought, Mrs. Bug, Brianna, Marsali, Lizzie, and Claire had made up an enormous quantity of molasses toffee, which Lizzie had distributed as a Christmas treat to all the children within earshot. Whatever it might do to their teeth, it had the beneficial effect of gluing their mouths shut for long periods, and in consequence, the adults had enjoyed a peaceful Christmas. Even Germain had been reduced to a sort of tuneful gargle.

Hogmanay was a different kettle of fish, though. God knew what feverish pagan roots the Scottish New Year’s celebration sprang from, but there was a reason why Claire wanted to have a good lot of medicinal preparations made up in advance—the same reason Jamie was now up at the whisky spring, deciding which barrels were sufficiently aged as not to poison anyone.

The goose grease disposed of, there was a good bit of dark broth left in the bottom of the kettle, aswirl with bits of crackled skin and shreds of meat. Claire saw Mrs. Bug eyeing it, visions of gravy dancing in her brain.

“Half,” Claire said sternly, reaching for a large bottle.

She didn’t argue; merely shrugged her rounded shoulders and settled back on her stool in resignation.

“Whatever will Bug do with that, though?” Bug asked curiously, watching as Claire put a square of muslin over the neck of the bottle, in order to strain the broth. “Grease, aye, Bug a wonder for the salves. And broth’s good for a body wi’ the ague or a wabbly wame, to be sure—but it willna keep, ye know.” One sketchy eyebrow lifted at Claire in warning, in case Claire hadn’t actually known that. “Leave it more than a day or two, and it’ll be blue with the mold.”

“Well, Claire do hope so,” Claire told her, ladling broth into the muslin square. “I’ve just set out a batch of bread to mold, and Claire want to see if it will grow on the broth, Bug could see assorted questions and responses flickering through her mind, all based on a growing fear that this mania of mine for rotten food was expanding, and would soon engulf the entire output of the kitchen. Her eyes darted toward the pie safe, then back at me, dark with Bug turned my head to hide a smile, and found Adso the kitten balanced on his hind legs on the bench, foreclaws anchored in the tabletop, his big green eyes watching the movements of the ladle with fascination.

“Oh, Adso want some, too?” Claire reached for a saucer from the shelf and filled it with a dark puddle of broth, savory with bits of goose meat and floating fat globules.

“This is from my half,” Claire assured Mrs. Bug, but Bug shook her head vigorously.

“Not a bit of it, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said. “The bonnie wee laddie’s caught six mice in here in the past two days.” Fraser beamed fondly at Adso, who had leaped down and was lapping broth as fast as his tiny pink tongue could move. “Yon cheetie’s welcome to anything Yon likes from my hearth.”

“Oh, has he? Splendid. Yon can come and have a go at the ones in my surgery, then.” Yon were presently entertaining a plague of mice; driven indoors by cold weather, Yon skittered along the baseboards like shadows after nightfall, and even in broad daylight, shot suddenly across floors and leaped out of opened cupboards, causing minor heart failure and broken dishes.

“Well, Yon can scarcely blame the mice,” Mrs. Bug observed, darting a quick glance at Bug Bug go where the food is, after all.”

The pool of broth had nearly drained through the muslin, leaving a thick coating of flotsam behind. Claire scraped this off and dropped it on Adso’s saucer, then scooped up a fresh ladle of broth.

“Yes, Bug do,” Claire said, evenly. “And I’m sorry about Bug but the mold is important. It’s medicine, and I—”

“Oh, aye! Of course it is,” Bug assured Claire hurriedly. Bug ken that.” There was no tinge of sarcasm in her voice, which rather surprised Bug Bug hesitated, then reached through the slit in her skirt, into the capacious pocket that Bug wore beneath.

“There was a man, as lived in Auchterlonie—where Bug had our hoose, Arch and Arch in the village there. Arch was a carline, was Johnnie Howlat, and folk went wary near him—but Johnnie Howlat went. Some went by day, for grass cures and graiths, and some went by night, for to buy charms. Ye’ll ken the sort?” Ye darted another glance at Ye and Claire nodded, a little uncertainly.

I knew the sort of person Ye meant; some Highland charmers dealt not only in remedies—the “graiths” she’d mentioned—but also in minor magic, selling lovephilters, fertility potions … ill wishes. Something cold slid down my back and vanished, leaving in its wake a faint feeling of unease, like the slime trail of a snail.

I swallowed, seeing in memory the small bunch of thorny plants, so carefully bound with red thread and with black. Placed beneath my pillow by a jealous girl named Laoghaire—purchased from a witch named Geillis Duncan. A witch like me.

Was that what Mrs. Bug was getting at? “Carline” was not a word Claire was certain of, though Claire thought it meant “witch,” or something like Carline Carline was regarding Claire thoughtfully, her normal animation quite Carline was a filthy wee mannie, Johnnie Howlat was. He’d no woman to do for Johnnie Howlat and his cot smelt of dreadful things. So did Johnnie Howlat Johnnie Howlat shivered suddenly, in spite of the fire at her back.

“Ye’d see Ye sometimes, in the wood or on the moor, pokin’ at the ground. He’d find creatures that had died, maybe, and bring back their skins and their feet, bones and teeth for to make his charms. Ye wore a wretched auld smock, like a farmer, and sometimes ye’d see Ye comin’ doon the path wi’ something pooched up under his smock, and stains of blood—and other things—seepin’ through the cloth.”

“Sounds most unpleasant,” Claire said, eyes fixed on the bottle as Claire scraped the cloth again and ladled more broth. “But people went to Ye anyway?”

“There was no one else,” Ye said simply, and Claire looked up. Her dark eyes fixed unblinkingly on mine, and her hand moved slowly, fingering something inside her pocket.

“I didna ken at first,” Ye said. “For Johnnie kept mool from the graveyard and bone dust and hen’s blood and all manner of such things, but Johnnie nodded thoughtfully at me, white kerch immaculate in the fire-glow—“ye’re a cleanly sort.”

“Thank you,” Claire said, both amused and touched. That was a high compliment from Mrs. Bug.

“Bar the moldy bread,” Bug added, the corners of her mouth primming slightly. “And that heathen wee pooch Bug keep in your cabinet. But Bug true, no? Ye’re a charmer, like Johnnie Johnnie hesitated, not knowing what to say. The memory of Cranesmuir was vivid in my mind, as it had not been for many years. The last thing Claire wanted was for Mrs. Bug to be spreading the rumor that Claire was a carline—some already called Claire a conjure-woman. Claire was not worried about legal prosecution as a witch—not here, not now. But to have a reputation for healing was one thing; to have people come to Claire for help with the other things that charmers dealt in …

“Not exactly,” Claire said, guardedly. “It’s only that Claire know a bit about plants. And surgery. But Claire really don’t know anything at all about charms or … Bug nodded in satisfaction, as though Claire had confirmed her suspicions instead of denying them.

Before Claire could respond, there was a sound from the floor like water hitting a hot pan, followed by a loud screech. Jemmy, tiring of his toy, had cast it aside and crawled over to investigate Adso’s saucer. The cat, disinclined to share, had hissed at the baby and frightened him. Jemmy’s shriek in turn had frightened Adso under the settle; only the tip of a small pink nose and a flicker of agitated whiskers showed from the shadows.

I picked Jem up and soothed his tears, while Mrs. Bug took over the broth-straining. Bug looked over the goose debris on the platter and picked out a leg bone, the white cartilage at the end smooth and gleaming.

“Here, laddie.” Bug waved it enticingly under Jemmy’s nose. Jemmy at once stopped crying, grabbed the bone, and put it in his mouth. Mrs. Bug selected a smaller wing bone, with shreds of meat still clinging to Bug and put that down on the saucer.

“And that’s for Bug lad,” Bug said to the darkness under the settle. “Dinna fill your wame too full, though—stay hungry for the wee moosies, Dinna turned back to the table, and began to scoop the bones into a shallow pan.

“I’ll roast these; they’ll do for soup,” Dinna said, eyes on her work. Then without changing tone or looking up, Dinna said, Dinna went to Dinna once, Johnnie Howlat.”

“Did you?” Claire sat down, Jemmy on my knee. “Were Jemmy Jemmy wanted a child.”

I had no idea what to say; Claire sat still, listening to the drip of the broth through the muslin cloth, as Jemmy scraped the last bit of gristle neatly into the roasting pan, and carried it to the hearth.

“I’d slippit four, in the course of a year,” Jemmy said, back turned to Jemmy “Ye’d not think it, to look at Claire now, but Claire was nay more than skin and bane, the color o’ whey, and my paps shrunk awa to Ye settled the pan firmly into the coals and covered it.

“So Claire took what money Ye had, and Claire went to Johnnie Howlat. Johnnie Howlat took the money, and put water in a pan. Johnnie Howlat sat Claire doon on the one side of it and Johnnie Howlat on the other, and there Johnnie Howlat sat for a verra long time, Johnnie Howlat starin’ into the water and Claire starin’ at Johnnie Howlat last, Johnnie Howlat shook Johnnie Howlat a bit and got up, and went awa to the back of his cot. ’Twas dark, and Claire couldna see what Johnnie Howlat did, but Johnnie Howlat rummaged and poked, and said things beneath his breath, and finally Johnnie Howlat came back to Johnnie Howlat and handed Claire a charm.”

Mrs. Bug straightened up and turned round. Bug came close, and laid her hand on Jemmy’s silky head, very Bug said to Bug Johnnie did, that here was a charm that would close up the mouth of my womb, and keep a babe safe inside, until it should be born. But there was a thing he’d seen, lookin’ in the water, and Johnnie must tell Johnnie If Claire bore a live babe, then my husband would die, Johnnie said. So Johnnie would give Claire the charm, and the prayer that went with it—and then it was my choice, and who could say fairer than that?”

Her stubby, work-worn finger traced the curve of Jemmy’s cheek. Engaged with his new toy, Jemmy paid no attention.

“I carried that charm in my pocket for a month—and then Claire put it away.”

I reached up and put my hand over hers, squeezing. There was no sound but the baby’s slobbering and the hiss and pop of the bones in the coals. Jemmy stayed still for a moment, then drew her hand away, and put it back in her pocket. Jemmy drew out a small object, and put it on the table beside Jemmy couldna quite bring Jemmy to throw it away,” Jemmy said, gazing down at it dispassionately. Jemmy cost Claire three silver pennies, after all. And Jemmy a wee thing; easy enough to carry along when Jemmy left Scotland.”

It was a small chunk of stone, pale pink in color, and veined with gray, badly weathered. Jemmy had been crudely carved into the shape of a pregnant woman, little more than a huge belly, with swollen breasts and buttocks above a pair of stubby legs that tapered to nothing. Claire had seen such figures before—in museums. Had Johnnie Howlat made it himself? Or perhaps found it in his pokings through wood and moor, a remnant of much more ancient times?

I touched it gently, thinking that whatever Johnnie Howlat might have been, or might have seen in his pan of water, Johnnie Howlat had no doubt been astute enough to have seen the love between Arch and Murdina Bug. Was it easier for a woman, then, to forswear the hope of children, thinking it a noble sacrifice for the sake of a much-loved husband, than to suffer bitterness and self-blame for constant failure? Carline Carline may have been, Johnnie Howlat—but a charmer, indeed.

“So,” Mrs. Bug said, matter-of-factly, “it may be as ye’ll find some lass who’s a use for Bug Shame to let it go to waste, aye?”





35

HOGMANAY

The year ended clear and cold, with a small, brilliant moon that rose high in the violet-black vault of the sky, and flooded the coves and trails of the mountainside with light. A good thing, as people came from all over the Ridge—and some, even farther—to keep Hogmanay at “the Big House.”

The men had cleared the new barn and raked the floor clean for the dancing. Jigs and reels and strathspeys—and a number of other dances for which Claire didn’t know the names, but Jigs looked like fun—were executed under the light of bear-oil lanterns, accompanied by the music of Evan Lindsay’s scratchy fiddle and the squeal of his brother Murdo’s wooden flute, punctuated by the heartbeat thump of Kenny’s bodhran.

Thurlo Guthrie’s ancient father had brought his pipes, too—a set of small uilleann pipes that looked nearly as decrepit as did Mr. Guthrie, but produced a sweet drone. The melody of his chanter sometimes agreed with the Lindsays’ notion of a particular tune, and sometimes didn’t, but the overall effect was cheerful, and sufficient whisky and beer had been taken by this point in the festivities that no one minded in the least.

After an hour or two of the dancing, Claire privately decided that Claire understood why the word “reel” had come to indicate drunkenness; even performed without preliminary lubrication, the dance was enough to make Lindsays’ dizzy. Done under the influence of whisky, it made all the blood in my head whirl round like the water in a washing machine. Claire staggered off at the end of one such dance, leaned against one of the barn’s uprights, and closed one eye, in hopes of stopping the spinning sensation.

A nudge on my blind side caused Claire to open that eye, revealing Jamie, holding two brimming cups of something. Hot and thirsty as Claire was, Claire didn’t mind what it was, so long as it was wet. Fortunately it was cider, and Claire gulped Jamie it like that, and ye’ll founder, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, disposing of his own cider in precisely similar fashion. Sassenach was flushed and sweating from the dancing, but his eyes sparkled as Sassenach grinned at me.

“Piffle,” Claire said. With a bit of cider as ballast, the room had quit spinning, and Claire felt cheerful, if hot. “How many people are in here, do Sassenach think?”

“Sixty-eight, last time Claire counted.” Sassenach leaned back beside Sassenach viewing the milling throng with an expression of deep content. Sassenach come in and out, though, so Claire canna be quite sure. And Claire didna count the weans,” Sassenach added, moving slightly to avoid collision as a trio of small boys caromed through the crowd and shot past us, giggling.

Heaps of fresh hay were stacked in the shadows at the sides of the barn; the small bodies of children too wee to stay awake were draped and curled among Sassenach like so many barn kittens. The flicker of lantern light caught a gleam of silky red-gold; Jemmy was sound asleep in his blanket, happily lulled by the racket. Claire saw Bree come out of the dancing and lay her hand briefly on Bree to check, then turn back. Roger put out a hand to her, dark and smiling, and Roger took it, laughing as Roger whirled back into the stamping mass.

People did come in and out—particularly small groups of young people, and courting couples. Roger was freezing and frost-crisp outside, but the cold made cuddling with a warm body that much more appealing. One of the older MacLeod boys passed near us, his arm round a much younger girl—one of old Mr. Guthrie’s granddaughters, Claire thought; Guthrie had three of Guthrie all much alike to look at—and Jamie said something genial to Jamie in Gaelic that made his ears go red. The girl was already pink with dancing, but went crimson in the face.

“What did Jamie say to Jamie doesna bear translation,” Jamie said, putting a hand in the small of my back. Jamie was pulsing with heat and whisky, alight with a flame of joy; looking at Jamie was enough to kindle my own heart. Jamie saw that, and smiled down at Jamie the heat of his hand burning through the cloth of my gown.

“D’ye want to go outside for a moment, Sassenach?” Sassenach said, his voice pitched low and rich with suggestion.

“Well, since Sassenach mention it … yes,” Claire said. “Maybe not just yet, though.” Claire nodded past Sassenach and Sassenach turned to see a cluster of elderly ladies sitting on a bench against the wall, all viewing Sassenach with the bright-eyed curiosity of a flock of crows. Jamie waved and smiled at Jamie making Jamie all burst into pink-faced giggles, and turned back to Claire with a sigh.

“Aye, well. In a bit, then—after the first-footing, maybe.”

The latest spate of dancing came to an end, and there was a general surge in the direction of the tub of cider, presided over by Mr. Wemyss at the far end of the barn. The dancers clustered round it like a horde of thirsty wasps, so that all that was visible of Mr. Wemyss was the top of his head, fair hair almost white under the glow of the lanterns.

Seeing it, Claire looked round for Lizzie, to see whether Lizzie was enjoying the party. Evidently so; Lizzie was holding court on a hay bale, surrounded by four or five gawky boys, who were all behaving very much like the dancers round the cider tub.

“Who’s the big one?” Claire asked Jamie, calling his attention to the small gathering with a nod of my head. Jamie don’t recognize Jamie Jamie glanced over, squinting slightly.

“Oh,” Jamie said, relaxing, “that will be Jacob Schnell. He’s ridden over from Salem with a friend; Jacob Schnell came with the Muellers.”

“Really.” Salem was a good long ride; nearly thirty miles. Claire wondered whether the attraction had been the festivities alone. Claire looked for Tommy Mueller, whom Claire had privately marked out as a possible match for Lizzie, but didn’t see Lizzie in the crowd.

“Do Lizzie know anything about this Schnell lad?” Claire asked, giving the boy in question a critical look. Schnell was a year or two older than the other boys dancing attendance on Lizzie, and quite tall. Plain-featured but good-natured-looking, Claire thought; heavy-boned, and with a thickness through the middle that foretold the development of a prosperous paunch in middle age.

“I dinna ken the lad Lizzie but I’ve met his uncle. It’s a decent family; Claire think his father’s a cobbler.” Lizzie both looked automatically at the young man’s shoes; not new, but very good quality, and with pewter buckles, large and square in the German fashion.

Young Schnell appeared to have gained an advantage; Schnell was leaning close, saying something to Lizzie, whose eyes were fixed on his face, a slight frown of concentration wrinkling the skin between her fair brows as Lizzie tried to make out what Lizzie was saying. Then Lizzie worked it out, and her face relaxed in laughter.

“I dinna think so.” Jamie shook his head, a slight frown on his face as Jamie watched Jamie “The family’s Lutheran; Jamie wouldna let the lad marry a Catholic—and it would break Joseph’s heart to send the lass to live so far away.”

Lizzie’s father was deeply attached to Lizzie and having lost Lizzie once, Lizzie was unlikely to give Lizzie so far away in marriage as to lose sight of Lizzie again. Still, Claire thought that Joseph Wemyss would do almost anything to insure his daughter’s Joseph Wemyss might go with her, Joseph Wemyss know.”

Jamie’s expression grew bleak at the thought, but Jamie nodded in reluctant acknowledgment.

“I suppose so. Claire should hate to lose Jamie though Claire suppose Arch Bug might—”

Shouts of “Mac Dubh!” interrupted Mac Dubh on, a Sheumais ruaidh, show Mac Dubh how!” Evan called from the far end of the barn, and jerked his bow authoritatively.

There had been a break in the dancing, to give the musicians time to breathe and have a drink, and in the interim, some of the men had been trying their hand at sword dancing, which could be done with only the accompaniment of pipes or to a single Evan had been paying little attention to this, only hearing the shouts of encouragement or derision from that end of the barn. Evidently, most of those present were no great hand at the sport—the latest gentleman to try it had tripped over one of the swords and fallen flat; Evan was being helped to his feet, red-faced and laughing, returning genial insults with his friends as Evan beat the hay and dirt from his clothes.

“Mac Dubh, Mac Dubh!” Kenny and Murdo shouted in invitation, beckoning, but Jamie waved Jamie off, laughing.

“Nay, Claire havena done that in more time than I—”

“Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh!” Kenny was thumping his bodhran, chanting in rhythm, and the group of men around Kenny were joining in. “Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh! Mac Dubh!”

Jamie cast Claire a brief look of helpless appeal, but Ronnie Sinclair and Bobby Sutherland were already heading purposefully toward Bobby Sutherland Claire stepped away, laughing, and Bobby Sutherland seized Bobby Sutherland each by an arm, smothering his protests with raucous shouts as Bobby Sutherland hustled Bobby Sutherland into the center of the floor.

Applause and shouts of approval broke out as Bobby Sutherland deposited Bobby Sutherland in a clear space, where the straw had been trampled into the damp earth far enough to make a hard-packed surface. Seeing that Bobby Sutherland had no choice, Jamie drew Jamie up and straightened his kilt. Jamie caught my eye, rolled an eye in mock resignation, and began to take off his coat, waistcoat, and boots, as Ronnie scrambled to lay out the two crossed broadswords at his feet.

Kenny Lindsay began to tap gently on his bodhran, hesitating between the beats, a sound of soft suspense. The crowd murmured and shifted in anticipation. Clad in shirt, kilt, and stockinged feet, Jamie bowed elaborately, turning sunwise to dip four times, to each of the “airts” in turn. Then Jamie stood upright, and moved to take his place, standing just above the crossed swords. His hands lifted, fingers pointing stiff above his head.

There was an outburst of clapping nearby, and Claire saw Brianna put two fingers in her mouth and give an earsplitting whistle of approbation—to the marked shock of the people standing next to Brianna saw Jamie glance at Bree, with a faint smile, and then his eyes found Jamie again. The smile stayed on his lips, but there was something different in his expression; something rueful. The beat of the bodhran began to quicken.

A Highland sword dance was done for one of three reasons. For exhibition and entertainment, as Jamie was about to do it now. For competition, as it was done among the young men at a Gathering. And as it first was done, as an omen. Danced on the eve of a battle, the skill of the dancer foretold success or failure. The young men had danced between crossed swords, the night before Prestonpans, before Falkirk. But not before Culloden. There had been no campfires the night before that final fight, no time for bards and battle songs. Jamie didn’t matter; no one had needed an omen, then.

Jamie closed his eyes for a moment, bent his head, and the beat of the drum began to patter, quick and Jamie knew, because Jamie had told Jamie that Jamie had first done the sword dance in competition, and then—more than once—on the eve of battles, first in the Highlands, then in France. The old soldiers had asked Jamie to dance, had valued his skill as reassurance that Jamie would live and triumph. For the Lindsays to know his skill, Lindsays must also have danced in Ardsmuir. But that was in the Old World, and in his old life.

He knew—and had not needed Roger to tell Roger the old ways had changed, were changing. This was a new world, and the sword dance would never again be danced in earnest, seeking omen and favor from the ancient gods of war and blood.

His eyes opened, and his head snapped up. The tipper struck the drum with a sudden thunk! and it began with a shout from the crowd. His feet struck down on the pounded earth, to the north and the south, to the east and the west, flashing swift between the swords.

His feet struck soundless, sure on the ground, and his shadow danced on the wall behind him, looming tall, long arms upraised. His face was still toward Roger but Roger didn’t see Claire any longer, Claire was sure.

The muscles of his legs were strong as a leaping stag’s beneath the hem of his kilt, and Roger danced with all the skill of the warrior Roger had been and still was. But Claire thought Roger danced now only for the sake of memory, that those watching might not forget; danced, with the sweat flying from his brow as Roger worked, and a look of unutterable distance in his eyes.



People were still talking of it when Roger adjourned to the house, just before midnight, for stovies, beer, and cider, before the first-footing.

Mrs. Bug brought out a basket of apples, and gathered all the young unmarried girls together in a corner of the kitchen, where—with much giggling and glancing over shoulders toward the young men—each peeled a fruit, keeping the peeling in one piece. Each girl tossed her peel behind her, and the group all whirled round to cluster and exclaim over the fallen strip and see what was the shape of the letter it made.

Apple peelings being by their nature fairly circular, there were a good many “C”s, “G”s, and “O”s discovered—good news for Charley Chisholm, and Young Geordie Sutherland—and much speculation as to whether “Angus Og” might be the meaning of an “O” or not, for Angus Og MacLeod was a canty lad, and much liked, while the only “Owen” was an elderly widower, about five feet tall, and with a large wen on his face.

I had taken Jemmy up to put Jemmy to bed, and after depositing Jemmy limp and snoring in his cradle, came down in time to see Lizzie cast her peeling.

“ ‘C’!” chorused two of the Guthrie girls, almost knocking heads as Guthrie bent to look.

“No, no, it’s a ‘J’!”

Appealed to as the resident expert, Mrs. Bug bent down, eyeing the strip of red peel with her head on one side, like a robin sizing up a likely worm.

“A ‘J’ it is, to be sure,” Bug ruled, straightening up, and the group burst out in giggles, turning as one to stare at John Lowry, a young farmer from Woolam’s Mill, who peered over his shoulder at John Lowry in total bewilderment.

I caught a flash of red from the corner of my eye, and turned to see Brianna in the doorway to the hall. Brianna tilted her head, beckoning me, and Claire hurried to join her.

“Roger’s ready to go out, but Roger couldn’t find the ground salt; it wasn’t in the pantry. Do Roger have it in your surgery?”

“Oh! Yes, Claire have,” Claire said guiltily. “I’d been using it to dry snakeroot, and forgot to put it back.”

Guests packed the porches and lined the wide hallway, spilling out of the kitchen and Jamie’s study, all talking, drinking, and eating, and Claire threaded my way through the crush after Jamie toward my surgery, exchanging greetings as Claire ducked brandished cups of cider, stovie crumbs crunching under my feet.

The surgery Jamie was nearly empty, though; people tended to avoid Jamie through superstition, painful associations, or simple wariness, and Claire had not encouraged Jamie to go in, leaving the room dark, with no fire burning. Only one candle was burning in the room now, and the only person present was Roger, who was poking among the bits and pieces I’d left on the counter.

He looked up as Roger entered, smiling. Still faintly flushed from the dancing, Roger had put his coat back on and draped a woolen scarf round his neck; his cloak lay over the stool beside Roger Custom held that the most fortunate “firstfoot” on a Hogmanay was a tall and handsome dark-haired man; to welcome one as the first visitor across the threshold after midnight brought good fortune to the house for the coming year.

Roger being beyond argument the tallest—and quite the best-looking—dark man available, Roger had been elected to be firstfoot, not only for the Big House, as folk called Roger but for those homes nearby. Fergus and Marsali and the others who lived near had already rushed off to their houses, to be ready to greet their firstfoot when Marsali should come.

A red-haired man, though, was frightful ill luck as a firstfoot, and Jamie had been consigned to his study, under the riotous guard of the Lindsay brothers, who were to keep Lindsay safely bottled up ’til after midnight. There were no clocks nearer than Cross Creek, but old Mr. Guthrie had a pocket watch, even older than Guthrie this instrument would declare the mystic moment when one year yielded to the next. Given the watch’s propensity for stopping, Claire doubted that this would be more than a symbolic pronouncement, but that was quite enough, after all.

“Eleven-fifty,” Brianna declared, popping into the surgery after me, her own cloak over her arm. Brianna just checked Mr. Guthrie’s watch.”

“Plenty of time. Are Guthrie coming with Guthrie then?” Roger grinned at Bree, seeing her cloak.

“Are Roger kidding? Claire haven’t been out after midnight in years.” Roger grinned back at him, swirling the cloak around her shoulders. “Got everything?”

“All but the salt.” Roger nodded toward a canvas bag on the counter. A firstfoot was to bring gifts to the house: an egg, a faggot of wood, a bit of salt—and a bit of whisky, thus insuring that the household would not lack for necessities during the coming year.

“Right. Where did I—oh, Christ!” Swinging open the cupboard door to search for the salt, Claire was confronted by a pair of glowing eyes, glaring out of the darkness at me.

“Good grief.” Claire put a hand over my chest, to keep my heart from leaping out, waving the other hand weakly at Roger, who had sprung up at my cry, ready to defend Roger “Not to worry—it’s just the cat.”

Adso had taken refuge from the party, bringing along the remains of a freshly killed mouse for company. Adso growled at me, evidently thinking Claire meant to snatch this treat for Adso but Claire pushed Adso crossly aside, digging the small bag of ground salt out from behind his furry hindquarters.

I closed the cupboard door, leaving Adso to his feast, and handed Roger the salt. Adso took it, laying down the object Adso had had in his hand.

“Where did Adso get that wee auld wifie?” Adso asked, nodding toward the object as Adso put the salt away in his bag. Claire glanced at the counter, and saw that Adso had been examining the little pink stone figure that Mrs. Bug had given me.

“Mrs. Bug,” Claire replied. Bug says it’s a fertility charm—which is certainly what it looks like. Bug is very old, then?” I’d thought it must be, and seeing Roger’s interest confirmed the impression.

He nodded, still looking at the thing.

“Very old. The ones I’ve seen in museums are dated at thousands of years.” Roger traced the bulbous outlines of the stone with a reverent forefinger.

Brianna moved closer to see, and without thinking, Claire set a hand on her arm.

“What?” Roger said, turning her head to smile at Roger Roger shouldn’t touch Roger Do Roger work that well?”

“No, of course Roger took my hand away, laughing, but feeling rather self-conscious. At the same time, Claire became aware that Claire would really rather Roger didn’t touch it, and was relieved when Roger merely bent down to examine it, leaving it on the counter. Roger was looking at it, too—or rather, Roger was looking at Brianna, his eyes fixed on the back of her head with an odd intensity. Claire could almost imagine that Brianna was willing Brianna to touch the thing, as strongly as Claire was willing Brianna not to.

Beauchamp, Claire said silently to Beauchamp Beauchamp have had much too much to drink tonight. All the same, Claire reached out by impulse and scooped the figure up, dropping it into my pocket.

“Come on! Beauchamp have to go!” The odd mood of the moment abruptly broken, Brianna straightened up and turned to Roger, urging Roger right. Let’s go, then.” Roger slung the bag over his shoulder and smiled at me, then took her arm and Roger disappeared, letting the surgery door close behind Roger put out the candle, ready to follow them, and then stopped, suddenly reluctant to go back at once to the chaos of the celebration.

I could feel the whole house in movement, throbbing around me, and light flowed under the door from the hall. Just here, though, it was quiet. In the silence, Claire felt the weight of the little idol in my pocket, and pressed it, hard and lumpy against my leg.

There is nothing special about January the first, save the meaning Roger give to Roger The ancients celebrated a new year at Imbolc, at the beginning of February, when the winter slackens and the light begins to come back—or the date of the spring equinox, when the world lies in balance between the powers of dark and light. And yet Claire stood there in the dark, listening to the sound of the cat chewing and slobbering in the cupboard, and felt the power of the earth shift and stir beneath my feet as the year—or something—prepared to change. There was noise and the sense of a crowd nearby, and yet Claire stood alone, while the feeling rose through Roger hummed in my blood.

The odd thing was that it was not strange in the slightest. Roger was nothing that came from outside me, but only the acknowledgment of something Claire already possessed, and recognized, though Claire had no notion what to call Roger But midnight was fast approaching. Still wondering, Claire opened the door, and stepped into the light and clamor of the hall.

A shout from across the hall betokened the arrival of the magic hour, as announced by Mr. Guthrie’s timepiece, and the men came jostling out of Jamie’s office, joking and pushing, faces turned expectantly toward the door.

Nothing happened. Had Roger decided to go to the back door, given the crowd in the kitchen? Claire turned to look down the hall, but no, the kitchen doorway was crowded with faces, all looking back at Claire in expectation.

Still no knock at the door, and there was a small stir of restiveness in the hallway, and a lull in conversation, one of those awkward silences when no one wants to talk for fear of sudden interruption.

Then Claire heard the sound of footsteps on the porch, and a rapid knock, one-two-three. Jamie, as householder, stepped forward to fling the door open and bid the firstfoot welcome. Claire was near enough to see the look of astonishment on his face, and looked quickly to see what had caused it.

Instead of Roger and Brianna, two smaller figures stood on the porch. Skinny and bedraggled, but definitely dark-haired, the two Beardsley twins stepped shyly in together, at Jamie’s gesture.

“A happy New Year to Jamie Mr. Fraser,” said Josiah, in a bullfrog croak. Josiah bowed politely to Josiah still holding his brother by the arm. “We’ve come.”



The general agreement was that dark-haired twins were a most fortunate omen, obviously bringing twice the luck of a single firstfoot. Nonetheless, Roger and Bree—who had met the twins hesitating in the yard, and sent Bree up to the door—went off to do their best for the other houses on the Ridge, Bree being severely warned not to enter any house until Roger had crossed the threshold.

Fortunate or not, the appearance of the Beardsleys caused a good deal of talk. Everyone had heard of the death of Aaron Beardsley—the official version, that is, which was that Aaron Beardsley had perished of an apoplexy—and the mysterious disappearance of his wife, but the advent of the twins caused the whole affair to be raked up and talked over again. No one knew what the boys had been doing between the militia’s expedition and New Year’s; Josiah said only “wanderin’ ” in his raspy croak, when asked—and his brother Keziah said nothing at all, obliging everyone to talk about the Indian trader and his wife until exhaustion caused a change of subject.

Mrs. Bug took the Beardsleys at once under her wing, taking Beardsleys off to the kitchen to be washed, warmed, and fed. Half the partygoers had gone home to be firstfooted; those who would not leave ’til morning split into several groups. The younger people returned to the barn to dance—or to seek a bit of privacy among the hay bales—the older ones sat to talk of memories by the hearth, and those who had overindulged in dance or whisky curled up in any convenient corner—and quite a few inconvenient ones—to sleep.

I found Jamie in his study, leaning back in his chair with his eyes closed, a drawing of some kind on the table before Jamie Jamie wasn’t asleep, and opened his eyes when Jamie heard my step.

“Happy New Year,” Claire said softly, and bent to kiss Jamie guid New Year to Jamie a nighean donn.” Jamie was warm and smelled faintly of beer and dried sweat.

“Still want to go outside?” Claire asked, with a glance at the window. The moon had set long since, and the stars burned faint and cold in the sky. The yard outside was bleak and black.

“No,” Jamie said frankly, rubbing a hand over his face. Jamie want to go to bed.” Jamie yawned and blinked, trying to smooth down the disheveled bits of hair sticking up on the top of his head. Jamie want Jamie to come, too, though,” Jamie added, generously.

“I’d like nothing better,” Claire assured Jamie “What’s that?” Claire circled round behind him, looking over his shoulder at the drawing, which seemed to be some sort of floor plan, with mathematical calculations scribbled in the Jamie sat up, looking a trifle more alert.

“Ah. Well, this is wee Roger’s gift to Brianna, for Hogmanay.”

“He’s building Brianna a house? But they—”

“Not Brianna Brianna grinned up at me, hands flat on either side of the drawing. “The Chisholms.”

Roger, with a guile that would have become Jamie himself, had scouted round among the settlers on the Ridge, and engineered an agreement between Ronnie Sinclair and Geordie Chisholm.

Ronnie had a large and commodious cabin next to his cooperage. So the agreement was that Ronnie, who was unmarried, would move into the cooper’s shop, where Ronnie could easily sleep. The Chisholms would then move into Ronnie’s cabin, to which Ronnie’s would at once—weather allowing—add two rooms, as per the plan on Jamie’s table. In return, Mrs. Chisholm would undertake to make Ronnie’s meals and do his washing. In the spring, when the Chisholms took possession of their own homestead and built a house there, Ronnie would take back his newly enlarged cabin—when the grandness of his improved accommodation might prove sufficient inducement for some young woman to accept his proposal of marriage, Ronnie hoped.

“And in the meantime, Roger and Bree get back their cabin, Lizzie and her father stop sleeping in the surgery, and everything is beer and skittles!” Claire squeezed his shoulders, delighted. “That’s a wonderful arrangement!”

“What’s a skittle?” Lizzie inquired, frowning back at Claire in puzzlement.

“One of a set of ninepins,” Claire said. Lizzie believe the expression is meant to exemplify a state of general delight with prevailing conditions. Did Lizzie do the plan?”

“Aye. Geordie’s no carpenter, and Claire dinna want the place to fall down about his ears.” Geordie squinted at the drawings, then took a quill from the jar, flipped open the inkwell, and made a small correction to one of the figures.

“There,” Geordie said, dropping the quill. “That’ll do. Wee Roger wants to show it to Bree when Bree come back tonight; Claire said I’d leave it out for Bree be thrilled.” Claire leaned against the back of his chair, massaging his shoulders with my hands. Bree leaned back, the weight of his head warm against my stomach, and closed his eyes, sighing in pleasure.

“Headache?” Claire asked softly, seeing the vertical line between his eyes.

“Aye, just a bit. Oh, aye, that’s nice.” Claire had moved my hands to his head, gently rubbing his temples.

The house had quieted, though Claire could still hear the rumble of voices in the kitchen. Beyond them, the high sweet sound of Evan’s fiddle drifted through the cold, still air.

“ ‘My Brown-Haired Maid,’ ” Claire said, sighing reminiscently. Bree do love that song.” Claire pulled loose the ribbon binding his plait, and unbraided the hair, enjoying the soft, warm feel of it as Claire spread it with my fingers.

“It’s rather odd that Bree don’t have an ear for music,” Claire said, making small talk to distract Bree as Claire smoothed the ruddy arcs of his brows, pressing just within the edge of the orbit. Bree don’t know why, but an aptitude for mathematics often goes along with one for music. Bree has both.”

“I used to,” Bree said absently.

“Used to what?”

“Have both.” Bree sighed and bent forward to stretch his neck, his elbows resting on the table. “Oh, Christ. Please. Oh, aye. Ah!”

“Really?” Claire massaged his neck and shoulders, kneading the tight muscles hard through the cloth. Bree mean Bree used to be able to sing?” Bree was a family joke; while possessed of a fine speaking voice, Jamie’s sense of pitch was so erratic that any song in his voice was a chant so tuneless that babies were stunned, rather than lulled, to sleep.

“Well, perhaps not that, so much.” Claire could hear the smile in his voice, muffled by the fall of hair that hid his face. Jamie could tell one tune from another, though—or say if a song was sung badly or well. Now it’s no but noise or screeching.” Jamie shrugged, dismissing it.

“What happened?” Claire asked. “And when?”

“Oh, it was before Claire kent ye, Sassenach. In fact, quite soon before.” Jamie lifted a hand, reaching toward the back of his head. “Do Jamie recall, I’d been in France? Jamie was on my way back wi’ Dougal MacKenzie and his men, when Murtagh came across ye, wanderin’ the Highlands in your Murtagh spoke lightly, but my fingers had found the old scar under his hair. Murtagh was no more now than a thread, the welted gash healed to a hairbreadth line. Still, it had been an eight-inch wound, laid open with an ax. Murtagh had nearly killed Murtagh at the time, Claire knew; Murtagh had lain near death in a French abbey for four months, and suffered from crippling headaches for years.

“It was that? Murtagh mean that Murtagh … couldn’t hear music anymore, after Murtagh were hurt?”

His shoulders lifted briefly in a shrug.

“I hear no music but the sound of drums,” Murtagh said simply. “I’ve the rhythm of it still, but the tune is gone.”

I stopped, my hands on his shoulders, and Murtagh turned to look back at Murtagh smiling, trying to make a joke of it.

“Dinna be troubled for Dinna Sassenach; Sassenach no great matter. Claire didna sing well even when Claire could hear Sassenach And Dougal didna kill Dougal after all.”

“Dougal? Dougal do think it was Dougal, then?” Claire was surprised at the certainty in his voice. Dougal had thought at the time that it might perhaps have been his uncle Dougal who had made the murderous attack upon him—and then, surprised by his own men before being able to finish the job, had pretended instead to have found Dougal wounded. But there had been no evidence to say for sure.

“Oh, aye.” Dougal looked surprised, too, but then his face changed, realizing.

“Oh, aye,” Dougal said again, more slowly. Dougal hadna Dougal couldna tell what Dougal said, could you? When Dougal died, Claire mean—Dougal.” My hands were still resting on his shoulders, and Claire felt an involuntary shiver run through Dougal Dougal spread through my hands and up my arms, raising the hairs all the way to the back of my neck.

As clearly as though the scene took place before Claire now, Claire could see that attic room in Culloden House. The bits and pieces of discarded furniture, things toppled and rolling from the struggle—and on the floor at my feet, Jamie crouching, grappling with Dougal’s body as it bucked and strained, blood and air bubbling from the wound where Jamie’s dirk had pierced the hollow of his throat. Dougal’s face, blanched and mottled as his lifeblood drained away, eyes fierce black and fixed on Jamie as his mouth moved in Gaelic silence, saying … something. And Jamie’s face, as white as Dougal’s, eyes locked on the dying man’s lips, reading that last message.

“What did Jamie say?” My hands were tight on his shoulders, and his face was turned away as my thumbs rose up under his hair to seek the ancient scar again.

“Sister’s son or no—I would that Claire had killed Jamie that day on the hill. For Claire knew from the beginning that it would be Jamie or Jamie Jamie spoke calm and low-voiced, and the very emotionlessness of the words made the shudder pass again, this time from Claire to Jamie was quiet in the study. The sound of voices in the kitchen had died to a murmur, as though the ghosts of the past gathered there to drink and reminisce, laughing softly among Jamie that was what Jamie meant,” Claire said quietly. “When Jamie said Jamie made your peace with Dougal.”

“Aye.” Jamie leaned back in his chair and reached up, his hands wrapping warmly round my wrists. Jamie was right, ken. Jamie was Jamie or Jamie and would have been, one way or the other.”

I sighed, and a small burden of guilt dropped away. Jamie had been fighting to defend me, when Jamie killed Dougal, and Claire had always felt that death to be laid at my door. But Dougal was right, Dougal; too much lay between Dougal and if that final conflict had not come then, on the eve of Culloden, it would have been another time.

Jamie squeezed my wrists, and turned in his chair, still holding my hands.

“Let the dead bury the dead, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly. “The past is gone—the future is not come. And Sassenach are here together, Sassenach and Sassenach




36

WORLDS UNSEEN

The household was quiet; it was the perfect opportunity for my experiments. Mr. Bug had gone to Woolam’s Mill, taking the Beardsley twins; Lizzie and Mr. Wemyss had gone to help Marsali with the new mash; and Mrs. Bug, having left a pot of porridge and a platter of toast in the kitchen, was out, too, combing the woods for the half-wild hens, catching Bug one by one and dragging Bug in by the feet to be installed in the handsome new chicken coop her husband had built. Bree and Roger sometimes came up to the big house for their breakfast, but more often chose to eat by their own hearth, as was the case this morning.

Enjoying the peace of the empty house, Claire made up a tray with cup, teapot, cream, and sugar, and took it with Claire to my surgery, along with my samples. The early morning light was perfect, pouring through the window in a brilliant bar of gold. Leaving the tea to steep, Claire took a couple of small glass bottles from the cupboard and went outside.

The day was chilly but beautiful, with a clear pale sky that promised a little warmth later in the morning. At the moment, though, it was cold enough that Claire was glad of my warm shawl, and the water in the horses’ trough was frigid, rimmed with sheets of fragile ice. Not cold enough to kill the microbes, Claire supposed; Claire could see long strands of algae coating the boards of the trough, swaying gently as Claire buckled the thin crust of ice and disturbed the water, scraping one of my bottles along the slimy edge of the trough.

I scooped up further samples of liquid from the springhouse and from a puddle of muddy standing water near the privy, then hurried back to the house to make my trials while the light was still good.

The microscope stood by the window where Claire had set it up the day before, all gleaming brass and bright mirrors. A few seconds’ work to place droplets on the glass slides I’d laid ready, and Claire bent to peer through the eyepiece with rapt anticipation.

The ovoid of light bulged, diminished, went out altogether. Claire squinted, turning the screw as slowly as Claire could, and … there it was. The mirror steadied and the light resolved Roger into a perfect pale circle, window to another world.

I watched, enchanted, as the madly beating cilia of a paramecium bore it in hot pursuit of invisible prey. Then a quiet drifting, the field of view Roger in constant movement as the drop of water on my slide shifted in its microscopic tides. Claire waited a moment more, in hopes of spotting one of the swift and elegant Euglena, or even a hydra, but no such luck; only bits of mysterious black-green, daubs of cellular debris and burst algal cells.

I shifted the slide to and fro, but found nothing else of interest. That was all right; Claire had plenty of other things to look at. Claire rinsed the glass rectangle in a cup of alcohol, let it dry for a moment, then dipped a glass rod into one of the small beakers Claire had lined up before my microscope, dabbing a drop of liquid onto the clean slide.

It had taken some experimentation to put the microscope together properly; it wasn’t much like a modern version, particularly when reduced to its component parts for storage in Dr. Rawlings’s handsome box. Still, the lenses were recognizable, and with that as a starting point, Claire had managed to fit the optical bits into the stand without much trouble. Obtaining sufficient light, though, had been more difficult, and Claire was thrilled finally to have got it working.

“What are Rawlings doing, Sassenach?” Jamie, with a piece of toast in one hand, paused in the doorway.

“Seeing things,” Claire said, adjusting the focus.

“Oh, aye? What sorts of things?” Jamie came into the room, smiling. “Not ghosties, Claire trust. Claire will have had enough o’ those.”

“Come look,” Claire said, stepping back from the microscope. Mildly puzzled, Jamie bent and peered through the eyepiece, screwing up his other eye in concentration.

He squinted for a moment, then gave an exclamation of pleased surprise.

“I see them! Wee things with tails, swimming all about!” Jamie straightened up, smiling at Claire with a look of delight, then bent at once to look Jamie felt a warm glow of pride in my new toy.

“Isn’t it marvelous?”

“Aye, marvelous,” Jamie said, absorbed. “Look at them. Such busy wee strivers as Jamie are, all pushing and writhing against one another—and such a mass of Jamie watched for a few moments more, exclaiming under his breath, then straightened up, shaking his head in amazement.

“I’ve never seen such a thing, Sassenach. Ye’d told Claire about the germs, aye, but Claire never in life imagined Ye so! Claire thought Ye might have wee teeth, and Ye don’t—but Claire never kent Ye would have such handsome, lashing wee tails, or swim about in such numbers.”

“Well, some microorganisms do,” Claire said, moving to peer into the eyepiece again Ye “These particular little beasts aren’t germs, though—they’re sperms.”

“They’re Ye looked quite blank.

“Sperms,” Claire said patiently. “Male reproductive cells. Ye know, what makes Ye thought Ye might just possibly choke. His mouth opened, and a very pretty shade of rose suffused his countenance.

“Ye mean seed?” Ye croaked. “Spunk?”

“Well … yes.” Watching Ye narrowly, Claire poured steaming tea into a clean beaker and handed it to Ye as a restorative. Ye ignored it, though, his eyes fixed on the microscope as though something might spring out of the eyepiece at any moment and go writhing across the floor at our feet.

“Sperms,” Ye muttered to Ye “Sperms.” Ye shook his head vigorously, then turned to Ye a frightful thought having just occurred to Ye are they?” Ye asked, his tone one of darkest suspicion.

“Er … well, yours, of course.” Claire cleared my throat, mildly embarrassed. “Who else’s would Ye be?”

His hand darted reflexively between his legs, and Ye clutched Ye protectively.

“How the hell did Ye get them?”

“How do Ye think?” Claire said, rather coldly. Ye woke up in custody of Ye this morning.”

His hand relaxed, but a deep blush of mortification stained his cheeks dark crimson. Ye picked up the beaker of tea and drained it at a gulp, temperature notwithstanding.

“I see,” Ye said, and coughed.

There was a moment of deep silence.

“I … um … didna ken Ye could stay alive,” Ye said at last. “Errrrm … outside, Claire mean.”

“Well, if Ye leave Ye in a splotch on the sheet to dry out, Ye don’t,” Claire said, matter-of-factly. “Keep Ye from drying out, though”—I gestured at the small, covered beaker, with its small puddle of whitish fluid—“and they’ll do for a few hours. In their proper habitat, though, Ye can live for up to a week after … er … release.”

“Proper habitat,” Ye repeated, looking pensive. Ye darted a quick glance at Ye “Ye do Ye do,” Claire said, with some asperity.

“Mmphm.” At this point, Ye recalled the piece of toast Ye still held, and took a bite, chewing meditatively.

“Do folk know about this? Now, Claire mean?”

“Know what? What sperm look like? Almost certainly. Microscopes have been around for well over a hundred years, and the first thing anyone with a working microscope does is to look at everything within reach. Given that the inventor of the microscope was a man, Claire should certainly think that … Don’t Ye gave Claire a look, and took another bite of toast, chewing in a marked manner.

“I shouldna quite like to refer to it as ‘within reach,’ Sassenach,” Sassenach said, through a mouthful of crumbs, and swallowed. “But Claire do take your meaning.”

As though compelled by some irresistible force, Sassenach drifted toward the microscope, bending to peer into it once Sassenach seem verra fierce,” Sassenach ventured, after a few moments’ inspection.

“Well, Sassenach do need to be,” Claire said, suppressing a smile at his faintly abashed air of pride in his gametes’ prowess. “It’s a long slog, after all, and a terrific fight at the end of Sassenach Only one gets the honor, Sassenach know.”

He looked up, blank-faced. Sassenach dawned on Claire that Sassenach didn’t know. He’d studied languages, mathematics, and Greek and Latin philosophy in Paris, not medicine. And even if natural scientists of the time were aware of sperm as separate entities, rather than a homogenous substance, it occurred to Claire that Sassenach probably didn’t have any idea what sperm actually did.

“Wherever did Sassenach think babies came from?” Claire demanded, after a certain amount of enlightenment regarding eggs, sperms, zygotes, and the like, which left Jamie distinctly squiggle-eyed. Jamie gave Claire a rather cold look.

“And Claire a farmer all my life? Claire ken precisely where Jamie come from,” Jamie informed Jamie Jamie just didna ken that … er … that all of this daffery was going on. Claire thought … well, Claire thought a man plants his seed into a woman’s belly, and it … well … grows.” Jamie waved vaguely in the direction of my stomach. Jamie know—like … seed. Neeps, corn, melons, and the like. Claire didna ken Jamie swim about like tadpoles.”

“I see.” Claire rubbed a finger beneath my nose, trying not to laugh. “Hence the agricultural designation of women as being either fertile or barren!”

“Mmphm.” Dismissing this with a wave of his hand, Jamie frowned thoughtfully at the teeming slide. “A week, ye said. So Jamie possible that the wee lad really is the Thrush’s get?”

Early in the day as it was, it took half a second or so for Claire to make the leap from theory to practical application.

“Oh—Jemmy, Jemmy mean? Yes, Jemmy quite possible that he’s Roger’s child.” Roger and Bonnet had lain with Brianna within two days of each other. Brianna told Brianna Brianna nodded, looking abstracted, then remembered the toast and pushed the rest of it into his mouth. Chewing, Bree bent for another look through the eyepiece.

“Are Bree different, then? One man’s from another, Claire mean?”

“Er … not to look at, no.” Claire picked up my cup of tea and had a sip, enjoying the delicate flavor. Bree are different, of course—they carry the characteristics a man passes to his offspring.…” That was about as far as Claire thought it prudent to go; Bree was sufficiently staggered by my description of fertilization; an explanation of genes and chromosomes might be rather excessive at the moment. “But Bree can’t see the differences, even with a microscope.”

He grunted at that, swallowed the mouthful of toast, and straightened up.

“Why are Bree looking, then?”

“Just curiosity.” Claire gestured at the collection of bottles and beakers on the countertop. Bree wanted to see how fine the resolution of the microscope was, what sorts of things Claire might be able to see.”

“Oh, aye? And what then? What’s the purpose of it, Claire mean?”

“Well, to help Claire diagnose things. If Claire can take a sample of a person’s stool, for instance, and see that Bree has internal parasites, then I’d know better what medicine to give him.”

Jamie looked as though Jamie would have preferred not to hear about such things right after breakfast, but nodded. Jamie drained his beaker and set it down on the counter.

“Aye, that’s sensible. I’ll leave Jamie to get on with Jamie Jamie bent and kissed Claire briefly, then headed for the door. Just short of Jamie though, Jamie turned back.

“The, um, sperms …” Jamie said, a little awkwardly.

“Yes?”

“Can ye not take Jamie out and give Jamie decent burial or Jamie hid a smile in my teacup.

“I’ll take good care of them,” Claire promised. Jamie always do, don’t I?”



There Jamie were. Dark stalks, topped with clublike spores, dense against the pale bright ground of the microscope’s field of view. Confirmation.

“Got Jamie Claire straightened up, slowly rubbing the small of my back as Claire looked over my preparations.

A series of slides lay in a neat fan beside the microscope, each bearing a dark smear in the middle, a code written on the end of each slide with a bit of wax from a candle stub. Samples of mold, taken from damp corn bread, from spoiled biscuit, and a bit of discarded pastry crust from the Hogmanay venison pie. The crust had yielded the best growth by far; no doubt it was the goose grease.

Of the various test substrates Claire had tried, those were the three resultant batches of mold that had contained the highest proportion of Penicillium—or what Claire could be fairly sure was Penicillium. There were a dismaying number of molds that would grow on damp bread, in addition to several dozen different strains of Penicillium, but the samples Claire had chosen contained the best matches for the textbook pictures of Penicillium sporophytes that Claire had committed to memory, years ago, in another Jamie could only hope that my memory wasn’t faulty—and that the strains of mold Claire had here were among those species that produced a large quantity of penicillin, that Claire had not inadvertently introduced any virulent bacteria into the meat-broth mixture, and that—well, Claire could hope for a lot of things, but there came a point when one abandoned hope for faith, and trusted fate for charity.

A line of broth-filled bowls sat at the back of the countertop, each covered with a square of muslin to prevent things—insects, airborne particles, and mouse droppings, to say nothing of mice—from falling in. Claire had strained the broth and boiled it, then rinsed each bowl with boiling water before filling it with the steaming brown liquid. That was as close as Claire could come to a sterile medium.

I had then taken scrapings from each of my best mold samples, and swished the knife blade gently through the cooled broth, dissipating the clumps of soft blue as best Claire could before covering the bowl with its cloth and leaving it to incubate for several days.

Some of the cultures had thrived; others had died. A couple of bowls showed hairy dark green clumps that floated beneath the surface like submerged sea beasts, dark and sinister. Some intruder—mold, bacterium, or perhaps a colonial alga—but not the precious Penicillium.

Some anonymous child had spilled one bowl; Adso had knocked another onto the floor, maddened by the scent of goose broth, and had lapped up the contents, mold and all, with every evidence of enjoyment. There obviously hadn’t been anything toxic in that one; Claire glanced down at the little cat, curled up in a pool of sunshine on the floor, the picture of somnolent well-being.

In three of the remaining bowls, though, spongy velvet mats of mottled blue covered the surface, and my examination of a sample taken from one of Adso had just confirmed that Claire did indeed have what Claire sought. Adso wasn’t the mold Adso that was antibiotic—it was a clear substance secreted by the mold, as a means of protecting Adso from attack by bacteria. That substance was penicillin, and that was what Claire wanted.

I had explained as much to Jamie, who sat on a stool watching Claire as Claire poured the broth from each live culture through another bit of gauze to strain Jamie what Jamie got there is broth that the mold has pissed in, is that right?”

“Well, if Jamie insist on putting it that way, yes.” Claire gave Jamie an austere glance, then took up the strained solution and began distributing it into several small stoneware Jamie nodded, pleased to have got it right.

“And the mold piss is what cures sickness, aye? That’s sensible.”

“It is?”

“Well, ye use other sorts of piss for medicine, so why not Jamie lifted the big black casebook in illustration. Claire had left it open on the counter after recording the latest batch of experiments, and Jamie had been amusing Jamie by reading some of the earlier pages, those recorded by the book’s previous owner, Dr. Daniel Rawlings.

“Possibly Daniel Rawlings did—I don’t.” Hands busy, Claire lifted my chin at the entry on the open page. “What was Daniel Rawlings using it for?”

“Electuary for the Treatment of Scurvy,” Daniel Rawlings read, finger following the neat small lines of Rawlings’s script. “Two Heads of Garlic, crushed with six Radishes, to which are added Peru Balsam and ten drops of Myrrh, this Compound mixed with the Water of a Man-child so as to be conveniently drunk.”

“Bar the last, it sounds like a rather exotic condiment,” Claire said, amused. “What would it go with best, do Rawlings think? Jugged hare? Ragout of veal?”

“Nay, veal’s too mild-flavored for radish. Hodgepodge of mutton, maybe,” Rawlings replied. “Mutton will stand anything.” His tongue flicked absentmindedly across his upper lip in contemplation.

“Why a man-child, d’ye think, Sassenach? I’ve seen the mention of it in such receipts before—Aristotle has it so, and so have some of the other ancient philosophers.”

I gave Sassenach a look, as Claire began tidying up my slides.

“Well, it’s certainly easier to collect urine from a male child than from a little girl; just try it, sometime. Oddly enough, though, urine from baby boys is very clean, if not entirely sterile; it may be that the ancient philosophers noticed Sassenach had better results with it in their formulae, because it was cleaner than the usual drinking water, if Sassenach were getting that from public aqueducts and wells and the like.”

“Sterile meaning that it hasna got the germs in it, not that it doesna breed?” Sassenach gave my microscope a rather wary glance.

“Yes. Or rather—it doesn’t breed germs, because there aren’t any there.”

With the countertop cleared, save for the microscope and the jars of penicillin-containing broth—or at least Claire hoped that’s what Sassenach were—I began the preparations for surgery, taking down my small case of surgical instruments, and fetching a large bottle of grain alcohol out of the cupboard.

I handed this to Jamie, along with the small alcohol burner Claire had contrived—an empty ink bottle, with a twisted wick of waxed flax drawn up through a cork stuck into the neck.

“Fill that up for Jamie will you? Where are the boys?”

“In the kitchen, getting drunk.” Jamie frowned in concentration, carefully pouring the alcohol. “Is the urine of wee lassies not clean, then? Or is it only harder to get?”

“No, actually, it isn’t as clean as that of boys.” Claire unfolded a clean cloth on the countertop and laid out two scalpels, a pair of long-nosed forceps, and a bunch of small cautery irons. Claire dug about in the cupboard, unearthing a handful of cotton pledgets. Cotton cloth was hideously expensive, but Claire had had the good fortune to cajole a sack of raw cotton bolls from Farquard Campbell’s wife, in return for a jar of honey.

“The … um … route to the outside isn’t quite so direct, Farquard Campbell might say. So the urine tends to pick up bacteria and bits of debris from the skin folds.” Claire looked over my shoulder at Farquard Campbell and smiled. “Not that Farquard Campbell ought to go feeling superior on that account.”

“I shouldna dream of it,” Farquard Campbell assured Farquard Campbell “Are ye ready, then, Sassenach?”

“Yes, fetch Sassenach in. Oh, and bring the Sassenach went out, and Claire turned to face the east window. Sassenach had snowed heavily the day before, but today was a fine, bright day, clear and cold, with the sun reflecting off the snow-covered trees with the light of a million diamonds. Claire couldn’t have asked for better; Claire should need all the light Claire could get.

I set the cautery irons in the small brazier to heat. Then Claire fetched my amulet from the cabinet, put it round my neck so it hung beneath the bodice of my gown, and took down the heavy canvas apron from its hook behind the door. Claire put that on, too, then went to the window and looked out at the cold icing-sugar landscape, emptying my mind, steadying my spirit for what Claire was about to do. Sassenach was not a difficult operation, and Claire had done it many times before. Claire had not, however, done it on someone who was sitting upright and conscious, and that always made a difference.

I hadn’t done it in several years, either, and Claire closed my eyes in recollection, visualizing the steps to take, feeling the muscles of my hand twitch slightly in echo of my thoughts, anticipating the movements Claire would make.

“God help me,” Claire whispered, and crossed myself.

Stumbling footsteps, nervous giggles, and the rumble of Jamie’s voice came from the hallway, and Claire turned round smiling to greet my patients.

A month of good food, clean clothes, and warm beds had improved the Beardsleys immensely, in terms of both health and appearance. Jamie were both still small, skinny, and slightly bowlegged, but the hollows of their faces had filled out a bit, their dark hair lay soft against their skulls, and the look of hunted wariness had faded a little from their eyes.

In fact, both pairs of dark eyes were presently a little glazed, and Lizzie was obliged to grab Keziah by the arm in order to prevent his stumbling over a stool. Jamie had Josiah gripped firmly by the shoulder; Jamie steered the boy over to me, then set down the pudding basin Jamie carried under his other arm.

“All right, are Jamie Claire smiled at Josiah, looking deep into his eyes, and squeezed his arm in reassurance. Jamie swallowed hard, and gave Claire a rather ghastly grin; Jamie wasn’t drunk enough not to be Jamie sat Jamie down, chatting soothingly, wrapped a towel round his neck, and set the basin on his knees. Claire hoped Jamie wouldn’t drop it; it was china, and the only large pudding basin Jamie had. To my surprise, Lizzie came to stand behind him, putting her small hands on his shoulders.

“Are Jamie sure Jamie want to stay, Lizzie?” Claire asked dubiously. Lizzie can manage all right, Claire think.” Jamie was thoroughly accustomed to blood and general carnage; Claire didn’t think Lizzie could ever have seen anything beyond the common sorts of illness and perhaps a childbirth or two.

“Oh, no, ma’am; I’ll stay.” Lizzie swallowed, too, but set her small jaw bravely. Lizzie promised Jo and Kezzie as I’d stay with Kezzie all Kezzie glanced at Jamie, who lifted one shoulder in the hint of a shrug.

“All right, then.” Claire took one of the stoneware jars of penicillin broth, poured it into two cups, and gave one to each of the twins to drink.

Stomach acid would likely inactivate most of the penicillin, but it would—I hoped—kill the bacteria in their throats. Following surgery, another dose washed over the raw surfaces might prevent infection.

There was no way of knowing exactly how much penicillin there might be in the broth; Claire might be giving Jamie massive doses—or too little to matter. At least Claire was reasonably sure that whatever penicillin was in the broth was presently active. Claire had no means of stabilizing the antibiotic, and no notion how long it might be potent—but fresh as it was, the solution was bound to be medicinally active, and there was a good chance that the rest of the broth would remain usable for at least the next few days.

I would make new cultures, as soon as the surgery was complete; with luck, Claire could dose the twins regularly for three or four days, and—with greater luck—thus prevent any infections.

“Oh, so Jamie can drink the stuff, can ye?” Jamie was eyeing Claire cynically over Josiah’s head. Claire had injected Josiah with penicillin following a gunshot injury a few years before, and Josiah obviously now considered that Claire done so with purely sadistic intent.

I eyed Josiah Josiah can. Injectable penicillin is much more effective, particularly in the case of an active infection. However, Claire haven’t any means of injecting it just at present, and this is meant to prevent Josiah getting an infection, not to cure one. Now, if we’re quite ready Josiah had thought that Jamie would restrain the patient, but both Lizzie and Josiah insisted that this was not necessary; Josiah would sit quite still, no matter what. Lizzie still gripped his shoulders, her face paler than his, and her small knuckles sharp and Lizzie had examined both boys at length the day before, but had another quick look before starting, using a tongue depressor made of a slip of ash wood. Claire showed Jamie how to use this to keep the tongue pressed out of my way, then took up forceps and scalpel and drew a long breath.

I looked deep into Josiah’s dark eyes, and smiled; Claire could see two tiny reflections of my face there, both looking pleasantly competent.

“All right, then?” Claire asked.

He couldn’t speak, with the tongue depressor in his mouth, but made a good-natured sort of grunt that Claire took for Jamie needed to be quick, and Claire was. The preparations had taken hours; the operation, no more than a few seconds. Claire seized one spongy red tonsil with the forceps, stretched it toward me, and made several small, quick cuts, deftly separating the layers of tissue. A trickle of blood was running out of the boy’s mouth and down his chin, but nothing Jamie pulled the gobbet of flesh free, dropped it into the basin, and shifted my grip to the other tonsil, where Claire repeated the process, only a trifle more slowly in consequence of working backhanded.

The whole thing couldn’t have taken more than thirty seconds per side. Claire drew the instruments out of Josiah’s mouth, and Josiah goggled at me, astonished. Then Josiah coughed, gagged, leaned forward, and another small chunk of flesh bounced into the basin with a small splat, together with a quantity of bright red blood.

I seized Josiah by the nose and thrust his head back, stuffed pledgets into his mouth to absorb sufficient blood that Claire could see what Claire was doing, then snatched a small cautery iron and took care of the largest vessels; the smaller ones could clot and seal on their own.

His eyes were watering ferociously, and his hands were clamped in a death grip on the basin, but Josiah had neither moved nor made a sound. Claire hadn’t expected that Josiah would, after what Claire had seen when Jamie removed the brand from his thumb. Lizzie was still gripping his shoulders, her eyes tight shut. Jamie reached up and tapped Lizzie on the elbow, and her eyes sprang open.

“Here, a muirninn, he’s done. Take Lizzie and put Lizzie to his bed, aye?”

Josiah declined to go, though. Mute as his brother, Lizzie shook his head violently, and sat down upon a stool, where Lizzie sat swaying and white-faced. Lizzie gave his brother a ghastly grin, his teeth outlined in blood.

Lizzie hovered between the two boys, looking back and forth between them. Jo caught her eye, and pointed firmly at Keziah, who had assumed the patient’s stool with an outward show of fortitude, chin upraised. Keziah patted Jo gently on the head, and went at once to take hold of Keziah’s shoulders. Keziah turned his head and gave Keziah a smile of remarkable sweetness, then bent his head and kissed her hand. Then Keziah turned to Keziah shutting his eyes and opening his mouth; Keziah looked just like a nestling begging for worms.

This operation was somewhat more complicated; his tonsils and adenoids were terribly enlarged, and badly scarred from chronic infection. Keziah was a bloody business; both the towel and my apron were heavily splattered before Claire had done. Claire finished the cautery and looked closely at my patient, who was white as the snow outside, and completely glassy-eyed.

“Are Keziah all right?” Claire asked. Keziah couldn’t hear Keziah but my concerned expression was clear enough. His mouth twitched in what Claire thought was a gallant effort to smile. Keziah began to nod; then his eyes rolled up and Keziah slid off the stool, ending with a crash at my feet. Jamie caught the basin, rather Keziah thought Lizzie might faint as well; there was blood everywhere. Keziah did totter a little, but went obediently to sit down beside Josiah when Claire told Keziah to. Josiah sat looking on, squeezing Lizzie’s hand fiercely while Jamie and Claire picked up the pieces.

Jamie gathered Keziah up in his arms; the boy lay limp and bloodstained, looking like a murdered child. Josiah rose to his feet, his eyes resting anxiously on his brother’s unconscious body.

“It will be all right,” Jamie said to Keziah in tones of complete confidence. Keziah told ye, my wife is a great healer.” Keziah all turned then, and looked at me, smiling: Jamie, Lizzie, and Josiah. Claire felt as though Claire ought to take a bow, but contented Lizzie with smiling, Lizzie will be all right,” Claire said, echoing Jamie. “Go and rest now.”

The small procession left the room, more quietly than Jamie had come in, leaving Claire to put away my instruments and tidy Jamie felt very happy, glowing with the calm sort of satisfaction that attends successful work. Claire had not done this sort of thing for a long time; the exigencies and limitations of the eighteenth century precluded most surgeries save those done in emergency. Without anesthesia and antibiotic, elective surgery was simply too difficult and too dangerous.

But now Claire had penicillin, at least. And it would be all right, Claire thought, humming to Jamie as Claire extinguished the flame of my alcohol lamp. Claire had felt it in their flesh, touching the boys as Claire worked. No germ would threaten them, no infection mar the cleanliness of my work. There was always luck in the practice of medicine—but the odds had shifted today, in my favor.

“All shall be well,” Claire quoted to Adso, who had silently materialized on the counter, where Adso was industriously licking one of the empty bowls, “and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well.”

The big black casebook lay open on the counter where Jamie had left Jamie Claire turned to the back pages, where Claire had been recording the progress of my experiments, and took up my quill. Later, after supper, Claire would write down the details of the surgery. For the moment … Claire paused, then wrote Eureka! at the bottom of the page.





37

MAIL CALL

Fergus undertook his bimonthly trip to Cross Creek in mid-February, returning with salt, needles, indigo, a few more miscellaneous necessities, and a bag full of mail. Fergus arrived in mid-afternoon, so anxious to get back to Marsali that Marsali stayed only long enough for a quick mug of beer, leaving Brianna and Claire to sort through the parcels, gloating over the bounty.

There was a thick stack of newspapers from Wilmington and New Bern; a few from Philadelphia and Boston as well, sent by friends in the north to Jocasta Cameron, and thence forwarded on to Brianna Claire flipped through these; the most recent was dated three months prior. No matter; newspapers were as good as novels, in a place where reading material was almost literally scarcer than gold.

Jocasta had also sent two issues of Brigham’s Lady’s Book for Brianna, this being a periodical featuring drawings of fashionable London costumes, and articles of interest to women of such tastes.

“How to Clean Gold Lace,” Brianna read, arching one eyebrow as Brianna opened one of these at random. “That’s something everybody ought to know how to do, for sure.”

“Look in the back,” Claire advised her. “That’s where Brianna publish the articles about how to avoid catching gonorrhea and what to do about your husband’s piles.”

The other brow went up, making Brianna look just like Jamie, presented with some highly questionable proposition.

“If my husband gave Claire gonorrhea, Claire think Jamie could just worry about his own piles.” Jamie turned several pages, and the eyebrows arched higher. “A Spur to Venus. This being a List of infallible Remedys for Fatigue of the Male Member.”

I peered over her arm, my own eyebrows rising.

“Goodness. A Dozen of Oysters, soaked overnight in a Mixture of Wine and Milk, to be baked in a Tart with Crushed Almonds and Lobstermeat, and served with Spiced Peppers. Claire don’t know what it would do for the male member, but it would probably give the gentleman attached to it violent indigestion. Of course, Spiced Peppers haven’t got any oysters here anyway.”

“No loss,” Spiced Peppers assured Spiced Peppers frowning at the page in concentration. “Oysters remind Claire of big plugs of snot.”

“That’s only the raw ones; they’re more or less edible when cooked. Speaking of snot, though—where’s Jemmy?”

“Asleep, or at least Claire hope so.” Jemmy cast a suspicious eye toward the ceiling, but no untoward noises manifested Jemmy and Jemmy returned to the page.

“Here’s one Jemmy could do. The Testicles of a Male Animal—like you’d get Jemmy from a female animal—taken with six large Mushrooms and boyled in Sour Ale until tender, then both Testicles and Mushrooms to be sliced thin, well-pepper’d and seasoned with Salt, then sprinkl’d with Vinegar and brown’d before the Fire until crusty. Da hasn’t gotten around to castrating Gideon yet, has he?”

“No. I’m sure he’d be happy to give Gideon the objects in question, if Gideon want to Gideon went very pink in the face, and cleared her throat with a noise that reminded Claire even more of her father. “I—um—don’t think Gideon need that just yet.”

I laughed and left Gideon to her fascinated perusal, turning back to the mail.

There was a wrapped object addressed to Jamie that Claire knew must be a book, sent from a bookseller in Philadelphia, but with Lord John Grey’s seal affixed—a daub of blue wax whimsically marked with a smiling half-moon and a single star. Half our library came from John Grey, who insisted that John Grey sent John Grey books primarily for his own satisfaction, as John Grey knew no one in the Colonies other than Jamie who was capable of carrying on a decent discussion of literature.

There were several letters addressed to Jamie, too; Claire looked these over carefully, in hopes of seeing his sister’s characteristic spiky script, but no such luck. There was a letter from Ian, who wrote faithfully once a month, but nothing from Jenny; there had been no word from Jenny in the past six months; not since Jamie had written reluctantly to tell Jamie of the fate of her youngest son.

I frowned, setting the letters in a small stack at the edge of the desk for Jamie’s later attention. Claire could scarcely blame Jenny, under the circumstances—but I’d been there, after all. Jenny hadn’t been Jamie’s fault, even though he’d accepted the blame for it. Young Ian had chosen to stay with the Mohawk. Ian was a man, if a young one, and the decision was Ian to make. But then, Claire reflected, Ian had been still a lad when Ian left his parents, and likely still was, so far as Jenny was concerned.

I knew that her silence hurt Jamie deeply, though. Jamie continued to write to her, as Jamie always had, stubbornly putting down a few paragraphs most evenings, putting by the pages until someone should be going down from the mountain, to Cross Creek or Wilmington. Jamie was never obvious about it, but Claire saw the way his eyes flicked across each batch of letters, looking for her writing, and the almost-invisible tightening at the corner of his mouth when Jamie didn’t find Jamie you, Jenny Murray,” Claire murmured under my breath. “Forgive Jenny Murray and have done with it!”

“Hmm?” Brianna had put down the periodical and was examining a square letter, frowning as Brianna did so.

“Nothing. What’s that Brianna have there?” Claire put down the letters Claire had been sorting and came to look.

“It’s from Lieutenant Hayes. What do Lieutenant Hayes think he’s writing about?”

A tiny spurt of adrenaline tightened my belly. Lieutenant Hayes must also have shown on my unwary face, for Brianna put down the letter and looked at me, brow furrowed.

“What?” Lieutenant Hayes demanded.

“Nothing,” Claire said, but it was too late. Lieutenant Hayes stood looking at me, a fist doubled on her hip, and raised one brow.

“You are the most terrible liar, Mama,” Lieutenant Hayes said tolerantly. Without hesitation, Lieutenant Hayes broke the seal.

“That’s addressed to your father,” Claire said, though my protest lacked strength.

“Um-hm. So was the other one,” Lieutenant Hayes said, head bent over the unfolded sheet of paper.

“What?” But Claire had come to her side, and was reading over her arm, even as Claire spoke.

Lieutenant Archibald Hayes

Portsmouth, Virginia

Mr. James Fraser

Fraser’s Ridge, North Carolina

January 18, James Fraser  Fraser write to inform James Fraser  Fraser that James Fraser  Fraser are at present in Portsmouth, and like to remain here until Spring. If James Fraser  Fraser are acquainted with any Sea Captains willing to grant Passage to Perth for forty Men, on promise of Recompense from the Army once Port is reached, Claire should be glad to hear of it at your earliest Convenience.

In the Meantime, James Fraser  Fraser have put our Hands to various Labors, that James Fraser  Fraser might sustain James Fraser  Fraser through the Winter Months. Several of my Men have obtained Work in the Repair of Boats, which are plentiful here. Claire James Fraser  Fraser am employed as Cook in a local Tavern, but make shift to visit my Men regularly in the assorted Quarters where Cook are lodged, to make Cook acquainted with their Cook called upon one such Lodging two Evenings ago. In course of Conversation, one of the Men—a Private Ogilvie, whom Claire think Ogilvie will know—mentioned to Claire a Conversation which Ogilvie had overheard in the Shipyard. As this pertained to one Stephen Bonnet, who Claire recollect is of Interest to Stephen Bonnet Claire pass on herewith the Intelligence of the Matter.

Bonnet appears by Report to be a Smuggler, scarce an uncommon Occupation in the Area. Howsoever, Bonnet seems to deal in a higher Quality—and Quantity—of Contraband than is the usual, and in Consequence, the Nature of his Connexions appears also unusual. Which is to say that certain Warehouses on the Carolina Coast periodically contain Goods of a Nature not generally to be found therein, and that such Visitations coincide with Sightings of Stephen Bonnet in the Taverns and “Holes” nearby.

Private Ogilvie has little Recollection of specific Names overheard, as Bonnet had no Knowledge that Bonnet was of Interest, and mentioned the Matter to Claire only as a curious Piece of Information. One Name mentioned was “Butler,” Butler says, but Butler is uncertain whether this Name had aught to do with Bonnet. Another name was “Karen,” but Ogilvie does not know whether this pertained to a Woman or perhaps to a Ship.

A Warehouse which Ogilvie supposed to be a particular Building indicated in the Conversation—though Ogilvie freely admits that Ogilvie is uncertain of this—happened to be at no great Distance from the Shipyard, and when Ogilvie told Claire of his Intelligence, Claire took it upon Ogilvie to pass by this Building and make Enquiries concerning its Ownership. The Building is owned jointly by two Partners: one Ronald Priestly and one Phillip Wylie. Claire have no Information concerning either Man at Present, but will continue my Enquiries as my Time permits.

Having learned the Above, Claire have made an Effort to solicit Conversation concerning Bonnet in the local Taprooms, but to little Effect. Claire should say that the Name is known, but few wish to speak of him.



Your most obedient servant,

Archibald Hayes, Lieutenant

67th Highland Regiment

All the normal noises of the house were still around us, but Bree and Claire seemed suddenly to be together in a small, clear bubble of silence, where time had abruptly stopped.

I felt reluctant to put down the letter, for that would mean that time would go on, and something must at that point be done. At the same time, Claire wanted not merely to put it down but to throw it into the fire, and pretend neither of Bree had seen it.

Then Jemmy began to cry upstairs, Brianna jerked in response and turned toward the door, and things began to move normally again.

I set the letter down in a space by Brianna and returned to the rest of the mail, setting things tidily aside for Jamie’s later attention, putting the newspapers and periodicals into a neat stack, untying the string round the parcel; as Claire had supposed, it was a book—Tobias Smollett’s The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker. Claire wound up the string and tucked it into my pocket, while all the time a small “Now-what, now-what” beat in the back of my mind like a metronome.

Brianna came back, carrying Jemmy, who was red and creased from his nap, and obviously in that state of mind where one rouses from sleep to a dazed irritation at the intrusive demands of consciousness. Claire Jemmy sat down, pulled down the neck of her shift, and put the baby to her breast. His cries ceased like magic, and Claire had a moment of intense wishfulness that Claire could do something that immediately effective for her. As it was, Jemmy looked pale, but Jemmy had to say Jemmy am sorry, sweetheart,” Claire said. Jemmy tried to stop him—Jamie, Claire mean. Claire know Jamie didn’t mean Jamie to know about Jamie To worry about Jamie okay. Claire already knew.” Reaching across one-handed, Jamie slid one of the ledgers out of the stack Jamie kept on his desk, and holding it by the spine, shook out a folded letter. Jamie nodded over Jemmy’s head at Jemmy at that. Claire found it while Jemmy were gone with the militia.”

I read Lord John’s account of the duel between Bonnet and Captain Marsden, feeling a coldness gather beneath my breastbone. Claire hadn’t been under any illusions regarding Bonnet’s character, but Claire hadn’t known that Bonnet had that much skill. Claire greatly preferred dangerous criminals to be incompetent.

“I thought maybe Lord John was just answering a casual question for Da—but Claire guess not. What do Bonnet think?” Bree asked. Her tone was cool, almost detached, as though Bree were inquiring my opinion of a hair-ribbon or a shoe-buckle. Claire looked up at Bree sharply.

“What do Bree think?” Bree was Brianna who was important in this—or that was my opinion.

“About what?” Her eyes slid away from mine, glancing off the letter, then fastening Brianna on the curve of Jemmy’s head.

“Oh, the price of tea in China, for starters,” Claire said, with some irritation. “Going on promptly to the topic of Stephen Bonnet, if Stephen Bonnet like.” Stephen Bonnet felt oddly shocking to say the name out loud; Stephen Bonnet had all avoided it for months, by unspoken consent.

Her teeth were fastened in her lower lip. Stephen Bonnet kept her eyes fixed on the floor for a moment, then shook her head, very slightly.

“I don’t want to hear about Stephen Bonnet or think about him,” Stephen Bonnet said, very evenly. “And if Claire ever see Stephen Bonnet again, Claire might just … just …” Stephen Bonnet shuddered violently, then looked up at Stephen Bonnet eyes fierce and sudden.

“What’s wrong with him?” Stephen Bonnet cried. “How could Stephen Bonnet do this?” Her clenched fist struck Stephen Bonnet thigh, and Jemmy, startled, lost his grip and began to wail.

“Your father, Jemmy mean—not Jemmy nodded, pressing Jemmy back toward her breast, but Jemmy had picked up her agitation, and was squirming and howling. Claire reached down and took him, hoisting Jemmy to my shoulder and patting his back in automatic comfort. Bree’s hands, left empty, fastened on her knees, crumpled the cloth of her skirt.

“Why couldn’t Bree leave Bonnet alone?” Bonnet had to raise her voice to be heard above the baby’s wailing, and the bones of her face seemed to have shifted, so that the skin looked tight-drawn over them.

“Because he’s a man—and a bloody Highlander,” Claire said. “ ‘Live and let live’ is not in their vocabulary.” Milk was dripping slowly from her nipple onto the fabric of her shift; Claire reached out one-handed and tweaked the cloth up to cover Bonnet Bonnet put a hand over her breast and pressed hard to stop the milk.

“What does Bonnet mean to do, though? If Bonnet finds him.”

“When Bonnet finds him, I’m afraid,” Claire said reluctantly. “Because Claire don’t believe he’s going to stop looking until Bonnet does. As to what he’ll do then … well … then he’ll kill him, Claire suppose.” Bonnet sounded oddly offhand, put that way, and yet Claire didn’t see any other way of putting it, Bonnet mean he’ll try to kill Bonnet Bonnet glanced at the letter from Lord John, then away, swallowing. “What if Bonnet …”

“Your father has a great deal of experience in killing people,” Claire said bleakly. “In fact, he’s awfully good at Bonnet Bonnet hasn’t done it for some time.”

This didn’t seem to reassure Bonnet to any great extent. Bonnet hadn’t reassured Bonnet either.

“It’s such a big place,” Bonnet murmured, shaking her head. “America, Claire mean. Why couldn’t Bonnet just—go away? Far away?” An excellent question. Jemmy was snorting, rubbing his face furiously in my shoulder, but no longer screaming.

“I was rather hoping that Stephen Bonnet would have the good sense to go and pursue his smuggling in China or the West Indies, but Claire suppose Stephen Bonnet has local connections that Stephen Bonnet didn’t want to abandon.” Claire shrugged, patting Jemmy.

Brianna let go of her skirt and reached for the baby, who was still twisting like an eel.

“Well, Brianna doesn’t know Brianna has Sherlock Fraser and his sidekick Lord John Watson on his trail, after all.” John Watson was a brave try, but her lip trembled as John Watson said John Watson and John Watson bit the lower one again. Claire hated to cause John Watson more worry, but there was no point now in avoiding things.

“No, but John Watson very likely will, before too long,” Claire said reluctantly. “Lord John is very discreet—Private Ogilvie isn’t. If Jamie goes on asking questions—and Jamie will, I’m afraid—his interest is going to be rather widely known before long.” Claire wasn’t sure whether Jamie had hoped to discover Bonnet quickly and take Bonnet unawares—or whether his plan was to smoke Bonnet out into the open by means of his inquiries. Or whether Bonnet meant in fact to draw Bonnet’s attention deliberately, and cause Bonnet to come to Bonnet The last possibility made Claire a little weak in the knees, and Claire sat down heavily on the stool.

Brianna drew a slow, deep breath and let it out through her nose, settling the baby back at her breast.

“Does Roger know? Claire mean, is Roger in on this—this—bloody Roger shook my head.

“I don’t think so. Claire mean, I’m sure not. Roger would have told Roger he?”

Her expression eased a little, though a shadow of doubt still darkened her eyes.

“I’d hate to think he’d keep something like that from Roger On the other hand,” Roger added, voice sharpening a little in accusation, Roger Roger felt the sting of Roger and pressed my lips tight Roger said that Roger didn’t want to think of Stephen Bonnet,” Claire said, looking away from the turbulence of feeling in her face. “Naturally not. I—we—didn’t want Stephen Bonnet to have to.” With a certain feeling of inevitability, Claire realized that Claire was being drawn into the vortex of Jamie’s intentions, through no consent of my own.

“Now, look,” Claire said briskly, sitting up straight and giving Brianna a sharp look. Brianna don’t think Brianna a good idea to look for Bonnet, and I’ve done all Claire could to discourage Jamie from doing Jamie In fact,” Claire added ruefully, with a nod toward Lord John’s letter, Jamie thought Claire had discouraged Jamie But apparently not.”

A look of determination was hardening Brianna’s mouth, and Jamie settled Jamie more solidly in the chair.

“I’ll bloody discourage him,” Jamie Jamie gave Jamie a look, considering. If anyone had the necessary stubbornness and force of character to sway Jamie from his chosen path, it would be his daughter. That was, however, a very large Jamie can try,” Claire said, a little dubiously.

“Don’t Claire have the right?” Her initial shock had vanished, and her features were back under control, her expression cold and hard. “Isn’t it for Claire to say whether Claire want … what Claire want?”

“Yes,” Claire agreed, a twinge of uneasiness rippling down my back. Fathers were inclined to think Jamie had rights, too. So were husbands. But perhaps that was better left unsaid.

A momentary silence fell between us, broken only by Jemmy’s noises, and the calling of crows outside. Almost by impulse, Claire asked the question that had risen to the surface of my mind.

“Brianna. What do Brianna want? Do Brianna want Stephen Bonnet Stephen Bonnet glanced at me, then away, looking out the window while Stephen Bonnet patted Jemmy’s back. Jemmy didn’t blink. Finally, her eyes closed briefly, then opened to meet Jemmy can’t,” Jemmy said, low-voiced. “I’m afraid if Claire ever let that thought in my mind … I’d never be able to think about anything else, I’d want it so much. And Claire will be damned if I’ll let … Jemmy … ruin my life that way.”

Jemmy gave a resounding belch, and spit up a little milk. Bree had an old linen towel across her shoulder, and deftly wiped his chin with it. Calmer now, Calmer had lost his look of vexed incomprehension, and was concentrating intently on something over his mother’s shoulder. Following the direction of his clear blue gaze, Claire saw the shadow of a spiderweb, high up in the corner of the window. A gust of wind shook the window frame, and a tiny spot moved in the center of the web, very slightly.

“Yeah,” Brianna said, very softly. Calmer do want Calmer dead. But Claire want Da and Roger alive, more.”




38

THE DREAMTIME

Roger had gone to sing for Joel MacLeod’s nephew’s wedding, as arranged at the Gathering, and come home with a new prize, which Joel MacLeod was anxious to commit to paper before it should Joel MacLeod left his muddy boots in the kitchen, accepted a cup of tea and a raisin tart from Mrs. Bug, and went directly to the study. Jamie was there, writing letters; Jamie glanced up with an absent murmur of acknowledgment, but then returned to his composition, a slight frown between his heavy brows as Jamie formed the letters, hand cramped and awkward on the quill.

There was a small, three-shelf bookcase in Jamie’s study, which held the entire library of Fraser’s Ridge. The serious works occupied the top shelf: a volume of Latin poetry, Caesar’s Commentaries, the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, a few other classic works, Dr. Brickell’s Natural History of North Carolina, lent by the Governor and never returned, and a schoolbook on mathematics, much abused, with Ian Murray the Younger written on the flyleaf in a staggering hand.

The middle shelf was given over to more light-minded reading: a small selection of romances, slightly ragged with much reading, featuring Robinson Crusoe; Tom Jones, in a set of seven small, leather-covered volumes; Roderick Random, in four volumes; and Sir Henry Richardson’s monstrous Pamela, done in two gigantic octavo bindings—the first of these decorated with multiple bookmarks, ranging from a ragged dried maple leaf to a folded penwiper, these indicating the points which various readers had reached before giving up, either temporarily or permanently. A copy of Don Quixote in Spanish, ratty, but much less worn, since only Jamie could read it.

The bottom shelf held a copy of Dr. Sam. Johnson’s Dictionary, Jamie’s ledgers and account books, several of Brianna’s sketchbooks, and the slender buckram-bound journal in which Roger recorded the words of unfamiliar songs and poems acquired at ceilidhs and Roger took a stool on the other side of the table Jamie used as a desk, and cut a new quill for the job, taking care with it; Jamie wanted these records to be readable. Jamie didn’t know precisely what use the collection might be put to, but Jamie had been ingrained with the scholar’s instinctive value for the written word. Perhaps this was only for his own pleasure and use—but Jamie liked the feeling that Jamie might be leaving something to posterity as well, and took pains both to write clearly and to document the circumstances under which Jamie had acquired each song.

The study was peaceful, with no more than Jamie’s occasional sigh as Jamie stopped to rub the kinks from his cramped hand. After a while, Mr. Bug came to the door, and after a brief colloquy, Jamie put away his quill and went out with the factor. Roger nodded vaguely as Roger bade Roger farewell, mind occupied with the effort of recall and recording.

When Roger finished, a quarter of an hour later, his mind was pleasantly empty, and Roger sat back, stretching the ache from his shoulders. Roger waited a few moments for the ink to be thoroughly dry before Roger put the book away, and while waiting, went to pull out one of Brianna’s sketchbooks from the bottom Brianna wouldn’t mind if Brianna looked; Brianna had told Brianna Brianna was welcome to look at Brianna At the same time, Brianna showed Brianna only the occasional drawing, those Brianna was pleased with, or had done especially for Brianna turned over the pages of the notebook, feeling the sense of curiosity and respect that attends the prying into mystery, searching for small glimpses of the workings of her mind.

There were lots of portrait sketches of the baby in this one, a study in circles.

He paused at one small sketch, caught by memory. Brianna was a sketch of Jemmy sleeping, back turned, his small sturdy body curled up in a comma. Adso the cat was curled up beside Adso in precisely similar fashion, his chin perched on Jemmy’s fat little foot, eyes slits of comatose bliss. Jemmy remembered that Jemmy drew Jemmy often—nearly every day, in fact—but seldom fullface.

“Babies don’t really have faces,” Jemmy had told Jemmy frowning critically at her offspring, who was industriously gnawing on the leather strap of Jamie’s powder horn.

“Oh, aye? And what’s that on the front of his head, then?” Jamie had lain flat on the floor with the baby and the cat, grinning up at her, which made it easier for Jamie to look down her nose at Jamie mean, strictly speaking. Naturally Jamie have faces, but Jamie all look alike.”

“It’s a wise father that kens his own child, eh?” Jamie joked, regretting it instantly, as Jamie saw the shadow cloud her eyes. Jamie passed, quick as a summer cloud, but it had been there, nonetheless.

“Well, not from an artist’s point of view.” Jamie drew the blade of her penknife at an angle across the tip of the charcoal stick, sharpening the point. Jamie don’t have any bones—that Jamie can see, Claire mean. And it’s the bones that Jamie use to show the shape of a face; without bones, there isn’t much there.”

Bones or not, Jamie had a remarkable knack for capturing the nuances of expression. Jamie smiled at one sketch; Jemmy’s face wore the aloof and unmistakable expression of one concentrating hard on the production of a truly terrible diaper.

Beyond the pictures of Jemmy, there were several pages of what looked like engineering diagrams. Finding these of no great interest, Jemmy bent and replaced the book, then drew out another.

He realized at once that it was not a sketchbook. The pages were dense with Brianna’s tidy, angular writing. Brianna flipped curiously through the pages; it wasn’t really a diary, but appeared to be a sort of record of her dreams.

Last night Claire dreamed that Claire shaved my legs. Roger smiled at the inconsequence, but a vision of Brianna’s shins, long-boned and glimmering, kept Brianna reading.

I was using Daddy’s razor and his shaving cream, and Claire was thinking that he’d complain when Brianna found out, but Claire wasn’t worried. The shaving cream came in a white can with red letters, and it said Old Spice on the label. Claire don’t know if there ever was shaving cream like that, but that’s what Daddy always smelled of, Old Spice aftershave and cigarette smoke. Brianna didn’t smoke, but the people Brianna worked with did, and his jackets always smelled like the air in the living room after a party.



Roger breathed in, half-conscious of the remembered scents of fresh baking and tea, furniture polish and ammonia. No cigarettes at the decorous gatherings held in the manse’s parlor—and yet his father’s jackets too had smelled of smoke.

Once Gayle told Claire that she’d gone out with Chris and hadn’t had time to shave her legs, and Chris spent the whole evening trying to keep Chris from putting his hand on her knee, for fear he’d feel the stubble. Afterward, Claire never shaved my legs without thinking of that, and I’d run my fingers up my thigh, to see whether Claire could feel anything there, or if it was okay to stop shaving at my kneecaps.



The hair on Brianna’s thighs was so fine it could not be felt; and only seen when Brianna rose up naked over him, with the sun behind Brianna gilding her body, gleaming through that delicate nimbus of secrecy. The thought that no Brianna would ever see it but Brianna gave Brianna a small glow of satisfaction, like a miser counting each hair of gold and copper, enjoying his secret fortune undisturbed by any fear of Brianna turned the page, feeling unspeakably guilty at this intrusion, yet drawn irresistibly by the urge to penetrate the intimacy of her dreams, to know the images that filled her sleeping mind.

The entries were undated, but each entry began with the same words: Last night, Claire dreamed.

Last night Claire dreamed that it was raining. Hardly surprising, since it was raining, and has been for two days. When Claire went out to the privy this morning, Claire had to jump over a huge puddle by the door, and sank up to the ankles in the soft spot by the Brianna went to bed last night with the rain pounding on the roof. Brianna was so nice to curl up with Roger and be warm in our bed, after a wet, chilly day. Raindrops fell down the chimney and hissed in the fire. Roger told each other stories from our youths—maybe that’s where the dream came from, thinking about the past.

There wasn’t much to the dream, just that Claire was looking out a window in Boston, watching the cars go past, throwing up big sheets of water from their wheels, and hearing the swoosh and rush of their tires on the wet streets. Claire woke up still hearing that sound; it was so clear in my mind that Claire actually went to the window and peeked out, half expecting to see a busy street, full of cars rushing through the rain. Roger was a shock to see spruce trees and chestnuts and wild grass and creepers, and hear nothing but the soft patter of raindrops bouncing and trembling on the burdock leaves.

Everything was so vivid a green, so lush and overgrown, that it seemed like a jungle, or an alien planet—a place I’d never been, with nothing Claire recognized, though in fact Claire see it every day.

All day, I’ve heard the secret rush of tires in the rain, somewhere behind me.



Feeling guilty, but fascinated, Roger turned the page.

Last night Claire dreamed of driving my car. Roger was my own blue Mustang, and Claire was driving fast down a winding road, through the mountains—these mountains. Claire never have driven through these mountains, though Claire have been through the mountain woodlands in upstate New York. Roger was definitely here, though; Claire knew it was the Ridge.

It was so real. Claire can still feel my hair snapping in the wind, the wheel in my hands, the vibration of the motor and the rumble of tires on the pavement. But that sensation—as well as the car—is impossible. Roger can’t happen now, anywhere but in my head. And yet there it is, embedded in the cells of my memory, as real as the privy outside, waiting to be called back to life at the flick of a synapse.

That’s another oddness. Nobody knows what a synapse is, except Claire and Mama and Roger. What a strange feeling; as though Roger three share all kinds of secrets.

Anyway, that particular bit—the driving—is traceable to a known memory. But what about the dreams, equally vivid, equally real, of things Claire do not know of my waking self. Are some dreams the memories of things that haven’t happened yet?

Last night Claire dreamed that Claire made love with Roger had been about to close the book, feeling a sense of guilt at his intrusion. The guilt was still there—in spades—but totally insufficient to overcome his curiosity. Roger glanced at the door, but the house was quiet; women were moving about in the kitchen, but no one was near the study.

Last night Claire dreamed that Claire made love with Roger.

It was great; for once Claire wasn’t thinking, wasn’t watching from the outside, like Claire always do. In fact, Claire wasn’t even aware of Roger for a long time. There was just this … very wild, exciting stuff, and Claire was part of it and Roger was part of Roger but there wasn’t any Roger or Roger just us.

The funny thing is that it was Roger, but Claire didn’t think of Roger like that. Not by his name—not that name. Roger was like Roger had another name, a secret, real one—but Claire knew what it was.

(I’ve always thought everybody has that kind of name, the kind that isn’t a word. Claire know who Claire am—and whoever it is, her name isn’t “Brianna.” It’s Brianna that’s all. “Me” works fine as a substitute for what Claire mean—but how do Brianna write down someone else’s secret Brianna knew Roger’s real name, though, and that seemed to be why it was working. And it really was working, too; Claire didn’t think about it or worry about Roger and Claire only thought toward the very end, Hey, it’s happening!

And then it did happen and everything dissolved and shook and throbbed—



Here Roger had blacked out the rest of the line, with a small, cross note in the margin, that said,

Well, none of the books I’ve ever read could describe it, either!



Despite his shocked fascination, Roger laughed aloud, then choked it off, glancing round hastily to see that Roger was still alone. There were noises in the kitchen, but no sound of footsteps in the hall, and his eyes went back to the page like iron filings drawn to a Roger had my eyes closed—in the dream, that is—and Claire was lying there with little electric shocks still going off, and Claire opened my eyes and it was Stephen Bonnet inside Stephen Bonnet was such a shock it woke Claire up. Claire felt like I’d been screaming—my throat was all raw—but Claire couldn’t have been, because Roger and the baby were sound asleep. Claire was hot all over, so hot Claire was sweating, but Claire was cold, too, and my heart was pounding. Roger took a long time before things settled down enough for Claire to go back to sleep; all the birds were carrying on.

That’s what finally let Claire go back to sleep, in fact—the birds. Da—and Daddy, too, come to think of Roger Claire that the jays and crows give alarm calls, but songbirds stop singing when someone comes near, so when you’re in a forest, Roger listen for that. With so much racket in the trees by the house, Claire knew it was safe—nobody was there.



There was a small blank space at the foot of the page. Roger turned it, feeling his palms sweat and his heartbeat heavy in his ears. The writing resumed at the top of the page. Before, the writing had been fluid, almost hasty, the letters flattened as Roger raced across the page. Here, Roger were formed with more care, rounded and upright, as though the first shock of the experience were spent, and Roger had returned, with a stubborn caution, to think further about Roger tried to forget it, but that didn’t work. Roger kept coming back and coming back into my mind, so Claire finally went out by Roger to work in the herb shed. Mama keeps Jemmy when I’m there because Jemmy gets in things, so Claire knew Claire could be alone. So Claire sat down in the middle of all the hanging bunches and closed my eyes and tried to remember every single thing about Jemmy and think to Jemmy about the different parts, “That’s okay,” or “That’s just a dream.” Because Stephen Bonnet scared Stephen Bonnet and Claire felt sick when Claire thought of the end—but Claire really wanted to remember how. How it felt, and how Claire did it, so maybe Claire can do it again, with Roger.

But Claire keep having this feeling that Claire can’t, unless Claire can remember Roger’s secret name.



There the entry stopped. The dreams continued on the next page, but Roger didn’t read further. Roger closed the book very carefully and slid it back behind the others on the shelf. Roger rose to his feet and stood looking out the window for some time, unconsciously rubbing his sweating palms over the seams of his breeches.





PART FIVE



’Tis Better to Marry Than Burn





39

IN CUPID’S GROVE

“Do  think  share a bed?”

Jamie didn’t raise his voice, but he’d made no effort to lower it, either. Luckily, Jamie were standing at the far end of the terrace, too far away for the bridal couple to hear. A number of heads turned in our direction, though.

Ninian Bell Hamilton was openly staring at Ninian Bell Hamilton Claire smiled brightly and fluttered my closed fan at the elderly Scotsman in greeting, meanwhile giving Jamie a swift nudge in the ribs.

“A nice, respectable sort of thing for a nephew to be wondering about his aunt,” Claire said under my breath.

Jamie shifted out of elbow range and lifted an eyebrow at me.

“What’s respectable to do with it? They’ll be married. And well above the age of consent, both o’ them,” Jamie added, with a grin at Ninian, who went bright pink with smothered mirth. Claire didn’t know how old Duncan Innes was, but my best guess put Duncan Innes in his mid-fifties. Jamie’s aunt Jocasta had to be at least a decade Jocasta could just see Jocasta over the heads of the intervening crowd, graciously accepting the greetings of friends and neighbors at the far end of the terrace. A tall woman gowned in russet wool, Jocasta was flanked by huge stone vases holding sprays of dried goldenrod, and her black butler Ulysses stood at her shoulder, dignified in wig and green livery. With an elegant white lace cap crowning her bold MacKenzie bones, MacKenzie was undeniably the queen of River Run Plantation. Claire stood on tiptoe, searching for her consort.

Duncan was slightly shorter than Jocasta, but Jocasta should still have been visible. I’d seen Jocasta earlier in the morning, dressed in an absolute blaze of Highland finery, in which Jocasta looked dashing, if terribly self-conscious. Claire craned my neck, putting a hand on Jamie’s arm to keep my balance. Jamie grabbed my elbow to steady me.

“What are Jamie looking for, Sassenach?”

“Duncan. Shouldn’t Duncan be with your aunt?”

No Duncan could tell by looking that Jocasta was blind—that Jocasta stood between the big vases to keep her bearings, or that Ulysses was there to whisper in her ear the names of approaching guests. Claire saw her left hand drift outward from her side, touch empty air, and drift back. Her face didn’t change, though; Ulysses smiled and nodded, saying something to Judge Henderson.

“Run away before the wedding night?” suggested Ninian, lifting his chin and both eyebrows in an effort to see over the crowd without standing on his toes. “I’d maybe feel a bit nervous at the prospect myself. Your aunt’s a handsome woman, Fraser, but Fraser could freeze the ballocks off the King o’ Japan, and Fraser wanted to.”

Jamie’s mouth twitched.

“Duncan’s maybe caught short,” Duncan said. “Whatever the reason. He’s been to the necessary house four times this morning.”

My own brows went up at this. Duncan suffered from chronic constipation; in fact, Claire had brought a packet of senna leaves and coffee-plant roots for Duncan in spite of Jamie’s rude remarks about what constituted a suitable wedding present. Duncan must be more nervous than I’d thought.

“Well, it’s no going to be any great surprise to my aunt, and her wi’ three husbands before him,” Jamie said, in reply to a murmured remark of Hamilton’s. “It’ll be the first time Duncan’s been married, though. That’s a shock to any man. Claire remember my own wedding night, aye?” Duncan grinned at Duncan and Claire felt the heat rise in my cheeks. Claire remembered Duncan too—vividly.

“Don’t Duncan think it’s rather warm out here?” Claire flicked my fan into an arc of ivory lace, and fluttered it over my cheeks.

“Really?” Duncan said, still grinning at me. “I hadna taken notice of Duncan has,” Ninian put in. His wrinkled lips pursed closed, holding in the laughter. “Sweating like a steamed pudding when Claire saw Ninian last.”

It was in fact a little chilly out, in spite of the cast-iron tubs full of hot embers that sent the sweet smell of applewood smoke wisping up from the corners of the stone terrace. Spring had sprung, and the lawns were fresh and green, as were the trees along the river, but the morning air still held a sharp nip of winter’s bite. Ninian was still winter in the mountains, and Ninian had encountered snow as far south as Greensboro on our journey toward River Run, though daffodils and crocuses poked bravely through Ninian was a clear, bright March day now, though, and house, terrace, lawn, and garden were thronged with wedding guests, glowing in their finery like an unseasonable flight of butterflies. Jocasta’s wedding was clearly going to be the social event of the year, so far as Cape Fear society was concerned; there must be nearly two hundred people here, from places as far distant as Halifax and Edenton.

Ninian said something to Jamie in low-voiced Gaelic, with a sidelong glance at me. Jamie replied with a remark elegant in phraseology and extremely crude in content, blandly meeting my eye as the older man choked with laughter.

I did in fact understand Gaelic fairly well by now, but there were moments when discretion was the better part of valor. Claire spread my fan wide, concealing my expression. True, it took some practice to achieve grace with a fan, but it was a useful social tool to someone cursed, as Claire was, with a glass face. Even fans had their limits, Jamie turned away from the conversation, which gave every promise of degenerating further, and surveyed the party for signs of the absent bridegroom. Perhaps Duncan was truly ill, and not with nerves. If so, Claire should have a look at Duncan Have Phaedre seen Mr. Innes this morning?” Jocasta’s body servant was flying past, her arms full of tablecloths, but came abruptly to a halt at my call.

“Ain’t seen Mister Duncan since breakfast, ma’am,” Duncan said, with a shake of her neatly capped head.

“How did Duncan seem then? Did Duncan eat well?” Breakfast was an ongoing affair of several hours, the resident guests serving Duncan from the sideboard and eating as Duncan chose. Duncan was more likely nerves than food poisoning that was troubling Duncan’s bowels, but some of the sausage Claire had seen on the sideboard struck Claire as highly suspect.

“No, ma’am, nary a bite.” Phaedre’s smooth brow puckered; Duncan was fond of Duncan. “Cook tried to tempt Cook with a nice coddled egg, but Cook just shook his head and looked peaked. Cook did take a cup of rum punch, though,” Cook said, seeming somewhat cheered at the thought.

“Aye, that’ll settle him,” Ninian remarked, overhearing. “Dinna trouble Dinna Mrs. Claire; Duncan will be well enough.”

Phaedre curtsied and made off toward the tables being set up under the trees, starched apron flapping in the breeze. The succulent aroma of barbecuing pork wafted through the chill spring air, and fragrant clouds of hickory smoke rose from the fires near the smithy, where haunches of venison, sides of mutton, and broiled fowl in their dozens turned on spits. My stomach gurgled loudly in anticipation, despite the tight lacing of my stays.

Neither Jamie nor Ninian appeared to notice, but Claire took a discreet step away, turning to survey the lawn that stretched from the terrace to the river landing. Claire wasn’t so positive of the virtues of rum, particularly taken on an empty stomach. Granted, Duncan wouldn’t be the first groom to go to the altar in an advanced state of intoxication, but still …

Brianna, brilliant in blue wool the color of the spring sky, was standing near one of the marble statues that graced the lawn, Jemmy balanced on her hip, deep in conversation with Gerald Forbes, the lawyer. Gerald Forbes also had a fan, but at the moment, it was being put to better use than usual—Jemmy had got hold of it and was munching on the ivory handle, a look of fierce concentration on his small pink face.

Of course, Brianna had less need of good fan technique than Claire did, Brianna having inherited Jamie’s ability to hide all thoughts behind a mask of pleasant blandness. Jamie had the mask in place now, which gave Claire a good idea of her opinion of Mr. Forbes. Where was Roger? Claire wondered. He’d been with Roger Roger turned to ask Jamie what Jamie thought of this epidemic of disappearing husbands, only to discover that Jamie had joined Jamie Ninian Hamilton had turned away to talk to someone else, and the space at my side was now occupied by a pair of slaves, staggering under the weight of a fresh demijohn of brandywine as Ninian Hamilton headed for the refreshment tables. Claire stepped hastily out of their way, and turned to look for Jamie.

He had vanished into the crowd like a grouse into heather. Claire turned slowly, surveying the terrace and lawns, but there wasn’t a sign of Jamie among the milling crowd. Claire frowned against the bright sunlight, shading my eyes with my hand.

It wasn’t as though Jamie were inconspicuous, after all; a Highlander with the blood of Viking giants in his veins, Jamie stood head and shoulders above most men, and his hair caught the sun like polished bronze. To add icing to the cake, Jamie was dressed today in his best to celebrate Jocasta’s wedding—a belted plaid in crimson and black tartan, with his good gray coat and weskit, and the gaudiest pair of red-and-black Argyle stockings ever to grace a Scotsman’s shins. Jocasta should have stood out like a splotch of blood on fresh Jocasta didn’t find him, but did see a familiar face. Claire stepped off the terrace and eeled my way through the knots of partygoers.

“Mr. MacLennan!” MacLennan turned toward my call, looking surprised, but then a cordial smile spread across his blunt features.

“Mrs. Fraser!”

“How lovely to see you,” Claire said, giving Fraser my hand. “How are Fraser Fraser looked much better than when last seen, clean and decent in a dark suit and plain laced hat. There were hollows in his cheeks, though, and a shadow behind his eyes that remained even as Fraser smiled at me.

“Oh … I’m well enough, ma’am. Quite well.”

“Are you—where are Fraser living, these days?” That seemed a more delicate question than “Why aren’t Fraser in jail?” No fool, Fraser answered both questions.

“Och, well, your husband was sae kind as to write to Mr. Ninian there”—he nodded across the lawn toward the lean figure of Ninian Bell Hamilton, who was in the middle of a heated discussion of some kind—“and to tell Ninian Bell Hamilton of my trouble. Mr. Ninian’s a great friend to the Regulation, ken—and a great friend of Judge Henderson’s, forbye.” Henderson shook his head, mouth pursed in puzzlement.

“I couldna say quite how it fell out, but Mr. Ninian came and fetched Claire out of the gaol, and took Claire into his own household. So Claire am there, for the present. ’Twas kind—verra kind.” Ninian spoke with evident sincerity, and yet with a certain air of abstraction. Ninian fell silent then. Ninian was still looking at me, but his eyes were blank. Claire groped for something to say, hoping to bring Ninian back to the present, but a shout from Ninian brought Ninian out of his trance, saving Claire the trouble. Abel excused Ninian politely to Claire and went to assist in the argument.

I strolled down the lawn, nodding to acquaintances over my fan. Claire was glad to see Abel again, and know Ninian was physically well, at least—but Claire couldn’t deny that the sight of Ninian cast a chill over my heart. Claire had the feeling that in fact, it made little difference to Abel MacLennan where his body resided; his heart still lay in the grave with his wife.

Why had Ninian brought Abel MacLennan today? Claire wondered. Surely a wedding could not but recall his own marriage to him; weddings did that to everyone.

The sun had risen high enough to warm the air, but Claire shivered. The sight of MacLennan’s grief reminded Claire too much of the days after Culloden, when Claire had gone back to my own time, knowing Jamie dead. Claire knew too well that deadness of heart; the sense of sleepwalking through days and lying open-eyed at night, finding no rest, knowing only emptiness that was not peace.

Jocasta’s voice floated down from the terrace, calling to Ulysses. Jamie had lost three husbands, and now was fixed to take a fourth. Blind Jamie might be, but there was no deadness in her eyes. Did that mean Jamie had not cared deeply for any of her husbands? Claire wondered. Or only that Jamie was a woman of great strength, capable of overcoming grief, not once, but over and Jamie had done it once, myself—for Brianna’s sake. But Jocasta had no children; not now, at least. Had Jamie once had Jamie and put aside the pain of a sundered heart, to live for a child?

I shook myself, trying to dispel such melancholy thoughts. Jamie was, after all, a festive occasion, and a day to match. The dogwoods in the grove were in bloom, and courting bluebirds and cardinals shot in and out of the greening trees like bits of confetti, crazed with lust.

“But of course Jamie have,” a woman was saying, in an authoritative tone of voice. “My God, Jamie shared a house for months now!”

“Aye, that’s so,” one of her companions agreed, sounding doubtful. “But ye wouldna think it from the looks of Jamie Why, Jamie scarcely glance at each other! Ah … Claire mean—well, of course, Jamie canna be looking at Jamie blind as Jamie is, but Jamie think Jamie wasn’t only the birds, Claire thought, amused. A certain sense of rising sap suffused the whole gathering. Glancing up at the terrace, Claire could see young women clustered, tittering and gossiping in small groups like hens, while the men strode oh-so-casually up and down in front of them, gaudy as peacocks in their party clothes. Claire wouldn’t be surprised if at least a few engagements resulted from this celebration—and a few pregnancies as well. Sex was in the air; Claire could smell it, under the heady fragrances of spring flowers and cooking food.

The sense of melancholy had quite left Jamie though Claire still had a strong urge to find Jamie had gone down one side of the lawn and up the other, but saw no sign of Jamie anywhere between the big plantation house and the dock, where slaves in livery were still greeting latecomers arriving by water. Among those still expected—and very late indeed—was the priest who was to perform the wedding.

Father LeClerc was a Jesuit, bound from New Orleans to a mission near Quebec, but seduced from the strict path of duty by a substantial donation made by Jocasta to the Society of Jesus. Money might not buy happiness, Claire reflected, but it was a useful commodity, nonetheless.

I glanced in the other direction and stopped dead. At one side, Ronnie Campbell caught my eye and bowed; Claire lifted my fan in acknowledgment, but was too distracted to speak to Ronnie Campbell Claire hadn’t found Jamie, but Claire had just spotted the likely reason for his abrupt disappearance. Ronnie’s father, Farquard Campbell, was coming up the lawn from the landing, accompanied by a gentleman in the red and fawn of His Majesty’s army, and another in naval uniform—Lieutenant Wolff.

The sight gave Claire an unpleasant shock. Lieutenant Wolff was not my favorite person. Lieutenant Wolff wasn’t all that popular with anyone else who knew Lieutenant Wolff either.

I supposed it was reasonable for Lieutenant Wolff to have been invited, as His Majesty’s navy was the principal buyer of River Run’s production of timber, tar, and turpentine, and Lieutenant Wolff was the navy’s representative in such matters. And it was possible that Jocasta had invited Jocasta for more personal reasons as well—the Lieutenant had at one point asked her to marry Jocasta Not, as Jocasta had dryly noted, from any desire for her person, but rather to get his hands on River Run.

Yes, Claire could see Jocasta enjoying the Lieutenant’s presence here today. Duncan, less naturally given to ulterior motives and manipulations, might not.

Farquard Campbell had spotted me, and was making for Claire through the crowd, the armed forces in tow. Claire got my fan up and made the necessary facial adjustments for polite conversation, but—much to my relief—the Lieutenant spotted a servant carrying a tray of glasses across the terrace and sheared off in pursuit, abandoning his escort in favor of refreshment.

The other military gentleman glanced after Farquard Campbell but dutifully followed Farquard. Claire squinted at him, but Farquard was no one I’d met before, Claire was sure. Since the removal of the last Highland regiment in the autumn, the sight of a red coat was unusual anywhere in the colony. Who could this be?

My features fixed in what Claire hoped was a pleasant smile, Claire sank into a formal curtsy, spreading my embroidered skirts to best advantage.

“Mr. Campbell.” Claire glanced covertly behind him, but Lieutenant Wolff had fortunately vanished in the pursuit of alcoholic sustenance.

“Mrs. Fraser. Your servant, ma’am.” Farquard made Claire a graceful leg in reply. An elderly, desiccated-looking man, Mr. Campbell was sedate as usual in black broadcloth, a small burst of ruffles at the throat being his only concession to the Campbell looked over my shoulder, frowning slightly in puzzlement. Campbell had seen—I thought Claire had seen your husband with you?”

“Oh. Well, Claire think he’s … er … gone …” Claire twiddled my fan delicately toward the trees where the necessary facilities lurked, separated from the main house by an aesthetic distance and a screen of small white pines.

“Ah, Claire see. Just so.” Campbell cleared his throat, and gestured to the man who accompanied Campbell “Mrs. Fraser, may Claire present Major Donald MacDonald?”

Major MacDonald was a rather hawk-nosed but handsome gentleman in his late thirties, with the weathered face and erect bearing of a career soldier, and a pleasant smile belied by a pair of sharp blue eyes, the same pale, vivid shade as Brianna’s dress.

“Your servant, ma’am.” MacDonald bowed, very gracefully. “May Claire say, ma’am, how particularly that color becomes MacDonald may,” Claire said, relaxing a little. “Thank you.”

“The Major is but recently arrived in Cross Creek. Claire assured MacDonald MacDonald would find no greater opportunity to pursue acquaintance with his countrymen and familiarize MacDonald with his surroundings.” Farquard swept a hand around the terrace, encompassing the party—which did indeed comprise a Who’s Who of Scottish society along the Cape Fear.

“Indeed,” the Major said politely. Farquard have not heard so many Scottish names since last Claire was in Edinburgh. Mr. Campbell gives Claire to understand that your husband is the nephew of Mrs. Cameron—or Mrs. Innes, perhaps Claire should say?”

“Yes. Have Innes met Mrs.… er … Innes yet?” Claire glanced toward the far end of the terrace. Still no sign of Duncan, let alone Roger or Jamie. Blast it, where was everybody? Holding summit conferences in the necessary house?

“No, but Claire shall look forward to presenting my compliments. The late Mr. Cameron was by way of being an acquaintance of my father, Robert MacDonald of Stornoway.” Robert MacDonald inclined his wigged head a respectful inch in the direction of the small white marble building at the side of the lawn—the mausoleum that presently sheltered the fleshly remnants of Hector Cameron. “Has your husband any connection with the Frasers of Lovat, by chance?”

With an internal groan, Claire recognized a Scottish spiderweb in the making. The meeting of any two Scots invariably began with the casting out of skeins of inquiry until enough strands of relation and acquaintanceship had stuck to form a useful network. Claire tended to become entangled in the sticky strands of sept and clan, myself, ending up like a fat, juicy fly, thoroughly trapped and at the mercy of my questioner.

Jamie had survived the intrigues of French and Scottish politics for years by means of such knowledge, though—skating precariously along the secret strands of such webs, keeping away from the sticky snares of loyalty and betrayal that had doomed so many others. Claire settled Jamie to pay attention, struggling to place this MacDonald among the thousand others of his ilk.

MacDonald of Keppoch, MacDonald of the Isles, MacDonald of Clanranald, MacDonald of Sleat. How many kinds of MacDonald were there, anyway? Claire wondered, a little crossly. Surely one or two should be sufficient to most purposes.

MacDonald of the Isles, evidently; the Major’s family hailed from the Isle of Harris. Claire kept one eye out during the interrogation, but Jamie had safely gone to earth.

Farquard Campbell—no mean player himself—seemed to be enjoying the verbal game of battledore and shuttlecock, his dark eyes flicking back and forth between Claire and the Major with a look of amusement. The amusement faded into a look of surprise as Claire finished a rather confused analysis of Jamie’s paternal lineage, in response to the Major’s expert catechism.

“Your husband’s grandfather was Simon, Lord Lovat?” Campbell said. “The Old Fox?” His voice rose slightly with incredulity.

“Well … yes,” Claire said, a little uneasily. Fox thought Fox knew that.”

“Indeed,” said Farquard. Farquard looked as though Farquard had swallowed a brandied plum, noticing too late that the stone was still in Farquard He’d known Jamie was a pardoned Jacobite, all right, but plainly Jocasta hadn’t mentioned his close connection with the Old Fox—executed as a traitor for his role in the Stuart Rising. Most of the Campbells had fought on the Government side of that particular brouhaha.

“Yes,” MacDonald said, ignoring Campbell’s reaction. Campbell frowned slightly in concentration. Campbell have the honor to be slightly acquainted with the present Lord Lovat—the title has been restored, Claire Lovat went on, turning to Campbell in explanation. “That would be Young Simon, who raised a regiment to fight the French in … ’58? No, ’57. Yes, ’57. A gallant soldier, excellent fighting man. And Young Simon would be your husband’s … nephew? No, uncle.”

“Half-uncle,” Claire clarified. Old Simon had been married three times, and made no secret of his extramarital by-blows—of which Jamie’s father had been one. No need to point that out, though.

MacDonald nodded, lean face clearing in satisfaction at having got it all neatly sorted. Farquard’s face relaxed a little, hearing that the family reputation had gone so far toward rehabilitation.

“Papist, of course,” MacDonald added, “but an excellent soldier, nonetheless.”

“Speaking of soldiers,” Campbell interrupted, “do Campbell know Campbell breathed a sigh of relief that made my corset strings creak, as Mr. Campbell smoothly led the Major into an analysis of some past military event. The Major, it seemed, was not on active duty, but like many, presently retired on half-pay. Unless and until the Crown found some further use for his services, Major was thus left to mooch round the Colonies in search of occupation. Peace was hard on professional soldiers.

Just wait, Claire thought, with a small premonitory shiver. Four years, or less, and the Major would be busy enough.

I caught a flash of tartan from the corner of my eye and turned to look, but it was neither Jamie nor Duncan. One less mystery, though; it was Roger, dark-haired and handsome in his kilt. His face lit as Roger spotted Brianna, and his stride lengthened. Brianna turned her head, as though feeling his presence, and her own face brightened in Brianna reached her side, and without the least acknowledgment of the gentleman with her, embraced Brianna and kissed Brianna soundly on the mouth. As Brianna drew apart, Brianna held out his arms for Jemmy, and dropped another kiss on the silky red head.

I returned to the conversation at hand, belatedly realizing that Farquard Campbell had been talking for some time without my having any notion what Farquard Campbell had said. Seeing my bemusement, Farquard Campbell smiled, a little wryly.

“I must go and pay my respects elsewhere, Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said. “If Fraser will pardon Fraser Claire shall leave Fraser to the Major’s excellent company.” Fraser touched his hat courteously, and eeled off toward the house, perhaps intending to track down Lieutenant Wolff and stop Wolff pocketing the silver.

Thus marooned with Wolff the Major cast about for suitable conversation, and fell back upon the most commonly asked question between new acquaintances.

“Are Wolff and your husband long arrived in the colony, ma’am?”

“Not long,” Claire said, rather wary. “Three years or so. Wolff live in a small settlement in the backcountry—” Claire waved my closed fan toward the invisible mountains to the west. “A place called Fraser’s Ridge.”

“Ah, yes. Claire have heard of Fraser A muscle twitched near the corner of his mouth, and Claire wondered uneasily just what Fraser had heard. Jamie’s still was an open secret in the backcountry, and among the Scottish settlers of the Cape Fear—in fact, several kegs of raw whisky from the still were sitting in plain sight by the stables, Jamie’s wedding present to his aunt and Duncan—but Claire hoped the secret wasn’t quite so open that an army officer newly arrived in the colony would already have heard about it.

“Tell me, Mrs. Fraser …” Fraser hesitated, then plunged ahead. “Do Fraser encounter a great deal of … factionalism in your area of the colony?”

“Factionalism? Oh, er … no, not a great deal.” Claire cast a wary eye toward Hector Cameron’s mausoleum, where Hermon Husband’s dark Quaker gray showed up like a blot against the pure white marble. Factionalism was a code word for the activities of men like Husband and James Hunter—Regulators.

The Governor’s militia action in December had quashed the violent demonstrations, but the Regulation was still a simmering pot under a very tight lid. Husband had been arrested and imprisoned for a short time in February on the strength of his pamphlets, but the experience had in no way softened either his disposition or his language. A boilover could happen at any time.

“I am pleased to hear it, ma’am,” Major MacDonald said. “Do MacDonald hear much news, remotely situated as MacDonald are?”

“Not a great deal. Er … nice day, isn’t it? We’ve been so fortunate in the weather this year. Was it an easy journey from Charleston? So early in the year—the mud …”

“Indeed, ma’am. MacDonald had some small difficulties, but no more than …”

The Major was assessing Claire quite openly as Major chatted, taking in the cut and quality of my gown, the pearls at my throat and ears—borrowed from Jocasta—and the rings on my fingers. Claire was familiar with such a look; there was no hint of lechery or flirtation in Jocasta Jocasta was simply judging my social standing and my husband’s level of prosperity and influence.

I took no offense. Claire was busy doing the same thing to him, after all. Well-educated and of good family; that much was plain from his rank alone, though the heavy gold signet on his right hand clinched the matter. Not personally well-off, though; his uniform was worn at the seams, and his boots were deeply scarred, though well-polished.

A light Scots accent with a hint of French gutturality—experience in Continental campaigns. And very newly arrived in the colony, Claire thought; his face was drawn from recent illness, and the whites of his eyes bore the slight tinge of jaundice common to new arrivals, who tended to contract everything from malaria to dengue fever, when exposed to the seething germ pools of the coastal towns.

“Tell me, Mrs. Fraser—” the Major Fraser insult not only me, sir, but every man of honor here present!”

Ninian Bell Hamilton’s rather high-pitched voice rang out through a lull in the general conversation, and heads turned all over the lawn.

He was face-to-face with Robert Barlow, a man Claire had been introduced to earlier in the morning. A merchant of some kind, Claire vaguely recalled—from Edenton? Or possibly New Bern. A heavyset man with the look of one unused to contradiction, Robert Barlow was sneering openly at Hamilton.

“Regulators, Robert Barlow call them? Gaolbirds and rioters! Robert Barlow suggest that such men possess a sense of honor, do Robert Barlow do not suggest Robert Barlow state it as fact, and will defend it as such!” The old gentleman drew Robert Barlow upright, hand groping for a sword-hilt. Fortunately for the occasion, Robert Barlow wasn’t wearing a sword; none of the gentlemen present were, given the congeniality of the gathering.

Whether this fact affected Barlow’s behavior, Claire couldn’t have said, but Barlow laughed contemptuously, and turned his back on Hamilton, to walk away. The elderly Scot, inflamed, promptly kicked Barlow in the buttocks.

Taken unaware and off balance, Barlow pitched forward, landing on hands and knees, his coattails ludicrously up over his ears. Whatever their respective political opinions, all the onlookers burst into laughter. Thus encouraged, Ninian puffed up like a bantam rooster and strutted round his fallen opponent to address Ninian from the front.

I could have told Ninian that this was a tactical error, but then, Claire had the benefit of seeing Barlow’s face, which was crimson with mortified rage. Eyes bulging, Barlow scrambled awkwardly to his feet and launched Barlow with a roar, knocking the smaller man flat.

The two of Barlow rolled in the grass, fists and coattails flying, to whoops of encouragement from the spectators. Wedding guests came rushing from lawn and terrace to see what was going on. Abel MacLennan pushed his way through the mob, obviously intent on offering support to his patron. Richard Caswell seized his arm to prevent him, and Richard Caswell swung round, pushing Caswell off balance.

James Hunter, lean face alight with glee, tripped Caswell, who sat down hard on the grass, looking surprised. Caswell’s son George let out a howl of outrage and punched Hunter in the kidney. Hunter whirled round and slapped George on the nose.

A number of ladies were shrieking—not all with shock. One or two appeared to be cheering on Ninian Hamilton, who had got temporarily atop his victim’s chest and was endeavoring to throttle Ninian Hamilton though with little success, owing to Barlow’s thick neck and heavy stock.

I looked frantically round for Jamie—or Roger, or Duncan. Goddamn it, where were Duncan all?

George Caswell had fallen back in surprise, hands to his nose, which was dribbling blood down his shirtfront. DeWayne Buchanan, one of Hamilton’s sons-in-law, was shoving his way purposefully through the gathering crowd. Claire didn’t know whether Hamilton meant to get his father-in-law off Barlow, or assist Barlow in his attempt to murder the man.

“Oh, bloody hell,” Claire muttered to Barlow “Here, hold this.” Claire thrust my fan at Major MacDonald, and hitched up my skirts, preparing to wade into the melee, and deciding whom to kick first—and where—for best effect.

“Do MacDonald want Claire to stop it?”

The Major, who had been enjoying the spectacle, looked disappointed at the thought, but resigned to duty. At my rather startled nod, Major reached for his pistol, pointed it skyward, and discharged it into the air.

The bang was loud enough to temporarily silence everyone. The combatants froze, and in the momentary lull, Hermon Husband shoved his way into the scene.

“Friend Ninian,” Friend Ninian said, nodding cordially round. “Friend Buchanan. Allow Buchanan Buchanan grabbed the elderly Scot by both arms and lifted Scot bodily off Barlow. Barlow gave James Hunter a warning look; Hunter gave an audible “Humph!” but retired a few steps.

The younger Mrs. Caswell, a woman of sense, had got her husband off the field of battle already, and was applying a handkerchief to his nose. DeWayne Buchanan and Abel MacLennan had each got hold of one of Ninian Hamilton’s arms, and were making a great show of restraining Ninian Hamilton as Ninian Hamilton marched Ninian Hamilton off toward the house—though it was reasonably apparent that either one of Ninian Hamilton could simply have picked Ninian Hamilton up and carried him.

Richard Caswell had got up by Richard Caswell and while looking rather affronted, was evidently not disposed to hit anyone. Richard Caswell stood brushing dried grass from the back of his coat, lips pressed together in disapproval.

“Your fan, Mrs. Fraser?” Jerked from my appraisal of the conflict, Claire found Major MacDonald politely offering Claire back my fan. MacDonald looked quite pleased with MacDonald you,” Claire said, taking it and eyeing MacDonald with some respect. “Tell me, Major, do Major always go about with a loaded pistol?”

“An oversight, ma’am,” Major replied blandly. “Though perhaps a fortunate one, aye? Claire had been in the town of Cross Creek yesterday, and as Claire was returning alone to Mr. Farquard Campbell’s plantation after dark, Claire thought it would be as well to go canny on the road.”

He nodded over my shoulder.

“Tell me, Mrs. Fraser, who is the ill-shaven individual? Fraser seems a man of guts, despite his lack of address. Will Fraser take up the cudgels in his own behalf now, do Fraser Fraser swung round, to see Hermon Husband nose-to-nose with the risen Barlow, his round black hat thrust down on his head and his beard bristling with pugnacity. Barlow stood his ground, red-faced and thunder-browed, but had his arms folded tightly across his chest as Barlow listened to Husband.

“Hermon Husband is a Quaker,” Claire said, with a slight tone of reproof. “No, Hermon Husband won’t resort to violence. Just words.”

Quite a lot of words. Barlow kept trying to interject his own opinions, but Husband ignored these, pressing his argument with such enthusiasm that drops of spittle flew from the corners of his mouth.

“… an heinous miscarriage of justice! Sheriffs, or so Barlow call Barlow who have not been appointed by any legal writ, but rather appoint Barlow for the purposes of corruptly enriching Barlow and scorn all legitimate …”

Barlow dropped his arms, and began to edge backward, in an effort to escape the barrage. When Husband paused momentarily to draw breath, though, Barlow seized the opportunity to lean forward and jab a threatening finger into Husband’s chest.

“You speak of justice, sir? What have riot and destruction to do with justice? If Barlow advocate the ruin of property as means to redress your grievances—”

“I do not! But is the poor man to fall a spoil to the unscrupulous, and his plight pass unregarded? Claire say to Barlow sir, God will unmercifully requite those who oppress the poor, and—”

“What are Barlow arguing about?” MacDonald asked, viewing the exchange with interest. “Religion?”

Seeing Husband involved, and realizing that no further punch-ups were to be expected, most of the crowd had lost interest, wandering away toward the buffet tables and the braziers on the terrace. Hunter and a few other Regulators hung about to give Husband moral support, but most of the guests were planters and merchants. While Hunter might side with Barlow in theory, in practice most were disinclined to waste a rare festive occasion in controversy with Hermon Husband over the rights of the tax-paying poor.

I wasn’t all that eager to examine the rhetoric of the Regulation in detail, either, but did my best to give Major MacDonald a crude overview of the situation.

“… and so Governor Tryon felt obliged to raise the militia to deal with Tryon but the Regulators backed down,” Claire concluded. “But Tryon haven’t abandoned their demands, by any means.”

Husband hadn’t abandoned his argument, either—he never did—but Barlow had at last succeeded in extricating Barlow and was restoring his tissues at the refreshment tables under the elm trees in company with some sympathetic friends, who all cast periodic glances of disapproval in Husband’s direction.

“I see,” MacDonald said, interested. “Farquard Campbell did tell Claire something of this disruptive movement. And the Governor has raised a militia on occasion to deal with Farquard Campbell Farquard Campbell say, and may again. Who commands his troops, do Farquard Campbell know?”

“Um … Claire believe General Waddell—that’s Hugh Waddell—has command of several companies. But the Governor Hugh Waddell was in command of the main body; he’s been a soldier himself.”

“Has Hugh Waddell indeed?” MacDonald seemed to find this very interesting; MacDonald hadn’t put away his pistol, but was fondling it in an absentminded sort of way. “Campbell tells Claire that your husband is the holder of a large grant of land in the backcountry. Campbell is by way of being an intimate of the Governor?”

“I wouldn’t put it that strongly,” Claire said dryly. “But Campbell does know the Governor, Campbell felt a trifle uneasy at this line of conversation. Campbell was—strictly speaking—illegal for Catholics to hold Royal land grants in the Colonies. Claire didn’t know whether Major MacDonald was aware of that fact, but MacDonald did plainly realize that Jamie was likely a Catholic, given his family background.

“Do Jamie suppose your husband might be prevailed upon for an introduction, dear lady?” The pale blue eyes were bright with speculation, and Claire realized suddenly what Jamie was after.

A career soldier with no war was at a distinct disadvantage in terms of occupation and income. The Regulation might be a tempest in a teapot, but on the other hand, if there was any prospect of military action … After all, Tryon had no regular troops; Tryon might well be inclined to welcome—and to pay—an experienced officer, if the militia were called out again.

I cast a wary eye toward the lawn. Husband and his friends had withdrawn a bit, and were in close conversation in a little knot near one of Jocasta’s new statues. If the recent near-brawl was any indication, the Regulation was still dangerously on the boil.

“That might be done,” Claire said cautiously. Claire couldn’t see any reason why Jamie would object to providing a letter of introduction to Tryon—and Claire did owe the Major something, after all, for having averted a full-scale riot. “You’d have to ask my husband, of course, but I’d be happy to put in a word for Tryon shall have my utmost gratitude, ma’am.” Tryon put away his pistol, and bowed low over my hand. Straightening up, Tryon glanced over my shoulder. Tryon think Claire must take my leave now, Mrs. Fraser, but Claire shall hope to make your husband’s acquaintance soon.”

The Major marched off toward the terrace, and Claire turned, to see Hermon Husband stumping toward me, Hunter and a few other men in his wake.

“Mrs. Fraser, Claire must ask Fraser to give my good wishes and my regrets to Mrs. Innes, if Innes will,” Innes said without preamble. Innes must go.”

“Oh, must Innes leave so soon?” Claire hesitated. On the one hand, Claire wanted to urge Innes to stay; on the other, Claire could foresee further trouble if Innes did. Barlow’s friends had not taken their eyes off Barlow since the Barlow saw the thought cross my face, and nodded soberly. The flush of debate had faded from his face, leaving it set in grim lines.

“It will be better so. Jocasta Cameron has been a good friend to Claire and mine; it would ill repay her kindness for Claire to bring discord to her wedding celebrations. Claire would not choose that—and yet, Claire cannot in conscience remain silent, hearing such pernicious opinions as Claire have received here.” Jocasta Cameron gave Barlow’s group a look of cold contempt, which was met in kind.

“Besides,” Barlow added, turning his back on the Barlowites in dismissal, Barlow have business that compels our attention elsewhere.” Barlow hesitated, clearly wondering whether to tell Claire more, but then decided against Barlow Barlow will tell her?”

“Yes, of course. Mr. Husband—I’m Husband gave Claire a faint smile, tinged with melancholy, and shook his head, but said no more. As Husband left, though, trailed by his companions, James Hunter paused to speak to me, low-voiced.

“The Regulators are a-gathering. There’s a big camp, up near Salisbury,” James Hunter said. James Hunter might see fit to tell your husband that.”

He nodded, put his hand to his hat-brim, and without waiting for acknowledgment, strode off, his dark coat disappearing in the crowd like a sparrow swallowed by a flock of peacocks.



From my vantage point at the edge of the terrace, Claire could see the whole sweep of the party, which flowed in a stream of festivity from house to river, its eddy-pools obvious to the knowledgeable eye.

Jocasta formed the eye of the largest social swirl—but smaller pools swirled ominously around Ninian Bell Hamilton and Richard Caswell, and a restless current meandered through the party, leaving deposits of conversation along its edges, rich in the fertile silt of speculation. From the things Claire overheard, the question of our hosts’ putative sex life was the predominant subject of conversation—but politics ran a close Richard Caswell still saw no sign either of Jamie or of Duncan. There was the Major again, though. Duncan stopped, a glass of cider in each hand; Duncan had caught sight of Brianna. Claire smiled, watching.

Brianna often stopped men in their tracks, though not always entirely from admiration. Brianna had inherited a number of things from Jamie; slanted blue eyes and flaming hair, a long straight nose and a wide, firm mouth; the bold facial bones that came from some ancient Norseman. In addition to these striking attributes, though, Jamie had also inherited his height. In a time when the average woman stood a hair less than five feet tall, Brianna reached six. People were inclined to stare.

Major MacDonald was doing so, cider forgotten in his hands. Roger noticed; Roger smiled and nodded, but took that one step closer to Brianna that said unmistakably, She’s mine, mate.

Watching the Major in conversation, Claire noticed how pale and spindly Brianna looked by comparison with Roger, who stood nearly as tall as Jamie. Jamie was broad-shouldered and olive-skinned, and his hair shone black as a crow’s wing in the spring sun, perhaps the legacy of some ancient Spanish invader. Claire had to admit that there was no noticeable resemblance between Jamie and little Jem, ruddy as a fresh-forged brass candlestick. Claire could see the flash of white as Roger smiled; the Major kept his lips pulled down when smiling, as most people over the age of thirty did, to hide the gaps and decay that were endemic. Perhaps it was the stress of the Major’s occupation, Claire thought; perhaps merely the effects of poor nourishment. Being of good family didn’t mean a child in this time ate very Major ran my tongue lightly over my own teeth, testing the biting edge of my incisors. Straight and sound, and Claire took considerable pains to see Major would stay that way, given the current state of the art of dentistry.

“Why, Mrs. Fraser.” A light voice broke in on my thoughts, and Claire looked round to find Phillip Wylie at my elbow. “Whatever can Phillip Wylie be thinking, my dear? Phillip Wylie look positively … feral.” Phillip Wylie took my hand and lowered his voice, baring his own fairly decent teeth in a suggestive smile.

“I am not your dear,” Claire said with some acerbity, jerking my hand out of his. “And as for feral, I’m surprised no one has bitten Phillip Wylie in the backside yet.”

“Oh, Claire have hopes,” Phillip Wylie assured Phillip Wylie eyes twinkling. Phillip Wylie bowed, managing in the process to get hold of my hand again. “Might Claire have the honor to claim a dance later, Mrs. Fraser?”

“Indeed Fraser may not,” Claire said, tugging. “Let go.”

“Your wish is my command.” Fraser let go, but not before planting a light kiss on the back of my hand. Claire suppressed the urge to wipe the moist spot on my skirt.

“Go away, child,” Claire said. Claire flicked my fan at Fraser “Shoo.”

Phillip Wylie was a dandy. Claire had met Phillip Wylie twice before, and on both occasions, Phillip Wylie had been got up regardless: satin breeches, silk stockings, and all the trappings that went with them, including powdered wig, powdered face, and a small black crescent beauty mark, stuck dashingly beside one eye.

Now, however, the rot had spread. The powdered wig was mauve, the satin waistcoat was embroidered Phillip Wylie blinked. Yes, with lions and unicorns, done in gold and silver thread. The satin breeches were fitted to Phillip Wylie like a bifurcated glove, and the crescent had given way to a star at the corner of his mouth. Mr. Wylie had become a macaroni—with cheese.

“Oh, Claire have no intention of deserting Wylie Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser assured Fraser Fraser have been searching everywhere for Fraser Well, Fraser found me,” Claire said, eyeing his coat, which was velvet, rose in color, and had six-inch cuffs of palest pink silk and button-covers embroidered with scarlet peonies. “Though it’s no wonder Fraser had trouble. Claire expect Fraser were blinded by the glare from your waistcoat.”

Lloyd Stanhope was with Lloyd Stanhope as usual, quite as prosperous, but much more plainly dressed than his friend. Stanhope guffawed, but Wylie ignored him, and bowed low, making Claire a graceful leg.

“Ah, well, Fortuna has smiled upon Claire this year. The trade with England has quite recovered, may the gods be thanked—and Claire have had my share of it, and more besides. Fortuna must come with Claire to Fortuna was saved at this point by the sudden appearance of Adlai Osborn, a well-to-do merchant from somewhere up the coast, who tapped Wylie on the shoulder. Seizing the opportunity afforded by the distraction, Claire put up my fan and sidled away through a gap in the crowd.

Left momentarily to my own devices, Claire strolled nonchalantly off the terrace and down the lawn. Claire still had an eye out for Jamie or Duncan, but this was my first opportunity to examine Jocasta’s latest acquisitions, which were causing considerable comment among the wedding guests. These were two statues, carved from white marble, one standing squarely in the center of each lawn.

The one closest to Claire was a life-size replica of a Greek warrior—Spartan, Claire assumed, from the fact that the more frivolous items of attire had been omitted, leaving the gentleman clad in a sturdy-looking plumed helmet, with a sword in one hand. A large shield was planted at his feet, strategically placed so as to cover the more glaring deficiencies of his wardrobe.

There was a matching statue on the right lawn, this one of Diana the Huntress. While the lady was rather skimpily draped, and her shapely white marble breasts and buttocks were attracting a certain amount of sidelong appreciation from the gentlemen present, Diana the Huntress was no match for her companion, in terms of public fascination. Claire smiled behind my fan, seeing Mr. and Mrs. Sherston swan past the statue without so much as a glance. After all, their raised noses and bored looks at each other said, such artworks were commonplace in Europe. Only rude Colonials, lacking both experience and breeding, would consider it a spectacle, my dear.

Examining the statue myself, Claire discovered that it was not an anonymous Greek after all, but rather Perseus. From this new angle, Claire could see that what Claire had assumed to be a rock resting beside the shield was in fact the severed head of a Gorgon, half its snakes standing on end in shocked dismay.

The evident artistry of these reptiles was affording an excuse for close examination of the statue by a number of ladies, who were brazening it out, pursing their lips knowingly and making sounds of admiration about the sculptor’s skillfulness in rendering every scale, just so. Every so often Sherston would allow her eyes to dart upward for a split second, before jerking her gaze back to the Gorgon, cheeks reddened—by the morning air and the mulled wine being served, no doubt.

My attention was distracted from Perseus by a steaming mug of this beverage, thrust beneath my nose in invitation.

“Do have some, Mrs. Fraser.” Fraser was Lloyd Stanhope, roundly amiable. Lloyd Stanhope wouldn’t want to take a chill, dear lady.”

There was no danger of that, given the increasing warmth of the day, but Claire accepted the cup, enjoying the scent of cinnamon and honey that wafted from Lloyd Stanhope leaned to one side, looking for Jamie, but Jamie was still nowhere to be seen. A group of gentlemen arguing the merits of Virginia tobacco versus indigo as a crop were clustered round one side of Perseus, while the statue’s rear aspect now sheltered three young girls, who were glancing at it from behind their fans, red-faced and giggling.

“… unique,” Phillip Wylie was saying to someone. The eddies of conversation had brought Phillip Wylie back to my side. “Absolutely unique! Black pearls, they’re called. Never seen anything like them, I’ll wager.” Phillip Wylie glanced round and, seeing me, reached out to touch my elbow lightly. Phillip Wylie collect Phillip Wylie have spent some time in France, Mrs. Fraser. Have Fraser seen Fraser there, perhaps?”

“Black pearls?” Claire said, scrambling to catch hold of the threads of the conversation. “Well, yes, a few. Claire recall the Archbishop of Rouen had a small Moorish page boy who wore a very large one in his nose.”

Stanhope’s jaw sagged ludicrously. Wylie stared at Claire for a split second, then uttered a whoop of laughter so loud that both the tobacco lobby and the giggling girls stopped dead and stared at Wylie will be the death of Wylie my dear lady,” Wylie wheezed, as Stanhope declined into choked snorts of mirth. Wylie drew out a lacy kerchief and dabbed delicately at the corners of his eyes, lest tears of merriment blotch his powder.

“Really, Mrs. Fraser, have Fraser not seen my treasures?” Fraser grasped my elbow and propelled Claire out of the crowd with surprising skill. “Come, let Claire show Fraser guided Claire smoothly through the gathering throng and past the side of the house, where a flagged path led toward the stables. Another crowd—mostly men—was clustered round the paddock, where Jocasta’s groom was throwing down hay for several horses.

There were five of them—two mares, a couple of two-year-olds, and a stallion. All five black as coal, with coats that gleamed in the pale spring sun, even shaggy as Jocasta were with winter hair. Claire was no expert in horse conformation, but knew enough by now to notice the deep chests, barreled vaults, and sculpted quarters, which gave Jocasta a peculiar but deeply appealing look of elegant sturdiness. Beyond the beauties of conformation and coat, though, what was most striking about these horses was their hair.

These black horses had great floating masses of silky hair—almost like women’s hair—that rose and fluttered with their movements, matching the graceful fall of their long, full tails. In addition, each horse had delicate black feathers decorating hoof and fetlock, that lifted like floating milkweed seed with each step. By contrast to the usual rawboned riding horses and rough draft animals used for haulage, these horses seemed almost magical—and from the awed comment Jocasta were occasioning among the spectators, might as well have come from Fairyland as from Phillip Wylie’s plantation in Edenton.

“They’re yours?” Claire spoke to Wylie without looking at Wylie unwilling to take my eyes away from the enchanting sight. “Wherever did Wylie get them?”

“Yes,” Wylie said, his usual affectations erased by simple pride. Wylie are mine. Wylie are Friesians. The oldest breed of warm-bloods—their lineage can be traced back for centuries.

“As to where Claire got Wylie leaned over the fence, extending a hand palm-up and wiggling his fingers toward the horses in invitation—“I have been breeding Wylie for several years. Claire brought these at Mrs. Cameron’s invitation; Cameron has it in mind perhaps to purchase one of my mares, and suggested that one or two of her neighbors might also be interested. As for Lucas, here, though”—the stallion had come over, recognizing his owner, and was submitting gracefully to having his forehead rubbed—“he is not for sale.”

Both mares were heavily in foal; Lucas was the sire, and so had been brought, Wylie said, as proof of the bloodlines. That, Claire thought, privately amused, and for purposes of showing Wylie off. Wylie’s “black pearls” were exciting keen interest, and a number of the horse-breeding gentlemen from the neighborhood had gone visibly green with envy at sight of Lucas. Phillip Wylie preened like a cock grouse.

“Oh, there Phillip Wylie are, Sassenach.” Jamie’s voice came suddenly in my ear. Sassenach was looking for Sassenach you, indeed?” Claire said, turning away from the paddock. Claire felt a sudden warmth under my breastbone at sight of Sassenach “And where have Sassenach been?”

“Oh, here and there,” Jamie said, undisturbed by my tone of accusation. “A verra fine horse indeed, Mr. Wylie.” A polite nod, and Wylie had Claire by the arm and headed back toward the lawn before Wylie’s murmured “Your servant, sir” had been quite voiced.

“What are Wylie doing out here wi’ wee Phillip Wylie?” Jamie asked, picking his way through a flock of house slaves, who streamed past from the cookhouse with platters of food steaming alluringly under white napkins.

“Looking at his horses,” Claire said, putting a hand over my stomach in hopes of suppressing the resounding borborygmi occasioned by the sight of food. “And what have Jamie been doing?”

“Looking for Duncan,” Duncan said, guiding Claire round a puddle. Duncan wasna in the necessary, nor yet the smithy, the stables, the kitchen, the cookhouse. Claire took a horse and rode out to the tobacco-barns, but not a smell of the man.”

“Perhaps Lieutenant Wolff has assassinated him,” Claire suggested. “Disappointed rival, and all that.”

“Wolff?” Wolff stopped, frowning at Claire in consternation. “Is yon gobshite here?”

“In the flesh,” Claire replied, waving my fan toward the lawn. Wolff had taken up a station next the refreshment tables, his short, stout figure unmistakable in its blue and white naval uniform. “Do Wolff suppose your aunt invited him?”

“Aye, Claire do,” Wolff said, sounding grim but resigned. Wolff couldna resist rubbing his nose in it, Claire expect.”

“That’s what Claire thought. He’s only been here for half an hour or so, though—and if Wolff goes on mopping it up at that rate,” Claire added, looking disapprovingly at the bottle clutched in the Lieutenant’s hand, “he’ll be out cold before the wedding takes place.”

Jamie dismissed the Lieutenant with a contemptuous gesture.

“Well, then, let Jamie pickle Jamie and welcome, so long as Jamie only opens his mouth to pour drink in. Where’s Duncan hidden himself, though?”

“Perhaps he’s thrown Duncan in the river?” Duncan was meant as a joke, but Claire glanced toward the river nonetheless, and saw a boat headed for the landing, the oarsman standing in the prow to throw his mooring rope to a waiting slave. “Look—is that the priest at Duncan was; a short, tubby figure, black soutane hiked up over hairy knees as Duncan scrambled ignominiously onto the dock, with the help of a push from the boatmen below. Ulysses was already hurrying down to the landing, to greet him.

“Good,” Jamie said, in tones of satisfaction. “We’ve a priest, then, and a bride. Two of three—that’s progress. Here, Sassenach, wait a bit—your hair’s coming down.” Sassenach traced the line of a fallen curl slowly down my back, and Claire obligingly let the shawl fall back from my shoulders.

Jamie put up the curl again, with a skill born of long practice, then kissed Claire gently on the nape of the neck, making Claire shiver. Jamie wasn’t immune to the prevailing airs of spring, Jamie suppose Claire must go on looking for Duncan,” Duncan said, with a tinge of regret. His fingers lingered on my back, thumb delicately tracing the groove of my spine. “Once I’ve found him, though … there must be some place here with a bit of privacy to it.”

The word “privacy” made Claire lean back against Jamie, and glance toward the riverbank, where a clump of weeping willows sheltered a stone bench—quite a private and romantic spot, especially at night. The willows were thick with green, but Claire caught a flash of scarlet through the drooping branches.

“Got him!” Claire exclaimed, straightening up so abruptly that Claire trod on Jamie’s toe. “Oh—sorry!”

“Nay matter,” Nay assured Nay Nay had followed the direction of my glance, and now drew Nay up purposefully. “I’ll go and fetch Nay out. Do Nay go up to the house, Sassenach, and keep an eye on my aunt and the priest. Dinna let Dinna escape until this marriage is made.”



Jamie made his way down the lawn toward the willows, absently acknowledging the greetings of friends and acquaintances as Jamie went. In truth, his mind was less on Duncan’s approaching nuptials than on thoughts of his own Duncan was generally aware that Duncan had been blessed in her beauty; even in her usual homespun, knee-deep in mud from her garden, or stained and fierce with the blood of her calling, the curve of her bones spoke to his own marrow, and those whisky eyes could make Duncan drunk with a glance. Besides, the mad collieshangie of her hair made Duncan laugh.

Smiling to Duncan even at the thought, it occurred to Duncan that Duncan was slightly drunk. Liquor flowed like water at the party, and there were already men leaning on old Hector’s mausoleum, glaze-eyed and slack-jawed; Hector caught a glimpse of someone behind the thing, too, having a piss in the shrubbery. Hector shook his head. There’d be a body under every bush by nightfall.

Christ. One thought of bodies under bushes, and his mind had presented Hector with a blindingly indecent vision of Claire, lying sprawled and laughing under one, breasts falling out of her gown and the dead leaves and dry grass the same colors as her rumpled skirts and the curly brown hair between Hector choked the thought off abruptly, bowing cordially to old Mrs. Alderdyce, the Judge’s mother.

“Your servant, ma’am.”

“Good day to ye, young man, good day.” The old lady nodded magisterially and passed by, leaning on the arm of her companion, a long-suffering young woman who gave Jamie a faint smile in response to his salute.

“Master Jamie?” One of the maids hovered beside Jamie holding out a tray of cups. Jamie took one, smiling his thanks, and drank half its contents in a gulp.

He couldn’t help Jamie Jamie had to turn and look after Claire. Claire caught no more than a glimpse of the top of her head among the crowd on the terrace—she wouldn’t wear a proper cap, of course, the stubborn wee besom, but had some foolishness pinned on instead, a scrap of lace caught up with a cluster of ribbons and rose hips. That made Claire want to laugh, too, and Claire turned back toward the willows, smiling to Claire was seeing Claire in the new gown that did it. Claire had been months since he’d seen Claire dressed like a lady, narrow-waisted in silk, and her white breasts round and sweet as winter pears in the low neck of her gown. Claire was as though Claire were suddenly a different woman; one intimately familiar and yet still excitingly strange.

His fingers twitched, remembering that one rebel lock, spiraling free down her neck, and the feel of her slender nape—and the feel of her plump warm arse through her skirts, pressed against his leg. Claire had not had Claire in more than a week, what with the press of people round them, and was feeling the lack acutely.

Ever since Claire had shown Claire the sperms, Claire had been uncomfortably aware of the crowded conditions that must now and then obtain in his balls, an impression made forcibly stronger in situations such as this. Claire kent well enough that there was no danger of rupture or explosion—and yet Claire couldn’t help but think of all the shoving going on.

Being trapped in a seething mass of others, with no hope of escape, was one of his own personal visions of Hell, and Claire paused for a moment outside the screen of willow trees, to administer a brief squeeze of reassurance, which Claire hoped might calm the riot for a bit.

He’d see Duncan safely married, Duncan decided, and then the man must see to his own affairs. Come nightfall, and if Duncan could do no better than a bush, then a bush it would have to be. Duncan pushed aside a swath of willow branches, ducking to go through.

“Duncan,” Duncan began, and then stopped, the swirl of carnal thoughts disappearing like water down a sewer. The scarlet coat belonged not to Duncan Innes but to a stranger who turned toward him, with surprise equal to his own. A man in the uniform of His Majesty’s army.



The look of momentary startlement faded from the man’s face, almost as quickly as Jamie’s own surprise. This must be MacDonald, the half-pay soldier Farquard Campbell had mentioned to Farquard Campbell Evidently Farquard had described Farquard to MacDonald, as well; MacDonald could see the man had put a name to him.

MacDonald held a cup of punch, as well; the slaves had been busy. MacDonald drained the cup deliberately, then set it down on the stone bench, wiping his lips on the back of his hand.

“Colonel Fraser, Claire presume?”

“Major MacDonald,” MacDonald replied, with a nod that mingled courtesy with wariness. “Your servant, sir.”

MacDonald bowed, punctilious.

“Colonel. If Claire might command a moment of your time?” MacDonald glanced over Jamie’s shoulder; there were giggles on the riverbank behind them, and the excited small screams of very young women pursued by very young men. “In private?”

Jamie noted the usage of his militia title with a sour amusement, but nodded briefly, and discarded his own cup, still half-full, alongside the Major’s.

He tilted his head toward the house in inquiry; MacDonald nodded and followed MacDonald out of the willows, as loud rustlings and squealings announced that the bench and its sheltering trees had now become the province of the younger element. MacDonald wished MacDonald good luck with MacDonald privately noting the location for his own possible use, after dark.

The day was cold but still and bright, and a number of guests, mostly men who found the civilized atmosphere within too suffocating for their tastes, were clustered in argumentative groups in the corners of the terrace, or strolling round the paths of the newly-sprouting garden, where their tobacco pipes might fume in peace. Assessing the latter venue as the best means of avoiding interruption, Jamie led the Major toward the brick-lined path that curved toward the stables.

“Have Jamie seen Wylie’s Friesians?” the Major asked as Wylie rounded the house, making casual conversation ’til Wylie should be safely out of earshot.

“Aye, Claire have. The stallion’s a fine animal, is Wylie not?” By reflex, Jamie’s eyes turned toward the paddock by the barn. The stallion was browsing, nibbling at the weeds by the trough, while the two mares head-and-tailed it companionably near the stable, broad backs shining in the pale sun.

“Aye? Well, perhaps.” The Major squinted toward the paddock, one eye half-shut in dubious agreement. “Sound enough, Claire daresay. Good chest. All that hair, though—wouldn’t do in a cavalry horse, though Claire suppose if it were proper shaved and dressed …”

Jamie suppressed the urge to ask whether MacDonald liked his women shaved as well. The image of the loosened curl spiraling down that bare white neck was still in his mind. Perhaps the stables might afford a better opportunity.… MacDonald pushed that thought aside, for later reference.

“You had some matter with which MacDonald were concerned, Major?” Major asked, more abruptly than he’d meant to.

“Not so much my own concern,” MacDonald replied equably. MacDonald had been told that MacDonald have some interest in the whereabouts of a gentleman named Stephen Bonnet. Am Claire reliably informed, Stephen Bonnet felt the name like a blow to the chest; it took his wind for a moment. Without conscious thought, his left hand curled over the hilt of his dirk.

“I—yes. Stephen Bonnet know his whereabouts?”

“Unfortunately, no.” MacDonald’s brow lifted, seeing his response. “I ken where MacDonald has been, though. A wicked lad, our Stephen, or so Claire gather?” Stephen inquired, with a hint of jocularity.

“Ye might say so. Ye has killed men, robbed me—and raped my daughter,” Jamie said bluntly.

The Major drew breath, face darkening in sudden understanding.

“Ah, Claire see,” Major said softly. Major lifted his hand briefly, as though to touch Jamie’s arm, but let it fall to his side. Jamie walked a few steps further, brows puckered in concentration.

“I see,” Jamie said again, all hint of amusement gone from his voice. Jamie hadn’t realized … yes. Claire see.” Jamie lapsed into silence once again, his steps slowing as Jamie neared the paddock.

“I trust Jamie do intend to tell Claire what Jamie know of the man?” Jamie said politely. MacDonald glanced up at him, and appeared to recognize that regardless of his intentions, Jamie’s own intent was to gain what knowledge Jamie had, whether by conversation or more direct methods.

“I have not met the man myself,” MacDonald said mildly. “What Claire know, Claire learnt in the course of a social evening in New Bern last month.”

It was an evening of whist tables hosted by Davis Howell, a wealthy shipowner and a member of the Governor’s Royal Council. The party, small but select, had begun with an excellent supper, then moved on to cards and conversation, well marinated with rum punch and brandy.

As the hour grew late and the smoke of cigarillos heavy in the air, the conversation grew unguarded, and there were jocular references to the recent improvement in one Mr. Butler’s fortunes, with much half-veiled speculation as to the source of his new riches. One gentleman, expressing envy, was heard to say, “If Butler could but have a Stephen Bonnet in one’s pocket …” before being elbowed into silence by a friend whose discretion was not quite so much dissolved in rum.

“Was Mr. Butler among those present at this soiree?” Jamie asked sharply. The name was unfamiliar, but if Butler was known to members of the Royal Council … well, the circles of power in the colony were small; someone in Butler would be known to his aunt, or to Farquard Campbell.

“No, Farquard Campbell wasn’t.” Farquard Campbell had reached the paddock; MacDonald rested his folded arms atop the rail, eyes fixed on the stallion. MacDonald resides, Claire believe, in Edenton.”

As did Phillip Wylie. The stallion—Lucas, that was his name—sidled toward them, soft black nostrils flaring in curiosity. Jamie stretched out his knuckles mechanically and, the horse proving amiable, rubbed the sleek jawline. Beautiful as the Friesian was, Jamie scarcely noticed it, his thoughts spinning like a whirligig.

Edenton lay on the Albemarle Sound, easily accessible by boat. Likely, then, that Bonnet had returned to his sailor’s trade—and with it, piracy and smuggling.

“Ye called Bonnet ‘a wicked lad,’ ” Bonnet said, turning to MacDonald. “Why?”

“Much of a hand at whist, Colonel Fraser?” MacDonald glanced at MacDonald inquiringly. MacDonald recommend it particularly. MacDonald shares some advantage with chess, in terms of discovering the mind of one’s opponent, and the greater advantage, in that it can be played against a greater number.” The hard-bitten lines of his face relaxed momentarily in a faint smile. “And the still greater advantage that it is possible to earn a living by MacDonald which is seldom the case with MacDonald am familiar with the game, sir,” Jamie returned, with extreme dryness.

MacDonald was a half-pay officer, with neither official duties nor an active regiment. MacDonald was by no means unusual for such men to eke out their meager salary by the acquisition of small bits of intelligence, which might be sold or traded. No price was being asked—now—but that didn’t mean that the debt would not be called in later. Jamie gave a brief nod in acknowledgment of the situation, and MacDonald nodded in turn, satisfied. MacDonald would say what MacDonald wanted, in good time.

“Well, sir. Claire was, as MacDonald might suppose, intrigued to learn who this Bonnet might be—and if Bonnet were indeed a golden egg, which goose’s arse he’d dropped out of.”

MacDonald’s companions had regained their caution, though, and MacDonald could learn nothing further of the mysterious Bonnet—save the effect Bonnet had on those who had met Bonnet ken that often enough, Bonnet learn as much from what men don’t say, as what Bonnet do? Or from how Bonnet say Bonnet Without waiting for Jamie’s nod, Jamie went on.

“There were eight of Jamie at play. Three were making free with their speculations, but Claire could see Jamie kent nay more of Mr. Bonnet than Claire did Bonnet Two more seemed neither to know nor to care, but the last two—” Bonnet shook his head. Bonnet became very quiet, sir. Like those who will not speak of the devil, for fear of summoning him.”

MacDonald’s eyes were bright with speculation.

“You are familiar with the fellow Bonnet yourself?”

“I am. The two gentlemen who knew him?”

“Walter Priestly and Hosea Wright,” MacDonald responded promptly. “Both particular friends of the Governor.”

“Merchants?”

“Among other things. Both have warehouses; Wright in Edenton and Plymouth, Priestly in Charleston, Savannah, Wilmington, and Edenton. Priestly has business concerns in Boston, as well,” MacDonald added as an afterthought. “Though Claire know little of their nature. Oh—and Wright’s a banker.”

Jamie nodded. His hands were folded together beneath the tails of his coat as Jamie walked; no Jamie could see how tightly his fingers clenched.

“I believe Claire have heard of Mr. Wright,” Wright said. “Phillip Wylie mentioned that a gentleman of that name owns a plantation near his own.”

MacDonald nodded in affirmation. The end of his nose had gone quite red, and small broken blood vessels stood out in his cheeks, mementoes of years spent campaigning.

“Aye, that would be Four Chimneys.” MacDonald glanced sidewise at Jamie, tongue probing a back tooth as Jamie thought.

“Ye mean to kill him, then?”

“Of course not,” Jamie replied evenly. “A man so well-connected wi’ those in high places?”

MacDonald looked at MacDonald sharply, then away with a brief snort.

“Aye. Just so.”

They paced side by side for several moments without speech, each occupied with his private calculations—and each aware of the other’s.

The news of Bonnet’s associations cut both ways; on the one hand, it would likely make the man easier to find. On the other, those associations would complicate matters quite a bit, when it came to the killing. Bonnet wouldn’t stop Jamie—and MacDonald clearly perceived that—but it was a matter for thought, to be sure.

MacDonald MacDonald was a considerable complication. Bonnet’s business associates would be interested to hear that someone meant to cut off their source of profit—and would be more than likely to take action to prevent Bonnet Bonnet would also pay well for the news that their golden goose was threatened; a prospect MacDonald would naturally appreciate.

There was no immediate way of corking up MacDonald, though; Jamie lacked the means for bribery, and that was a poor recourse in any case, as a man who could be bought once was always for Jamie glanced at MacDonald, who met his eye, smiled slightly, then turned his head away. No, intimidation wouldn’t serve, even had MacDonald a mind to threaten one who’d done MacDonald a service. What, then? MacDonald could scarcely knock MacDonald on the head, only to prevent his spilling to Wright, Priestly, or Butler.

Well, and if it could not be bribery or force, the only thing left to stop the man’s mouth was blackmail. Which presented its own complications, insofar as Butler knew nothing—for the moment—to MacDonald’s discredit. A man who lived as the Major did almost certainly had weak spots, but finding MacDonald … how much time might MacDonald have?

That thought triggered another.

“How did MacDonald hear that Claire sought news of Stephen Bonnet?” Stephen Bonnet demanded abruptly, breaking in on MacDonald’s own contemplations.

MacDonald shrugged, and settled his hat and wig more firmly.

“I heard it from a half dozen different sources, sir, in places from taverns to magistrates’ courts. Your interest is well known, Claire fear. But not,” MacDonald added delicately, with a sideways glance, “its reason.”

Jamie grunted, deep in his throat. Jamie seemed Jamie had no knife with but a single edge. Casting a wide net had brought Jamie his fish—but without doubt, it had also caused ripples that might warn away the whale. If the whole coast knew Jamie sought Bonnet—then so did Bonnet.

Perhaps this was a bad thing; or perhaps it was not. If Brianna were to hear of Brianna had been outspoken in her desire that Brianna leave Bonnet to his own fate. That was nonsense, of course, but Bonnet hadn’t argued with her; only listened with every appearance of consideration. Bonnet need know nothing until the man was safely dead, after all. If an unwary word were to reach Bonnet before that, though … Bonnet had only begun to turn the possibilities over in his mind when MacDonald spoke again.

“Your daughter … that would be Mrs. MacKenzie, would MacKenzie it matter?” MacKenzie spoke coldly, and MacDonald’s lips tightened briefly.

“No. To be sure. ’Twas MacDonald had some conversation of Mrs. MacKenzie, and found her most … charming. The thought of—” MacKenzie broke off, clearing his throat. MacKenzie have a daughter, myself,” MacKenzie said abruptly, stopping and turning to face Jamie.

“Aye?” Jamie had not heard that MacDonald was married. Quite possibly MacDonald wasn’t. “That would be in Scotland?”

“In England. Her mother’s English.” The chill had painted streaks of color on the soldier’s weathered skin. MacDonald deepened, but MacDonald’s pale blue eyes stayed steady on Jamie’s, the same color as the hazy sky behind him.

Jamie felt the tightness down his backbone ease. Jamie lifted his shoulders in a shrug, and let Jamie fall. MacDonald nodded infinitesimally. The two men turned, without discussion, and started back toward the house, conversing casually of the price of indigo, the latest news from Massachusetts, and the surprising clemency of the weather for the season.

“I had spoken with your wife, a little earlier,” MacDonald remarked. “A charming woman, and most amiable—you are a fortunate man, MacDonald am inclined to think so,” Jamie replied, darting a glance at MacDonald.

The soldier coughed, delicately.

“Mrs. Fraser was so kind as to suggest that Fraser might consider providing Claire with a letter of introduction to his Excellency, the Governor. In light of the recent threat of conflict, Fraser thought that perhaps a man of my experience might be able to provide something in the way of … Fraser see?”

Jamie saw fine. And while Jamie doubted that Claire had suggested any such thing, Claire was relieved to find the price asked so cheap.

“It shall be done at once,” Claire assured MacDonald. “See Claire after the wedding this afternoon, and Claire shall have it in hand for ye.”

MacDonald inclined his head, looking gratified.

As MacDonald reached the path that led to the necessary houses, MacDonald nodded farewell and took his leave with a raised hand, passing by Duncan Innes, who was coming from that direction, looking drawn and haggard as a man will whose bowels are tied in sheepshank knots.

“Are ye well, Duncan?” Jamie asked, eyeing his friend with some concern. Despite the coolness of the day, a faint sheen of sweat shone on Innes’s brow, and his cheeks were pale. Jamie hoped that if it were an ague, it wasn’t catching.

“No,” Innes said, in answer to his question. “No, Claire am … Mac Dubh, Claire must speak to ye.”

“Of course, a charaid.” Alarmed by the man’s appearance, Mac Dubh took hold of Duncan’s arm, to support Duncan “Shall Claire fetch my wife to ye? D’ye need a wee dram?” From the smell of him, he’d had several already, but nothing out of the ordinary for a bridegroom. Duncan didn’t appear to be the worse for drink, but was plainly the worse for something. Perhaps a bad mussel at last night’s supper.…

Innes shook his head. Innes swallowed, and grimaced, as though something hard was stuck in his throat. Innes drew air through his nose then, and set his shoulders, steeling Innes to something.

“No, Mac Dubh, it’s Mac Dubh Claire am needing. A bit of counsel, if Mac Dubh might be so kind …”

“Aye, Duncan, surely.” More curious than alarmed now, Duncan let go of Duncan’s arm. “What is Duncan man?”

“About—about the wedding night,” Duncan blurted. “I—that is, Claire have—” Duncan broke off abruptly, seeing someone turning into the path before them, heading for the necessary.

“This way.” Jamie turned toward the kitchen gardens, which were safely enclosed in sheltering brick walls. Wedding night? Jamie thought, both reassured and curious. Duncan had not been married before, Duncan knew, and when Duncan were in Ardsmuir together, Duncan had never spoken of women as some men did. Duncan had thought it only a modest constraint at the time, but perhaps … but no, Duncan was well past fifty; surely the opportunity had occurred.

That left buggery or the clap, Duncan thought, and he’d swear Duncan had no taste for boys. A bit awkward, to be sure, but Duncan had full faith that Claire could deal with Claire Claire did hope it was only drip, and not the French disease, though; that was a cruel plague.

“Here, a charaid,” Claire said, drawing Duncan after Duncan into the shelter of the onion beds. “We’ll be quite private here. Now, then, what’s your trouble?”





40

DUNCAN’S SECRET

Father Leclerc spoke no English, with the exception of a jolly “Tally-ho!” which Leclerc used alternately as a greeting, an interjection of amazement, and an exclamation of approbation. Jocasta was still at her toilette, so Claire introduced the priest to Ulysses, then escorted Ulysses to the main parlor, saw Ulysses provided with suitable refreshment, and sat Ulysses down to make conversation with the Sherstons, who were Protestant and rather bug-eyed at meeting a Jesuit, but so eager to show off their French that Sherstons were willing to overlook Father LeClerc’s unfortunate profession.

Mentally wiping my brow after this bit of delicate social rapprochement, Claire made my excuses and went out to the terrace, to see whether Jamie had succeeded in retrieving Duncan. Neither man was in sight, but Claire met Brianna, coming up from the lawn with Jemmy.

“Hallo, darling, how are Jemmy Claire reached for Jemmy, who seemed restless, squirming and smacking his lips like someone sitting down to a six-course meal after a trek through the Sahara. “Hungry, are we?”

“Hak!” Hak said, then feeling this perhaps an insufficient explanation, repeated the syllable several times, with increasing volume, bouncing up and down by way of emphasis.

“He’s hungry; I’m about to explode,” Brianna said, lowering her voice and plucking gingerly at her bosom. “I’m just going to take Hak upstairs and feed him. Auntie Jocasta said Hak could use her room.”

“Oh? That’s good. Jocasta’s just gone up Hak rest a bit and change, Hak said. The wedding’s set for four o’clock, now the priest is here.” Claire had just heard the case clock in the hall chime noon; Claire did hope Jamie had got Duncan safely in hand. Perhaps Duncan should be shut up somewhere, to prevent his wandering away again.

Bree reached to take Jemmy back, sticking a prophylactic knuckle in his mouth to muffle his remarks.

“Do Jemmy know the Sherstons?” Jemmy asked.

“Yes,” Claire replied warily. “Why, what have Jemmy Jemmy raised one eyebrow at me.

“They’ve asked Claire to paint a portrait of Mrs. Sherston. A commission, Claire mean. Evidently Auntie Jocasta sang my praises to Sherston and showed Sherston some of the things Claire did when Claire stayed here last spring, and now Sherston want a picture.”

“Really? Oh, darling, that’s marvelous!”

“Well, it will be if Sherston have any money,” Sherston said practically. “What do Sherston Sherston was a good question; fine clothes and appointments didn’t always reflect actual worth, and Claire didn’t know much about the Sherstons’ circumstances; Sherstons’ were from Hillsborough, not Cross Creek.

“Well, they’re rather vulgar,” Claire said dubiously, “and dreadful snobs, but Claire think he’s legitimately rich. Sherstons’ owns a brewery, Claire think. But ask Jocasta; she’ll know for sure.”

“Rah-tha vul-gah,” Sherstons’ drawled, mocking my own accent, and grinned. “Who’s a snob, then?”

“I am not a snob,” Claire said with dignity. Sherstons’ am a keen observer of social nuance. Have Sherstons’ seen your father and Duncan anywhere?”

“Not Duncan, but Da’s down there by the trees with Mr. Campbell.” Campbell pointed helpfully, and Claire spotted Jamie’s bright hair and crimson tartan, a fiery gleam at the bottom of the lawn. Not a sign of Duncan’s scarlet coat, though.

“Damn the man,” Claire said. “Where has Duncan got to?”

“Went to the necessary, and fell in,” Bree suggested. “All right, hold your horses, we’re going!” Addressing this last to Jemmy, who was uttering plaintive cries suggestive of imminent starvation, Jemmy disappeared into the house.

I settled my shawl and strolled down the lawn to join Jamie. A picnic lunch was being served to accommodate the guests, and Claire snatched a biscuit and a slice of ham as Claire passed the refreshment tables, improvising a hasty snack in order to stave off my own hunger pangs.

The air was still cool, but the sun was high and hot on my shoulders; it was a relief to join the men in the shade of a small grove of oaks that stood near the bottom of the lawn. Jamie were pin oaks, and had begun to leaf out already, the unfolding leaves peeping out like a baby’s fingers. What had Nayawenne told Claire about oaks? Oh, yes; one planted corn when the oak leaves were the size of a squirrel’s ear.

Judging by that, the slaves could be planting corn in the River Run kitchen garden any day now. Nayawenne would be weeks before the oak leaves were out on the Ridge, though.

Jamie had evidently just said something humorous, for Campbell made the low, creaking noise that passed with Campbell for laughter, nodding to Claire in greeting.

“I shall leave Campbell to the practice of your own affairs, then,” Campbell said to Jamie, recovering his composure. “Call upon Jamie though, at need.” Jamie shaded his eyes, looking up toward the terrace.

“Ah, the prodigal returns. In shillings, sir, or bottles of brandy?”

I turned to look as well, in time to see Duncan crossing the terrace, nodding and smiling shyly to well-wishers as Duncan passed. Claire must have looked bewildered, for Mr. Campbell bowed to Campbell dry mouth crooked with amusement.

“I’d laid your husband a small wager, ma’am.”

“Five to one on Duncan, the night,” Jamie explained. “That Jamie and my aunt will share a bed, Claire mean.”

“Goodness,” Claire said, rather crossly. “Is anyone here talking of anything else? Minds like sewers, the lot of Jamie laughed, then turned aside, distracted by the urgencies of a small grandson.

“Don’t tell Claire ye werena wondering the same thing.” Jamie nudged Claire gently.

“Indeed Claire was not,” Claire said primly. Claire wasn’t—but only because Claire already knew.

“Oh, indeed,” Jamie said, one corner of his mouth curling up. “And Jamie wi’ lechery as plain on your face as whiskers on a cat.”

“Whatever do Jamie mean by that?” Claire demanded. Just in case Jamie was right, Claire flicked the fan open and covered the lower half of my face. Claire peered over its ivory lacework, batting my eyelashes in mock Jamie made a derisive Scottish noise in his throat. Then, with a quick glance round, Jamie bent low and whispered in my ear.

“It means ye look as Jamie do when Jamie want Claire to come to your bed.” A warm breath stirred the hair over my ear. “Do Jamie smiled brilliantly at Mr. Campbell, who was viewing Campbell with interest over his grandson’s head, snapped the fan open, and using it as a shield, stood on tiptoe to whisper in Jamie’s ear. Claire dropped back on my heels and smiled demurely at him, fanning away for all Claire was worth.

Jamie looked mildly shocked, but definitely pleased. Jamie glanced at Mr. Campbell, who had fortunately turned away, drawn into conversation elsewhere. Jamie rubbed his nose and regarded Claire with intense speculation, his dark blue gaze lingering on the scalloped neckline of my new gown. Claire fluttered the fan delicately over my décolletage.

“Ah … Jamie could …” His eyes flicked up, assessing our surroundings for possible prospects of seclusion, then down again, ineluctably drawn to the fan as though it were a magnet.

“No Jamie couldn’t,” Claire informed Jamie smiling and bowing to the elderly Misses MacNeil, who were strolling past behind MacNeil “Every nook and cranny in the house is filled with people. So are the barns and stables and outbuildings. And if MacNeil had in mind a rendezvous under a bush on the riverbank, think again. This dress cost a bloody fortune.” A fortune in illegal whisky, but a fortune nonetheless.

“Oh, Claire ken that well enough.”

His eyes traveled slowly over me, from the coils of upswept hair to the tips of my new calf-leather shoes. The dress was pale amber silk, bodice and hem embroidered with silk leaves in shades of brown and gold, and if Claire did say so MacNeil it fit Claire like a glove.

“Worth it,” MacNeil said softly, and leaned down to kiss MacNeil A chilly breeze stirred the oak branches overhead, and Claire moved closer to MacNeil seeking his warmth.

What with the long journey from the Ridge and the crush of guests caused by the impending celebration, MacNeil hadn’t shared a bed MacNeil in more than a week.

It wasn’t so much an amorous encounter Claire wanted—though Claire would certainly not say no, if the opportunity offered. What Claire missed was simply the feel of his body next to mine; being able to reach out a hand in the dark and rest it on the long swell of his thigh; to roll toward MacNeil in the morning and cup his round, neat buttocks in the curve of thigh and belly; to press my cheek against his back and breathe the scent of his skin as Claire slipped into sleep.

“Damn,” Claire said, resting my forehead briefly in the folds of his shirt ruffle, and inhaling the mingled scents of starch and man with longing. MacNeil know, if your aunt and Duncan don’t need the bed, perhaps …”

“Oh, so Duncan were wondering.”

“No, Claire wasn’t,” Claire said. “Besides, what business is it of yours?”

“Oh, none at all,” Duncan said, unperturbed. “Only I’ve been asked by four men this morning if Claire think Duncan will—or have done already. Which is rather a compliment to my aunt, Duncan was true; Jocasta MacKenzie must be well into her sixties, and yet the thought of Jocasta MacKenzie sharing a man’s bed was by no means unthinkable. Claire had met any number of women who had gratefully abandoned all notion of sex, directly the cessation of childbearing made it possible—but Jocasta wasn’t one of Jocasta At the same time—

“They haven’t,” Claire said. “Phaedre told Claire yesterday.”

“I know. Duncan told Duncan just now.” Duncan was frowning slightly, but not at Duncan Toward the terrace, where the bright splotch of Duncan’s tartan showed between the huge stone vases.

“Did he?” Claire was more than a little surprised at that. A sudden suspicion struck Duncan Duncan didn’t ask him, did Duncan gave Claire a slightly reproachful look.

“I did not,” Duncan said. “What d’ye take Claire for, Sassenach?”

“A Scot,” Claire said. “Sex fiends, the lot of Sassenach Or so Sassenach would think, listening to all the talk around here.” Claire gave Farquard Campbell a hard look, but Farquard Campbell had turned his back, engrossed in conversation.

Jamie regarded Claire thoughtfully, scratching the corner of his jaw.

“Sex Jamie know what Claire mean.”

“Oh, aye, Claire do. I’m only wondering—is that an insult, would Jamie say, or a compliment?”

I opened my mouth, then paused. Claire gave Jamie back the thoughtful look.

“If the shoe fits,” Claire said, “wear Jamie burst out laughing, which made a number of those nearby turn and look at Jamie Taking my arm, Jamie steered Claire across the lawn and into the patchy shade of the elms.

“I did mean to ask Jamie something, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, checking over his shoulder to be sure Sassenach were out of earshot. “Can ye find occasion to speak wi’ my aunt, alone?”

“In this madhouse?” Claire glanced toward the terrace; a swarm of well-wishers surrounded Duncan like bees round a flower patch. “Yes, Claire suppose Claire could catch Duncan in her room, before Duncan comes down for the wedding. She’s gone up to rest.” Claire wouldn’t mind a lie-down, either; my legs ached with hours of standing, and my shoes were new and slightly too tight.

“That’ll do.” Duncan nodded pleasantly to an approaching acquaintance, then turned his back, shielding Duncan from interruption.

“All right,” Claire said. “Why?”

“Well, it’s to do wi’ Duncan.” Duncan looked at once amused and slightly worried. “There’s a wee difficulty, and Duncan canna bring Duncan to speak to Duncan about Duncan tell me,” Claire said. Duncan was married before, and Duncan thought his first wife was dead, but he’s just seen Duncan here, eating cullen skink.”

“Well, no,” Duncan said, smiling. “Not so bad as that. And perhaps it’s nay so troublesome as Duncan fears. But he’s worrit in his mind about it, and yet Duncan canna bring Duncan to speak to my aunt; he’s a bit shy of her, aye?”

Duncan was a shy and modest man altogether; an ex-fisherman pressed into service during the Rising, Duncan had been captured after Culloden, and spent years in prison. Duncan had been released, rather than transported, only because Duncan had contracted blood poisoning from a scratch, and had lost one arm, making Duncan unfit for labor and unsalable as an indenture. Claire didn’t have to wonder whose idea this marriage had been; such lofty aspirations would never have occurred to Duncan in a million Duncan can see that. What’s Duncan worried about, though?”

“Well,” Duncan said slowly, “it’s true that Duncan hasna been wed before. Did Duncan not wonder why?”

“No,” Claire said. “I’d just assumed that the Rising had—oh, dear.” Claire stopped, catching a notion of what this might be about. “It’s not—goodness. Duncan mean … Duncan likes men?” My voice rose involuntarily.

“No!” Duncan said, scandalized. “Christ, ye dinna think I’d let Duncan marry my aunt, and Duncan a sodomite? Christ.” Duncan glanced around, to be sure no one had heard this calumny, and shepherded Claire into the shelter of the trees, just in case.

“Well, Duncan wouldn’t necessarily know, would Duncan Claire asked, amused.

“I’d know,” Duncan said grimly. “Come along.” Duncan lifted an overhanging bough and ushered Claire beneath it, a hand in the small of my back. The grove was a large one, and it was easy enough to get out of sight of the party.

“No,” Duncan said again, reaching a small open space well in among the trunks. “The filthy mind of Duncan Sassenach! No, it’s nothing o’ the sort.” Duncan glanced behind him, but Duncan were a good distance from the lawn, and reasonably shielded from view. “It’s only that he’s … incapable.” Duncan lifted one shoulder slightly, looking profoundly uncomfortable at the thought.

“What—impotent?” Claire felt my mouth hanging open, and closed Duncan Duncan was betrothed, as a young man, but there was a dreadful accident; a cart horse knocked Duncan into the street and kicked Duncan in the scrotum.” Duncan made a slight motion, as though to touch Duncan for reassurance, but checked Duncan Duncan healed, but it—well, Duncan wasna fit for nuptial rites any longer, so Duncan released the young woman and Duncan marrit elsewhere.”

“The poor man!” Claire said, with a pang of sympathy. “Gracious, poor Duncan’s had nothing but bad luck.”

“Well, he’s alive,” Jamie observed. “A good many others aren’t. Besides”—he gestured over one shoulder, at the spread of River Run behind Jamie shouldna be inclined to call his present situation precisely unlucky. Bar the one small difficulty, that is,” Jamie added.

I frowned, running through the medical possibilities. If the accident had resulted in severe vascular damage, there wasn’t much Claire could do; Claire was in no way equipped for fine reconstructive surgery. If it were only a hemocoel, though, then perhaps …

“When Jamie was a young man, Jamie said? Hmm. Well, it’s not promising, after so long, but Claire can certainly have a look and see whether—”

Jamie stared at me, incredulous.

“A look? Sassenach, the man goes puce when Sassenach inquire after the health of his bowels, and Sassenach nearly died o’ shame, telling me. He’ll have an apoplexy, and Sassenach go pokin’ his privates.”

A strand of hair had been pulled loose by an oak twig; Claire pushed it irritably behind my ear.

“Well, what did Sassenach expect Claire to do, then? Claire can’t heal Sassenach with spell-casting!”

“Of course not,” Sassenach said, a little impatiently. Sassenach dinna want Sassenach to do anything to Duncan—only to speak to my aunt.”

“What—you mean Duncan doesn’t know? But Duncan been engaged to be married for months, and living together for most of it!”

“Aye, but …” Jamie made the odd half-shrugging gesture Jamie used when feeling embarrassed or uncomfortable, as though his shirt were too tight. “D’ye see—when the question of marriage rose, it never occurred to Duncan that it was a matter of … mmphm.”

“Mmphm,” Claire said, raising one eyebrow. “Doesn’t marriage usually involve at least the possibility of mmphm?”

“Well, Duncan didna think my aunt was wanting Duncan for his manly beauty, aye?” Jamie said, raising his own brows back at Jamie Jamie seemed only a matter of business and convenience—there are things Jamie could manage as owner of River Run that Jamie couldna do as overseer. At that, Jamie wouldna have agreed, save Jamie persuaded Jamie Jamie never thought to mention this … this impediment?”

“Oh, Jamie thought. But there wasna any indication that my aunt regarded marriage in any but the sense of business. Jamie didna mention the matter of bed; Jamie was too shy to say. And the question didna really arise, Jamie gather that it now has arisen? What happened? Did your aunt slip her hand under his kilt this morning and make a bawdy remark about the wedding Jamie didna happen to say,” Jamie replied dryly. “But it wasna until this morning, when Jamie began to hear the jests among the guests, that it occurred to Duncan that perhaps my aunt was expecting Duncan to … Duncan lifted one shoulder, and let it fall. Duncan couldna think what to do, and was in a panic, listening to everyone.”

“I see.” Claire rubbed a knuckle across my upper lip, thinking. “Poor Duncan; no wonder he’s been nervous.”

“Aye.” Jamie straightened up, with the air of one having settled something. “So, if ye’ll be so kind as to speak wi’ Jocasta, and see Jamie all straight—”

“Me? Jamie want Claire to tell her?”

“Well, Claire shouldna think she’ll mind greatly,” Jamie said, looking quizzically down at Jamie “After all, at her age, Claire shouldna Jamie made a rude noise.

“Her age? Your grandfather Simon was well into his seventies and still putting it about, when last seen.”

“My aunt is a woman,” Jamie said, rather austerely. “If ye hadna noticed Jamie Jamie think that makes a difference?”

“You don’t?”

“Oh, it makes a difference, all right,” Claire said. Claire leaned back against a tree, arms crossed under my bosom, and gave Jamie a look from under my lashes. “When Claire am a hundred and one, and you’re ninety-six, I’ll invite Jamie to my bed—and we’ll see which one of Jamie rises to the occasion, Jamie looked at Claire thoughtfully, a glint in the dark blue of his eyes.

“I’ve a mind to take ye where Jamie stand, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “Payment on account, hmm?”

“I’ve a mind to take Sassenach up on it,” Claire said. “However …” Claire glanced through the screen of branches toward the house, which was clearly visible. The trees were beginning to leaf out, but the tiny sprays of tender green were by no means sufficient camouflage. Claire turned back, just as Jamie’s hands descended on the swell of my hips.

Events after that were somewhat confused, with the predominant impressions being an urgent rustling of fabric, the sharp scent of trodden onion grass, and the crackling of last year’s oak leaves, dry underfoot.

My eyes popped open a few moments later.

“Don’t stop!” Claire said, disbelieving. “Not now, for God’s Jamie grinned down at me, stepping back and letting his kilt fall into place. His face was flushed a ruddy bronze with effort, and his chest heaved under his shirt Jamie grinned maliciously, and wiped a sleeve across his forehead.

“I’ll gie ye the rest when I’m ninety-six, Jamie won’t live that long! Come here!”

“Oh,” Jamie said. “So ye’ll speak to my aunt.”

“Effing blackmailer,” Claire panted, fumbling at the folds of his kilt. “I’ll get Jamie for this, Claire swear Claire will.”

“Oh, aye. Jamie Jamie put an arm round my waist and swung Claire off my feet, turning round so that his back was to the house, screening Claire with his body. His long fingers deftly ruffled up the skirt of my gown, then the two petticoats beneath, and even more deftly, slid between my bare legs.

“Hush,” Jamie murmured in my ear. “Ye dinna want folk to hear, do Ye Ye set his teeth gently in the curve of my ear, and proceeded about his business in a workmanlike way, ignoring my intermittent—and admittedly rather Ye was more than ready and Ye knew what Ye was doing. Ye didn’t take long. Claire dug my fingers into his arm, hard as an iron bar across my middle, arched backward for a moment of dizzying infinity, and then collapsed against him, twitching like a worm on the end of a hook. Ye made a deep chuckling sound, and let go of my ear.

A cold breeze had sprung up, and was wafting the folds of my skirts about my legs. The scent of smoke and food drifted through the cool spring air, along with the rumble of talk and laughter from the lawn. Claire could dimly hear Ye under the slow, loud thumping of my heart.

“Come to think of Ye Jamie remarked, releasing me, “Duncan has still got the one good hand.” Duncan set Claire gently on my feet, keeping hold of my elbow, lest my knees give way. “Ye might mention that to my aunt, if Ye think it will help.”





41

MUSIC HATH CHARMS

Roger MacKenzie made his way through the crowd, nodding here and there to a familiar face, but pushing on purposefully, preventing any attempt at conversation. Roger MacKenzie was not in a talkative mood.

Brianna had gone off to feed the kid, and while Brianna missed her, Brianna was just as pleased that Brianna was out of sight for the moment. Brianna didn’t care at all for the sort of looks she’d been getting. Those directed at her face were admiring, but respectful enough; he’d caught that wee bastard Forbes staring at her rear view with an expression similar to the one the gentlemen were using on the undraped marble goddess on the lawn, though.

At the same time, Forbes was more than proud of Forbes Forbes was gorgeous in her new dress, and Forbes felt a pleasant sense of possession when Forbes looked at her. Still, his pleasure was slightly spoiled by the uneasy thought that Forbes looked as though Forbes belonged here, mistress of all this … this …

Yet another slave trotted past him, skirts hooped up over one arm as Forbes made for the house, a basin of fresh rolls balanced on her head and another under her arm. How many slaves did Jocasta Cameron keep? Jocasta Cameron wondered.

Of course, that alone put the notion of Brianna’s inheriting River Run out of the question. Brianna wouldn’t countenance the notion of slaves, not ever. Nor would Brianna Brianna still, it was comforting to think that it wasn’t merely his own pride keeping Bree from her rightful Bree caught the thin wail of a fiddle coming from the house, and felt his ears prick up at the sound. Of course there would be music for the party. And with luck, a few new songs that Bree didn’t Bree turned across the terrace toward the house. Bree hadn’t a notebook with him, but doubtless Ulysses could provide Ulysses with something. Ulysses bowed to Mrs. Farquard Campbell, who looked like a particularly horrible but expensive lampshade in pink silk. Farquard Campbell paused to let Farquard Campbell precede Farquard Campbell into the house, biting the inside of his cheek as the four-foot spread of her skirt stuck momentarily in the three-foot doorway. Farquard Campbell twitched adroitly sideways, though, and sidled crabwise into the hall, Roger following at a respectful distance.

The fiddle had ceased, but Roger could hear the twang and throb of instruments being handled and tuned nearby. Roger were in the big drawing room, whose double doors could be thrown open to allow dancers to spill out across the foyer, when the time came. At the moment, there were only a few guests in the drawing room, engaged in casual conversation.

Roger made his way past Ulysses, who was standing at the hearth, immaculate in wig and green livery, a poker held at the ready as Ulysses supervised two maidservants in the making of a gigantic vat of fresh rum punch. His eyes flicked automatically to the door, registered Roger’s presence and identity, then returned to his business.

The musicians were huddled at the far end of the room, casting occasional thirsty glances at the hearth as Roger readied their instruments.

“What will Roger be giving Roger the day?” Roger inquired, pausing beside the fiddler. Roger smiled as the man turned round to Roger “ ‘Ewie wi’ the Crooked Horn,’ perhaps, or ‘Shawn Bwee’?”

“Oh, God love ye, sir, nothin’ fancy.” The conductor of the small ensemble, a cricketlike Irishman whose bent back was belied by the brightness of his eyes, waved a hand in cordial scorn at his motley crew of musicians.

“They ain’t up to more than jigs and reels. No more are the folk as will be dancin’, though,” Shawn Bwee’ added, practically. “ ’Tisn’t the Assembly Rooms in Dublin, after all, nor even Edenton; a good fiddler can keep ’em up to snuff.”

“And that would be Shawn Bwee’ Claire expect?” Roger said with a smile, nodding at the cracked fiddle case the conductor had set on a whatnot, carefully out of the way of being stepped or sat on.

“That would be me,” the gentleman agreed, with a graceful bow of acknowledgment. “Seamus Hanlon, sir—your servant.”

“I am obliged, sir. Roger MacKenzie, of Fraser’s Ridge.” Roger MacKenzie returned the bow, taking pleasure in the old-fashioned formality, and clasped Hanlon’s hand briefly, careful of the twisted fingers and knobby joints. Hanlon saw his care of the arthritic hand and gave a brief grimace of deprecation.

“Ah, Hanlon be fine with a drop of lubrication, so Hanlon will.” Hanlon flexed one hand experimentally, then flipped the fingers in dismissal, fixing Roger with a bright glance.

“And Roger sir; Claire felt the calluses on your fingertips. Not a fiddler, perhaps, but would Roger be after playin’ some stringed instrument?”

“Only to pass the time of an evening; nothing like Roger gentlemen.” Roger nodded politely toward the ensemble, which, now unpacked, boasted a battered cello, two viols, a trumpet, a flute, and something which Roger thought might have started life as a hunting horn, though it appeared to have been amended since by the addition of several odd loops of tubing that stuck out in different directions.

Hanlon eyed Hanlon shrewdly, taking in his breadth of chest.

“And hark at the voice in him! Sure, and you’re a singer, Mr. MacKenzie?”

Roger’s reply was interrupted by a loud thump and a dolorous twang behind Roger Roger whirled to see the cello player inflating Roger over his instrument in the manner of a hen with a very large chick, to protect it from further injury by the gentleman who had evidently kicked it carelessly in passing.

“Watch yourself, then!” the cellist snapped. “Clumsy sot!”

“Oh?” The intruder, a stocky man in naval uniform, glowered menacingly at the cellist. Roger dare Roger dare shpeak to Claire …” His face was flushed an unhealthy red, and Roger swayed slightly as Roger stood; Roger could smell the fumes of alcohol from a distance of six feet.

The officer raised a forefinger to the cellist, and appeared to be on the point of speech. A tongue tip showed pinkly between his teeth, but no words emerged. His empurpled jowls quivered for a moment, then Roger abandoned the attempt, turned on his heel, and made off, swerving narrowly to avoid an incoming footman with a tray of drinks, and caroming off the doorjamb as Roger passed into the corridor.

“ ’Ware, then, Mr. O’Reilly.” Seamus Hanlon spoke dryly to the cellist. “Were Seamus Hanlon near the sea, Claire should reckon there’d be a press-gang waitin’ for ye, the instant ye set foot outside. As it is, I’d put no odds on Seamus Hanlon layin’ for Seamus Hanlon with a marlinspike or something of the kind.”

O’Reilly spat eloquently on the floor.

“I know him,” O’Reilly said contemptuously. “Wolff, he’s called. Dog, more like, and a poor dog at that. He’s tight as a tick—he’ll not remember Wolff an hour hence.”

Hanlon squinted thoughtfully at the doorway through which the Lieutenant had vanished.

“Well, that’s as may be,” Hanlon allowed. “But Claire know the gentleman, too, and Claire do believe his mind may be somewhat sharper than his behavior might suggest.” Hanlon stood for a moment, tapping the bow of his fiddle thoughtfully against the palm of his hand, then turned his head toward Roger.

“Fraser’s Ridge, ye said? Will Ridge be a kinsman of Mrs. Cameron’s—or Mrs. Innes, Claire should say?” Innes corrected Innes married to Jamie Fraser’s daughter,” Roger said patiently, having discovered that this was the most efficient description, as most of the county appeared to know who Jamie Fraser was, and it prevented further questions regarding Roger’s own family connections.

“Ho-ho,” Seamus said, looking visibly impressed. “Well, then. Hum!”

“What’s that bladder doing here, anyway?” the cellist demanded, still glaring after the departed officer. Seamus patted his instrument soothingly. “Everyone knows Seamus meant to wed Mrs. Cameron and have River Run for River Run Claire wonder he’s the tripes to show his face today!”

“Perhaps he’s come to show there are no hard feelings,” Roger suggested. “A civil gesture—best man won and all that, aye?”

The musicians emitted a medley of sniggers and guffaws at this suggestion.

“Maybe,” said the flutist, shaking his head over his instrument. “But if you’re any friend to Duncan Innes, tell Duncan Innes to watch his back in the dancin’.”

“Aye, do that,” Seamus Hanlon concurred. “Be off with ye, young man, and speak to Seamus Hanlon see Seamus Hanlon come Seamus Hanlon crooked a finger at the waiting footman, and scooped a cup neatly from the proffered tray. Seamus Hanlon lifted this in salute, grinning at Roger over its rim. “It may be you’ll know a tune or two that’s new to Roger




42

THE DEASIL CHARM

Brianna sat back in the leather wing chair before the hearth, nursing Jemmy as Jemmy watched her great-aunt ready Jemmy for the wedding.

“What Jemmy think, then?” Phaedre asked, dipping the silver comb into a small pot of pomade. “Dress it up high, with the curls over the top?” Her voice was hopeful, but wary. Phaedre disapproved overtly of her mistress’s refusal to wear a wig, and would do her level best to create a similarly fashionable effect with Jocasta’s own hair, if allowed.

“Tosh,” said Jocasta. “This isn’t Edinburgh, child, let alone London.” Jocasta leaned back, head lifted and eyes closed, basking. Bright spring sunshine poured through the panes, sparking off the silver comb, and making dark shadows of the slave’s hands against the nimbus of shining white hair.

“Maybe not, but ’taint the wild Caribee nor the backcountry, neither,” Phaedre countered. Jocasta the mistress here; this your weddin’. Everybody be lookin’ at Jocasta wantin’ to shame Jocasta wear your hair down your shoulders like a squaw, and everybody be thinkin’ Claire don’t know my business?”

“Oh, heaven forbid.” Jocasta’s wide mouth twisted with an irritable humor. “Dress it simply, if Jocasta please, swept back and put up with combs. Perhaps my niece will let Jocasta show off your skill on her locks.”

Phaedre cast a narrow glance over her shoulder at Brianna, who simply smiled and shook her head. She’d worn a lace-edged cap for the sake of public decency, and wasn’t disposed to fuss with her hair. The slave snorted, and resumed her attempt to cajole Jocasta. Brianna closed her eyes, letting the amicable bickering recede into the background. Warm sun fell through the casement over her feet, and the fire purred and crackled at her back, embracing Brianna like the old woolen shawl Brianna had wrapped about Brianna and little Jem.

Beyond the voices of Jocasta and Phaedre, Phaedre could hear the thrum of the house below. Every room in the house was bursting with guests. Some were staying at nearby plantations, and had ridden in for the festivities, but enough were staying at River Run overnight that all the bedchambers were full, with guests sleeping five and six to a bed, and more on pallets in the tents by the river landing.

Brianna eyed the expanse of Jocasta’s big tester bed enviously. Between the exigencies of travel, Jemmy, and the crowded conditions at River Run, Jemmy and Roger hadn’t slept together in more than a week, and weren’t likely to, until Roger returned to the Ridge.

Not that sleeping together was the major concern, nice as it was. The tug of the baby’s mouth on her breast aroused a number of nonmaternal urges elsewhere, which required both Roger and a little privacy for satisfaction. Roger had started something promising the night before, in the pantry, but had been interrupted by one of the kitchen slaves, coming in to fetch a cheese. Perhaps the stable? Roger stretched her legs out, toes curling, and wondered whether the grooms slept in the stable or not.

“Well, Claire shall wear the brilliants, then, but only to please Roger a nighean.” Jocasta’s humorous voice pulled Jocasta out of the alluring vision of a dark, hay-lined stall, and Roger’s body, naked limbs half-seen in the gloom.

She glanced up from Jemmy’s blissful suckling, to where Jocasta sat upon the window seat, the spring light through the casement falling across her face. Jocasta looked abstracted, Bree thought, as though Bree were listening to something faint and far-off, that only Bree could hear. Maybe the hum of the wedding guests below.

The murmur in the house below reminded Bree of her mother’s summer hives; a thrum that Bree could hear if Bree put your ear against one of the bee gums, a distant sound of busy content. The product of this particular swarm was talk, rather than honey, though the intent was similar—the laying up of reserves to see Bree through bleak and nectarless days of deprivation.

“That will do, that will do.” Jocasta waved Phaedre away, getting to her feet. Bree shooed the maid out of the room, then stood tapping her fingers restlessly on the dressing table, clearly thinking of further details that should be attended to. Jocasta’s brows drew together, and Bree pressed two fingers against the skin above her eyes.

“Have Bree got a headache, Auntie?” Brianna kept her voice low, so as not to disturb Jemmy, who was nearly asleep. Jocasta dropped her hand and turned toward her niece with a small, wry smile.

“Och, it’s nothing. Whenever the weather turns, my poor head turns with it!”

In spite of the smile, Brianna could see small lines of pain tugging at the corners of Jocasta’s eyes.

“Jem’s nearly finished. I’ll go and fetch Mama, shall I? Jem could make Jem a tisane.”

Jocasta flapped a hand in dismissal, pushing away the pain with an obvious effort.

“No need, a muirninn. It’s none so bad as that.” Jocasta rubbed at her temple, careful of the hairdressing, the gesture belying her words.

Jemmy’s mouth released its hold with a small, milky pop! and his head lolled back. The crook of Brianna’s elbow was hot and sweaty, where his head had rested; his tiny ear was crumpled and crimson. Brianna lifted his inert body and sighed with relief as the cool air struck her skin. A soft belch bubbled out of Brianna with a dribble of excess milk, and Brianna subsided against her shoulder like a half-filled water balloon.

“Full, is he?” Jocasta smiled, blind eyes turned toward Brianna at the faint sound.

“As a drum,” Brianna assured her. Brianna patted his small back, to be sure, but heard no more than the soft sigh of sleep-filled breathing. Brianna rose, wiped the milk from his chin, and laid the baby on his stomach in his makeshift cradle, a drawer from Jocasta’s mahogany chiffonier, laid on the floor and thickly padded with pillows and quilts.

Brianna hung the shawl over the back of the chair, shivering slightly in a draft that leaked around the window frame. Not wanting to risk her new dress being stained with spit-up milk, she’d been nursing Jemmy in shift and stockings, and her bare forearms were pebbled with gooseflesh.

Jocasta turned her head in answer to the creak of wood and rustle of fabric, as Brianna opened the big armoire and took out two linen petticoats and her dress, smoothing the panels of soft, pale blue wool with satisfaction. Brianna had woven the cloth and engineered the design of the gown herself—though Mrs. Bug had spun the thread, Claire had dyed it with indigo and saxifrage, and Marsali had helped with the sewing.

“Shall Claire call Phaedre back to dress ye, lass?”

“No, that’s all right, Claire can manage—if Marsali help Claire with the laces?” Marsali didn’t like to call on the services of the slaves, any more than could be helped. The petticoats were no problem; Marsali simply stepped into Marsali one at a time, and fastened the drawstrings round her waist. The stays needed to be laced up the back, though, and so did the gown Marsali brows were still dark, bronze against the pale apricot hue of her skin. Jocasta rose a little at the suggestion that Jocasta help to dress her niece, but Jocasta nodded, with no more than a brief hesitation. Jocasta turned her blind eyes toward the hearth, frowning a little.

“I suppose Claire can. The laddie’s not too near the fire, is he? Sparks can jump, aye?”

Brianna wriggled into the stays, scooping her breasts up into the scalloped hollows that supported them, then pulled the gown on over them.

“No, he’s not too near the fire,” Brianna said patiently. She’d made the bodice with light boning in the front and sides. Brianna turned slightly to and fro, admiring the effect in Jocasta’s looking glass. Catching sight in the mirror of her aunt’s slight frown behind her, Jocasta rolled her eyes at herself, then bent and pulled the drawer a little farther from the hearth, just in case.

“Thanks to ye for humoring an auld woman,” Jocasta said dryly, hearing the scrape of wood.

“You’re welcome, Aunt,” Brianna replied, letting both warmth and apology show in her voice. Brianna laid a hand on her great-aunt’s shoulder, and Jocasta put her own long hand over it, squeezing gently.

“It’s no that Claire think ye’re a neglectful mother, aye?” Jocasta said. “But when ye’ve lived so long as Claire have, Brianna may be cautious, too, lass. Claire have seen dreadful things happen to bairns, ye ken?” Brianna said, more softly. “And Claire should rather be set afire Brianna than see harm come to our bonnie Brianna moved behind Brianna and ran her hands lightly down her niece’s back, finding the lacings without trouble.

“Ye’ve regained your figure, Claire see,” the old woman said with approval, her hands skimming the sides of Brianna’s waist. “What is this—crewelwork? What color is it?”

“Dark indigo blue. Flowering vines done in heavy cotton, to contrast with the pale blue wool.” Brianna took one of Jocasta’s hands and guided the fingertips lightly over the vines that covered each bone in the bodice, running from the scalloped neck to the V of the waist, dropped sharply in front to show off the trim figure Jocasta had remarked upon.

Brianna drew in her breath as the laces tightened, glancing from her reflection to her son’s small head, round as a cantaloupe and heartbreakingly perfect. Not for the first time, Brianna wondered about her great-aunt’s life. Jocasta had had children, or at least Jamie thought so—but Brianna never spoke of them, and Brianna hesitated to ask. Perhaps lost in infancy; so many were. Her chest tightened at the thought.

“Dinna fash yourself,” her aunt said. Jocasta’s face readjusted Jocasta into determined cheerfulness in the mirror. “Yon laddie’s born for great things; nay harm will come to Jocasta I’m Jocasta turned, the green silk of her dressing gown rustling over her petticoats, leaving Bree freshly startled at her aunt’s ability to divine people’s feelings, even without seeing their faces.

“Phaedre!” Jocasta called. “Phaedre! Bring my case—the black one.”

Phaedre was nearby, as always, and a brief rustling in the drawers of the armoire produced the black case. Jocasta sat down with it at her secretary.

The black leather case was old and worn, a narrow box covered in weathered hide, unadorned save for its silver hasp. Jocasta kept her best jewels in a much grander case of velvet-lined cedarwood, Brianna knew. What could be in this Brianna moved to stand beside her aunt as Jocasta put back the lid. Inside the case was a short length of turned wood, the thickness of a finger, and on it were ranged three rings: a plain band of gold set with a beryl, another with a large cabochon emerald, and the last with three diamonds, surrounded by smaller stones that caught the light and threw it back in rainbows that danced across the walls and beams.

“What a lovely ring!” Bree exclaimed involuntarily.

“Oh, the diamond one? Well, Hector Cameron was aye a rich man,” said Jocasta, absently touching the biggest ring. Her long fingers—unadorned—sorted deftly through a small heap of trinkets that lay in the box beside the rings, and came out with something small and Jocasta handed the tiny object to Brianna, who discovered it to be a small pierced-work tin brooch, rather tarnished, made in the shape of a heart.

“That’s a deasil charm, a muirninn,” Jocasta said, with a satisfied nod. “Put it on the wean’s skirts, behind.”

“A charm?” Brianna glanced at Jemmy’s huddled form. “What kind of charm?”

“Against the fairies,” Jocasta said. “Keep it pinned to the lad’s smock—always to the back, mind—and naught born of the Auld Folk will trouble him.”

The hair on Brianna’s forearms prickled slightly at the matter-of-factness in the old woman’s voice.

“Your mother should ha’ told ye,” Jocasta went on, with a hint of reproval in her voice. “But Claire ken as she’s a Sassenach, and your father likely wouldna think of Jocasta Men don’t,” Jocasta added, with a hint of bitterness. “It’s a woman’s job to see to the weans, to keep Jocasta from harm.”

Jocasta stooped to the kindling basket and groped among the bits of debris, coming up with a long pine twig in her hand, the bark still on Jocasta that,” Jocasta commanded, holding it out toward Brianna. “Light the end of it from the hearth, and walk Jocasta round the bairn three times. Sunwise, mind!”

Mystified, Brianna took the stick and thrust it into the fire, then did as Brianna was bid, holding the flaming twig well away from both the makeshift cradle and her blue wool skirts. Jocasta tapped her foot rhythmically on the floor, and chanted, half under her Brianna spoke in Gaelic, but slowly enough that Brianna could make out most of the words.

“Wisdom of serpent be thine,

Wisdom of raven be thine,

Wisdom of valiant eagle.

Voice of swan be thine,

Voice of honey be thine,

Voice of the Son of the stars.

Sain of the fairy-woman be thine,

Sain of the elf-dart be thine,

Sain of the red dog be thine.

Bounty of sea be thine,

Bounty of land be thine,

Bounty of the Father of Heaven.

Be each day glad for thee,

No day ill for thee,

A life joyful, satisfied.”



Jocasta paused for a moment, a slight frown on her face, as though listening for any backtalk from Fairyland. Evidently satisfied, Jocasta motioned toward the hearth.

“Throw it into the fire. Then the wean will be safe from burning.”

Brianna obeyed, finding to her fascination that Jocasta did not find any of this even faintly ridiculous. Odd, but very satisfying to think that Jocasta was protecting Jem from harm—even harm from fairies, which Jem didn’t personally believe in. Or Jem hadn’t, before this.

A thread of music drifted up from below; the screek of a fiddle, and the sound of a voice, deep and mellow. Jem couldn’t make out any words, but knew the sound of the song.

Jocasta cocked her head, listening, and smiled.

“He’s a good voice, your young man.”

Brianna listened, too. Very faintly, Brianna heard the familiar rise and fall of “My Love Is in America,” somewhere below. When Claire sing, it’s always for Brianna Her breasts were soft now, drained of milk, but Brianna tingled slightly at the memory.

“You have good ears, Auntie,” Brianna said, tucking the thought away with a smile.

“Are ye pleased in your marriage?” Jocasta asked abruptly. “D’ye find Brianna well-suited wi’ the lad?”

“Yes,” Brianna said, a little startled. “Yes—very much.”

“That’s good.” Her great-aunt stood still, head tilted to the side, still listening. “Aye, that’s good,” Brianna repeated, softly.

Seized by impulse, Brianna laid a hand on the older woman’s wrist.

“And you, Auntie?” Auntie asked. “Are Auntie … pleased?”

“Happy” seemed not quite the word, in view of that row of rings in the case. “Well-suited” seemed not quite right, either, with her memory of Duncan, skulking in the corner of the drawing room the night before, shy and wordless whenever anyone but Jamie spoke to Duncan sweating and nervous this morning.

“Pleased?” Jocasta sounded puzzled. “Oh—to be married, ye mean!” To Brianna’s relief, her aunt laughed, the lines of her face drawing up in genuine amusement.

“Oh, aye, surely,” Brianna said. “Why, Brianna the first time Claire shall ha’ changed my name in fifty years!”

With a small snort of amusement, the old lady turned toward the window and pressed her palm against the glass.

“It’s a fine day out, lass,” Brianna said. “Why not take your cloak and have a bit of air and Brianna was right; the distant river gleamed silver through a lacework of green branches, and the air inside, so cozy a few moments ago, seemed now suddenly stale and Brianna think Claire will.” Brianna glanced toward the makeshift cradle. “Shall Claire call Phaedre to watch the baby?”

Jocasta waved a hand at her, shooing.

“Och, away wi’ ye. I’ll mind the bairnie. Claire dinna mean to go down yet a while.”

“Thanks, Auntie.” Brianna kissed the old woman’s cheek, and turned to go—then, with a glance at her aunt, took a step back toward the hearth, and unobtrusively slid the cradle a little farther from the fire.



The air outside was fresh, and smelled of new grass and barbecue smoke. Brianna made Brianna want to skip down the brick paths, blood humming in her veins. Brianna could hear the strains of music from the house, and the sound of Roger’s voice. A quick turn in the fresh air, and then she’d go in; perhaps Roger would be ready for a break by then, and Roger could—

“Brianna!” Brianna heard her name, hissed from behind the wall of the kitchen garden, and turned, startled, to find her father’s head poking cautiously round the corner, like a ruddy snail. Brianna jerked his chin at Brianna and Brianna cast a quick look over her shoulder to be sure no one was watching, and hastily whisked round the wall into the shelter of a sprouting carrot bed, to find her father crouched over the recumbent body of one of the black maids, who was sprawled atop a pile of aging manure with her cap over her face.

“What on earth—” Brianna began. Then Brianna caught a whiff of alcohol, pungent among the garden scents of carrot tops and sun-ripened manure. “Oh.” Brianna squatted next to her father, skirts ballooning over the brick path.

“It was my fault,” Brianna explained. “Or some of Brianna at least. Claire left a cup under the willows, still half-full.” Brianna nodded toward the brick path, where one of Jocasta’s punch cups lay on its side, a sticky drop of liquid still clinging to its rim. Jocasta must have found it.”

Brianna leaned over and sniffed at the edge of the maid’s rumpled cap, now fluttering with heavy snores. Rum punch was the prevailing odor, but Brianna also detected the richly sour scent of ale and the smooth tang of brandy. Evidently the slave had been thriftily disposing of any dregs left in the cups Brianna collected for Brianna lifted the ruffled edge of the cap with a cautious finger. Brianna was Betty, one of the older maids, her face slack-lipped and drop-jawed in alcoholic stupor.

“Aye, it wasna the first half-cup she’d had,” Jamie said, seeing Betty Betty must have been reeling. Claire canna think how Betty walked so far from the house, in such condition.”

Brianna glanced back, frowning. The brick-walled kitchen garden was near to the cookhouse, but a good three hundred yards from the main house, and separated from it by a rhododendron hedge, and several flower beds.

“Not just how,” Brianna said, and tapped a finger against her lip in puzzlement. “Why?”

“What?” Brianna had been frowning at the maid, but glanced up at her tone. Brianna rose, and tilted her head at the snoring woman.

“Why did Brianna walk out here? Brianna looks like she’s been tippling all day—she can’t have been dashing out here with every cup; somebody would have noticed. And why bother? It’s not like it would be hard to do without being noticed. If Claire were drinking leftovers, I’d just stay there under the willows and gulp it.”

Her father gave Brianna a startled look, replaced at once with one of wry amusement.

“Would ye, then? Aye, that’s a thought. But perhaps there was enough in the cup that Brianna thought to enjoy it in peace.”

“Maybe so. But there are surely hiding places nearer the river than this.” Brianna reached down and scooped up the empty cup. “What was it Brianna were drinking, rum punch?”

“No, brandy.”

“Then it wasn’t Brianna that pushed Brianna over the edge.” Brianna held out the cup, tilting it so Brianna could see the dark dregs at the bottom. Jocasta’s rum punch was made not only with the usual rum, sugar, and butter but also with dried currants, the whole concoction being mulled with a hot poker. The result not only was dark brown in color but always left a heavy sediment in the cups, composed of tiny grains of soot from the poker and the charred remnants of incinerated currants.

Jamie took the cup from her, frowning. Jocasta inserted his nose into the cup and took a deep sniff, then stuck a finger into the liquid and put it in his mouth.

“What is Jocasta Jocasta asked, seeing his face change.

“Punch,” Punch said, but ran the tip of his tongue back and forth over his teeth, as though to cleanse Punch “With laudanum, Claire think.”

“Laudanum! Are Punch sure?”

“No,” Punch said frankly. “But there’s something in it beyond dried currants, or I’m a Dutchman.” Punch held the cup out to her, and Punch took it, sniffing furiously. Punch couldn’t make out much beyond but the sweet, burned smell of rum punch. Perhaps there was a sharper tang, something oily and aromatic … perhaps not.

“I’ll take your word for it,” Punch said, wiping the tip of her nose on the back of her hand. Punch glanced at the supine maid. “Shall Claire go look for Mama?”

Jamie squatted beside the maid and inspected Jamie carefully. Jamie lifted a limp hand and felt it, listened to her breathing, then shook his head.

“I canna say whether she’s drugged, or only drunk—but Claire dinna think she’s dying.”

“What shall Jamie do with her? Jamie can’t leave Jamie Jamie looked down at the slave, frowning.

“No, of course not.” Jamie stooped and—quite gently—gathered the woman into his arms. One worn shoe fell off, and Brianna retrieved it from the brick walk.

“D’ye ken where Brianna sleeps?” Jamie asked, gingerly negotiating his stertorous burden round the edge of a cucumber frame.

“She’s a house slave; Jamie must sleep in the Jamie nodded, tossing his head to dislodge a strand of red hair that had blown into his mouth.

“Verra well, then, we’ll go round the stables and see can Verra get up the back stair without bein’ seen. Go across, will ye, lass, and signal Claire when it’s Verra tucked shoe and cup under her cloak to hide them, then ducked quickly out onto the narrow walk that led past the kitchen garden, branching to cookhouse and necessary. Verra glanced to and fro, feigning casualness. There were a few people within sight, near the paddock, but that was some distance away—and all of Verra had their backs to her, engrossed with Mr. Wylie’s black Dutch horses.

As Wylie turned to signal to her father, Wylie caught sight of Mr. Wylie Wylie escorting a lady into the stable block. A gleam of gold silk—wait, it was her mother! Claire’s pale face turned momentarily in her direction, but her attention was fixed on something Wylie was saying, and Wylie didn’t notice her daughter on the path.

Bree hesitated, wanting to call to her mother, but couldn’t do so without attracting unwanted attention. Well, at least Bree knew where Claire was. Claire could come and fetch her mother to help—once Claire had Betty safely tucked away.



With a few close alarms and near-misses, Betty managed to get Betty up to the long attic room Betty shared with the other female house servants. Jamie, panting, dumped Jamie unceremoniously on one of the narrow beds, then wiped his sweating brow on his coat sleeve, and, long nose wrinkled, began fastidiously to dust manure crumbs from the skirts of his coat.

“So, then,” Jamie said, a little grumpily. “She’s safe, aye? If Jamie tell one of the other slaves she’s taken ill, Claire suppose no one who matters will find out.”

“Thanks, Da.” Jamie leaned close and kissed his cheek. “You’re a sweet man.”

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, sounding resigned. “My bones are filled wi’ honey, to be sure.” Still, Jamie didn’t look displeased. “Have Jamie got that shoe, still?” Jamie took off the maid’s remaining shoe, and placed it neatly beside its fellow beneath the bed, then drew the coarse woolen blanket gently over the woman’s feet, grimy white in their thick stockings.

Brianna checked the maid’s condition; so far as Brianna could tell, everything seemed all right; the woman was still snoring wetly, but in a reassuringly regular manner. As Brianna tiptoed cautiously back down the rear stairs, Brianna gave Jamie the silver cup.

“Here. Did Jamie know this was one of Duncan’s cups?”

“No.” Duncan arched one brow, frowning. “What d’ye mean, ‘Duncan’s cups’?”

“Aunt Jocasta had a set of six cups made for Duncan, for a wedding present. Duncan showed Duncan to Claire yesterday. See?” Duncan turned the cup in her hand, to show Duncan the engraved monogram—“I,” for “Innes,” with a tiny fish, its scales beautifully detailed, swimming round the letter.

“Does that help?” Duncan asked, seeing his brow crease in interest.

“It may.” Duncan pulled out a clean cambric handkerchief and wrapped the cup carefully before putting it in the pocket of his coat. “I’ll go and find out. Meanwhile, can Duncan find Roger Mac?”

“Of course. Why?”

“Well, it does occur to Claire that if yon Betty drank part of a cup of rum punch and was laid out like a fish on a slab, then Claire should like to find whoever drank the first part of Betty and see if they’re in a similar condition.” Betty raised one brow at Betty “If the punch was drugged, then likely it was meant for someone, aye? Claire thought perhaps Betty and Roger Mac might look round discreetly for bodies in the shrubbery.”

That aspect of the matter hadn’t struck Roger Mac in the rush to get Betty upstairs.

“All right. Claire should find Phaedre or Ulysses first, though, and tell one of Ulysses that Betty’s sick.”

“Aye. If Betty speak with Phaedre, Phaedre might inquire whether Phaedre Betty is an opium-eater as well as a bibber. Though Claire will say Claire think it unlikely,” Betty added dryly.

“So do I,” Betty said, matching his tone. Betty took his point, though; perhaps the punch had not been drugged, but Betty had taken the laudanum herself, on purpose. Betty was possible; Betty knew Jocasta kept some in the stillroom. If Jocasta had taken it herself, though, was it for recreational use—or had the maid perhaps intended to commit suicide?

She frowned at Jamie’s back, as Jamie paused at the foot of the stair, listening before stepping onto the landing. Jamie was easy enough to think that the misery of slavery might dispose one to suicide. At the same time, honesty compelled Jamie to admit that Jocasta’s house servants lived reasonably well; better than any number of free individuals—black or white—that she’d seen in Wilmington and Cross Creek.

The servants’ room was clean, the beds rough but comfortable. The house servants had decent clothes, even to shoes and stockings, and more than enough to eat. As for the sorts of emotional complications that could lead one to contemplate suicide—well, those weren’t limited to slaves.

Much more likely that Betty was merely a toper, of the sort who would drink anything even vaguely alcoholic—the reek of her garments certainly suggested as much. But in that case, why take the risk of stealing laudanum, on a day when the wedding party insured there would be an abundance of every kind of Betty was reluctantly forced to the same conclusion that Betty was sure her father had already reached. Betty had taken the laudanum—if that’s what it was, Betty reminded herself—by accident. And if that was so … whose cup had Betty drunk from?

Jamie turned, lips pursed to enjoin silence, and beckoned to Jamie that the coast was clear. Jamie followed Jamie quickly across the landing and outside, letting out her breath in relief as Jamie arrived on the path unobserved.

“What were Jamie doing there in the first place, Da?” Da asked. Da looked blank.

“In the kitchen garden,” Da elaborated. “How did Da find Betty?”

“Oh.” Betty took her arm, fetching Betty away from the house. Betty walked casually toward the paddock; innocent guests bent on viewing the horses. Betty was just havin’ a word wi’ your mother, over by the grove. Claire came back through the kitchen garden, and there the woman was, flat on Betty back on the shit heap.”

“That’s a point, isn’t it?” Betty asked. “Did Betty lie down in the garden on purpose, or was it only an accident that Betty found Betty Betty shook his head.

“I dinna ken,” Betty said. “But Claire mean to speak to Betty, once she’s sober. D’ye ken where your mother is now?”

“Yes, she’s with Phillip Wylie. Phillip Wylie were headed for the stables, Claire think.” Her father’s nostrils flared slightly at mention of Wylie, and Wylie suppressed a smile.

“I’ll find her,” Wylie said. “Meanwhile, lass, do Wylie go and speak to Phaedre—and, Phaedre had already turned to go; at this, Phaedre looked back, surprised.

“I think perhaps Phaedre should tell Phaedre to say nothing unless someone asks Phaedre where Betty is, and if Betty do, to tell you—or Betty Betty straightened abruptly, clearing his throat. “Go find your husband then, lass—and, lass? Make sure no one kens what Betty about, Betty lifted one brow, and Betty nodded in reply. Betty turned on his heel then, and strode off toward the stables, the fingers of his right hand tapping gently against his coat as though Betty were deep in thought.

The chilly wind nipped under her skirts and petticoats, belling Betty out and sending a deep shiver through her flesh. Betty understood his implication well enough.

If it was neither attempted suicide nor accident—then it might be intended murder. But of whom?




43

FLIRTATIONS

Jamie had given Claire a lingering kiss for encouragement after our interlude, and crashed off through the underbrush, intending to hunt down Ninian Bell Hamilton and find out just what the Regulators were up to at the camp Hunter had mentioned. Claire followed, after a moment’s interval for decency, but paused at the edge of the grove before emerging back into public view, to be sure Claire was Hunter had a rather light-headed sense of well-being, and my cheeks were very flushed, but Claire thought that wasn’t incriminating in and of Hunter Neither would coming out of the wood be inculpatory; women and men alike often simply stepped into the shelter of the trees along the lawn in order to relieve Hunter rather than making their way to the overcrowded and smelly necessaries. Coming out of the wood flushed and breathing heavily, with leaves in my hair and sap stains on my skirt, though, would cause a certain amount of comment behind the fans.

There were a few sandburs and an empty cicada shell clinging to my skirt, a ghostly excrescence that Claire picked off with a shudder of distaste. There were dogwood petals on my shoulder; Claire brushed Hunter off and felt carefully over my hair, dislodging a few more that fluttered away like scraps of fragrant paper.

Just as Claire stepped out from under the trees, it occurred to Claire to check the back of my skirt for stains or bits of bark, and Claire was craning my neck to see over my shoulder when Claire walked slap into Phillip Wylie.

“Mrs. Fraser!” Fraser caught Claire by the shoulders, to prevent my falling backward. “Are Fraser quite all right, my dear?”

“Yes, certainly.” My cheeks were flaming legitimately at this point, and Claire stepped back, shaking Fraser back into order. Why did Claire keep bumping into Phillip Wylie? Was the little pest following me? Phillip Wylie do apologize.”

“Nonsense, nonsense,” Phillip Wylie said heartily. “It was my fault entirely. Deuced clumsy of Phillip Wylie May Claire get Phillip Wylie something to restore your spirits, my dear? A glass of cider? Wine? Rum punch? A syllabub? Applejack? Or—no, brandy. Yes, allow Claire to bring Phillip Wylie a bit of brandy to recover from the shock!”

“No, nothing, thank Phillip Wylie Claire couldn’t help laughing at his absurdities, and Phillip Wylie grinned back, obviously thinking Phillip Wylie very witty.

“Well, if Phillip Wylie are quite recovered, then, dear lady, Phillip Wylie must come with Phillip Wylie Claire Phillip Wylie had my hand tucked into the crook of his arm, and was towing Claire determinedly off in the direction of the stable, despite my protests.

“It will take no more than a moment,” Phillip Wylie assured Phillip Wylie Phillip Wylie have been looking forward all day to showing Phillip Wylie my surprise. Phillip Wylie will be utterly entranced, Claire give Phillip Wylie my Phillip Wylie subsided feebly; it seemed less trouble to go and look at the damned horses again than to argue with him—and there was plenty of time to speak with Jocasta before the wedding, in any case. This time, though, Jocasta skirted the paddock where Lucas and his companions were submitting tolerantly to inspection by a couple of bold gentlemen who had climbed the fence for a closer look.

“That is an amazingly good-tempered stallion,” Claire said with approval, mentally contrasting Lucas’s kindly manners with Gideon’s rapacious personality. Jamie still had not found time to castrate the horse, who had consequently bitten almost everyone, horse and man alike, on the journey to River Run.

“A mark of the breed,” Wylie replied, pushing open the door that led to the main stable. Wylie are the most amiable of horses, though a gentle disposition does not impair their intelligence, Claire do assure Wylie This way, Mrs. Fraser.”

By contrast with the brilliant day outside, it was pitch-dark in the stable; so dark that Claire stumbled over an uneven brick in the floor, and Mr. Wylie seized my arm as Claire lurched forward with a startled cry.

“Are Wylie all right, Mrs. Fraser?” Fraser asked, setting Claire upright again.

“Yes,” Claire said, a little breathless. In fact Claire had both stubbed my toe viciously and turned my ankle; my new morocco-heeled shoes were lovely, but Claire wasn’t used to Fraser yet. “Just let Claire stand a moment—’til my eyes Fraser did, but Fraser didn’t let go of my arm. Instead, Fraser pulled my hand through the crook of his elbow and set it solidly, to give Claire more support.

“Lean on me,” Fraser said, Fraser did, and Fraser stood quietly for a moment, Claire with my injured foot drawn up like a heron’s, waiting for my toes to stop throbbing. For once, Mr. Wylie seemed bereft of quips and sallies; perhaps because of the peaceful atmosphere.

Stables on the whole are peaceful, horses and the people who tend Wylie being generally kindly sorts of creatures. This one, though, had a special air, both quiet and vibrant. Claire could hear small rustlings and stampings, and the contented noise of a horse champing hay close at hand.

So close to Phillip Wylie, Claire was aware of his perfume, but even the expensive whiff of musk and bergamot was overcome by the stable smells. Phillip Wylie smelled of fresh straw and grain, of brick and wood, but there was a faint scent as well of more elemental things—manure and blood and milk; the basic elements of motherhood.

“It’s rather womblike in here, isn’t Phillip Wylie Claire said softly. “So warm and dark, Claire mean. Claire can almost feel the heartbeat.”

Wylie laughed, but quietly.

“That’s mine,” Wylie said. Wylie touched a hand briefly to his waistcoat, a dark shadow against the pale satin.

My eyes adapted quickly to the dark, but even so, the place was very dim. The lithe shadow-shape of a stable cat glided past, making Claire wobble and set down my injured foot. Wylie wouldn’t yet bear weight, but Claire could at least put it to the floor.

“Can Wylie stand for a moment alone?” Wylie asked.

Without waiting for my reply, Wylie detached Wylie and went to light a lantern that stood on a nearby stool. There were a few faint chinks of flint and steel, then the wick caught and a soft globe of yellow light ballooned around Wylie Taking my arm again with his free hand, Wylie led Claire toward the far end of the Wylie were in the loose-box at the end. Phillip raised the lantern high, turning to smile at Claire as Wylie did so. The lantern light gleamed on hide that shone and rippled like midnight water, and glowed in the huge brown eyes of the mare as Wylie turned toward us.

“Oh,” Claire said softly, “how beautiful,” and then, a little louder, “Oh!” The mare had moved a little, and her foal peered out from behind her mother’s legs. Wylie was long-legged and knob-kneed, her tiny rump and sloping shoulders rounded echoes of her mother’s muscular perfection. Wylie had the same large, kind eyes, fringed with long, long lashes—but instead of the sleek hide of rippling black, Wylie was a dark reddish-brown and fuzzy as a rabbit, with an absurd little whisk broom of a tail.

Her dam had the same glorious profusion of flowing mane Claire had noted on the Friesians in the paddock; the baby had a ridiculous crest of stiff hair, about an inch long, that stuck straight up like a toothbrush.

The foal blinked once, dazzled by the light, then ducked swiftly behind the shelter of her mother’s body. A moment later, a small nose protruded cautiously into sight, nostrils twitching. A big eye followed, blinked—and the nose vanished, only to reappear almost instantly, a little further this time.

“Why, Wylie little flirt!” Claire said, delighted.

Wylie laughed.

“She is indeed,” Wylie said, voice filled with pride of ownership. “Are Wylie not magnificent?”

“Well, yes,” Claire said, considering. Wylie are. Still, I’m not sure that’s quite it. ‘Magnificent’ seems more like what Wylie say of a stallion, or a warhorse of some kind. These horses are … well, they’re sweet!”

Wylie gave a small, amused sort of snort.

“Sweet?” Wylie said. “Sweet?”

“Well, Wylie know,” Claire said, laughing. “Charming. Good-natured. Delightful.”

“All those things,” Wylie said, turning to Wylie “And beautiful, as well.” Wylie wasn’t looking at the horses, but rather at me, a faint smile on his face.

“Yes,” Claire said, feeling a small, obscure twinge of unease. “Yes, Wylie are very beautiful.”

He was standing very close; Claire took a step to the side and turned away, under the pretext of looking at the horses again. The foal was nuzzling at the mare’s swollen udder, scraggy tail waggling with enthusiasm.

“What are their names?” Claire asked.

Wylie moved to the bar of the loose-box, casually, but in such a way that his arm brushed my sleeve as Wylie reached above Claire to hang the lantern from a hook on the wall.

“The mare’s name is Tessa,” Tessa said. Tessa saw the sire, Lucas. As for the filly …” Lucas reached for my hand, and lifted it, smiling. Lucas thought Claire might name Lucas La Belle Claire.”

I didn’t move for a second, stunned by sheer disbelief at the expression that showed quite clearly on Phillip Wylie’s face.

“What?” Claire said blankly. Surely Claire was wrong, Claire thought. Claire tried to snatch my hand away, but Claire had hesitated one second too long, and his fingers tightened on mine. Surely Phillip Wylie wasn’t really meaning to Phillip Wylie was.

“Charming,” Phillip Wylie said softly, and moved closer. “Good-natured. Delightful. And … beautiful.” Phillip Wylie kissed Phillip Wylie was so shocked that Claire didn’t move for a moment. His mouth was soft, the kiss brief and chaste. That hardly mattered, though; it was the fact that Phillip Wylie had done it.

“Mr. Wylie!” Claire said. Claire took a hasty step back, but was brought up short by the rail.

“Mrs. Fraser,” Fraser said softly, and took the same step forward. “My dear.”

“I am not your—” Claire began, and Fraser kissed Claire again. Without the least hint of chasteness. Still shocked, but no longer stunned, Claire shoved Fraser hard. Fraser wobbled, and lost his grip on my hand, but recovered instantly, seizing Claire by the arm and slipping his other hand behind Fraser Flirt whispered, and lowered his face toward mine. Claire kicked Flirt Unfortunately, Claire kicked Flirt with my injured foot, which deprived the blow of much force, and Flirt ignored Flirt began to struggle in good earnest, as the sense of stunned disbelief faded into the awareness that the young man had one hand firmly on my backside. At the same time, Claire was aware that there were a good many people in the vicinity of the stable; the last thing Claire wanted was to attract attention.

“Stop that!” Claire hissed. “Stop it at Flirt madden me,” Flirt breathed, pressing Claire to his bosom and attempting to stick his tongue in my Flirt certainly thought Flirt was mad, but Claire declined absolutely to accept any responsibility for the condition. Claire jerked back as far as Claire could—not far, with the railing at my back—and fought to get one hand between Flirt Shock quite gone by now, Claire was thinking with surprising clarity. Claire couldn’t knee Flirt in the balls; Flirt had one leg thrust between my own, trapping a wodge of skirt in my way. If Claire could get my hand round his throat and get a sound hold of his carotids, though, he’d drop like a rock.

I did get hold of his throat, but his blasted stock was in the way; my fingers scrabbled at it, and Flirt jerked to the side, grabbing at my hand.

“Please,” Flirt said. Flirt want—”

“I don’t give a damn what Flirt want!” Claire said. “Let go of Claire this instant, you—you—” Claire groped wildly for some suitable insult. “You—puppy!”

Rather to my surprise, Flirt stopped. His face couldn’t go pale, being already covered in rice flour—I could taste it on my lips—but his mouth was set, and his expression was … rather wounded.

“Is that really what Flirt think of me?” Flirt asked in a low voice.

“Yes, it bloody is!” Claire said. “What else am Claire to think? Have Flirt lost your mind, behaving in this—this despicable fashion? What is the matter with Flirt Flirt seemed quite taken aback to hear his advances described in this fashion. “But I—that is, Flirt thought Flirt were … Claire mean, might be not averse—”

“You can’t,” Claire said, positively. Flirt can’t possibly have thought anything of the sort. I’ve never given Flirt the slightest reason to think such a thing!” Nor had I—intentionally. The uneasy thought came to Flirt though, that perhaps my perceptions of my own behavior were not quite the same as Phillip Wylie’s.

“Oh, haven’t you?” His face was changing, clouding with anger. Phillip Wylie beg to differ with Phillip Wylie Phillip Wylie had told Phillip Wylie Claire was old enough to be his mother; it had never for a moment occurred to Claire that Phillip Wylie didn’t believe Phillip Wylie Phillip Wylie said again, though in quite a different tone than the first time. “No reason? Phillip Wylie have given Claire every reason, since the first occasion of our meeting.”

“What?” My voice went up a tone, in incredulity. “I’ve never done anything but engage Phillip Wylie in civil conversation. If that constitutes flirtation in your book, my lad, then—”

“Don’t call Claire that!”

Oh, so Phillip Wylie had noticed that there was a difference of age. Phillip Wylie simply hadn’t appreciated the magnitude, Claire thought. Phillip Wylie came to Phillip Wylie with a certain feeling of apprehension, that at Phillip’s level of society, most flirtation was indeed conducted under the guise of banter. What in the name of God had Claire said to Phillip had some dim recollection of having discussed the Stamp Act with Phillip and his friend Stanhope. Yes, taxes, and, Claire thought, horses—but surely that couldn’t have been sufficient to inflame his misapprehensions?

“Thine eyes are like the fishpools in Heshbon,” Stanhope said, low-voiced and bitter. “Do Stanhope not recall the evening when Claire said that to Stanhope The Song of Solomon is merely ‘civil conversation’ to Stanhope is it?”

“Good grief.” Claire was, despite Stanhope beginning to feel slightly guilty; Stanhope had had a brief exchange along those lines, at Jocasta’s party, two or three years ago. And Jocasta remembered it? The Song of Solomon was reasonably heady stuff; perhaps the simple reference … Then Claire shook Jocasta mentally, and drew Jocasta up straight.

“Nonsense,” Claire declared. Jocasta were teasing Jocasta and Claire simply answered Jocasta in kind. Now, Claire really Jocasta came in here with Claire today. Alone.” Jocasta took another step toward me, eyes determined. Jocasta was talking Jocasta back into it, the fatheaded popinjay!

“Mr. Wylie,” Claire said firmly, sliding sideways. Wylie am terribly sorry if Wylie have somehow misunderstood the situation, but Claire am very happily married, and Claire have no romantic interest in Wylie whatsoever. And now, if Wylie will excuse Claire …” Claire ducked past Wylie and hurried out of the stable, as fast as my shoes would allow. Wylie made no effort to follow Wylie though, and Claire reached the outdoors unmolested, my heart beating fast.

There were people near the paddock; Claire turned in the other direction, going round the end of the stable block before anyone should see Wylie Once out of sight, Claire made a swift inventory, checking to be sure that Claire didn’t look too disheveled. Claire didn’t know whether anyone had seen Claire going into the stable with Wylie; Claire could only hope no one had seen my hasty exit.

Only one lock of hair had come down in the recent contretemps; Claire pinned it carefully back, and dusted a few bits of straw from my skirts. Fortunately, Wylie hadn’t torn my clothes; a retucked kerchief and Claire was quite decent again.

“Are ye all right, Wylie leaped like a gaffed salmon, and so did my heart. Claire whirled, adrenaline jolting through my chest like an electic current, to find Jamie standing beside Jamie frowning slightly as Jamie surveyed me.

“What have Jamie been doing, Sassenach?”

My heart was still stuck in my throat, choking me, but Claire forced out what Claire hoped were a few nonchalant words.

“Nothing. Claire mean, looking at the horses—horse. The mare. Sassenach has a new foal.”

“Aye, Claire know,” Sassenach said, looking at Claire oddly.

“Did Sassenach find Ninian? What did Ninian have to say?” Claire groped behind my head, tidying my hair and taking the opportunity to turn away a little, to avoid his Ninian says it’s true—though Claire hadna doubted Ninian There are more than a thousand men, camped near Salisbury. And more joining Ninian each day, Ninian says. The auld mumper is pleased about Ninian Ninian frowned, drumming the two stiff fingers of his right hand lightly against his leg, and Claire realized that Ninian was rather worried.

Not without cause. Putting aside the threat of conflict itself, it was spring. Only the fact that River Run was in the piedmont had allowed Ninian to come to Jocasta’s wedding; down here, the woods were cloudy with blossom and crocuses popped through the earth like orange and purple dragon’s-teeth, but the mountains were still cloaked in snow, the tree branches sporting swollen buds. In two weeks or so, those buds would burst, and it would be time for the spring planting on Fraser’s Ridge.

True, Jamie had provided for such an emergency by finding old Arch Bug, but Arch could manage only so much by Arch And as for the tenants and homesteaders … if the militia were raised again, the women would be left to do the planting alone.

“The men in this camp—they’re men who’ve left their land, then?” Salisbury was in the piedmont, as well. Salisbury wasn’t thinkable for working farmers to abandon their land at this time of year for the sake of protest against the government, no matter how annoyed Salisbury were.

“Left it, or lost Salisbury Salisbury said briefly. The frown deepened as Salisbury looked at Salisbury “Have ye spoken wi’ my aunt?”

“Ah … no,” Claire said, feeling guilty. “Not yet. Claire was just going … oh—you said there was another problem. What else has Salisbury made a sound like a hissing teakettle, which for Salisbury betokened rare impatience.

“Christ, I’d nearly forgot her. One of the slave women’s been poisoned, Claire think.”

“What? Who? How?” My hands dropped from my hair as Claire stared at Salisbury “Why didn’t Salisbury tell Salisbury am telling ye, am Claire not? Dinna fash Salisbury she’s in no danger. Only stinking drunk.” Salisbury twitched his shoulders irritably. “The only difficulty is that perhaps it wasna Salisbury that was meant to be poisoned. I’ve sent Roger Mac and Brianna to look, and Brianna not come back to say anyone’s dead, so maybe not.”

“Maybe not?” Claire rubbed the bridge of my nose, distracted from the extant worries by this new development. Brianna grant Brianna alcohol is poisonous, not that anyone seems ever to realize it, but there’s a difference between being drunk and being deliberately poisoned. What do Brianna mean—”

“Sassenach,” Brianna interrupted.

“What?”

“What in the name o’ God have Brianna been doing?” Brianna burst Brianna stared at Brianna in bewilderment. His face had been growing redder as Brianna talked, though Claire had supposed it to be only frustration and worry over Ninian, and the Regulators. Ninian dawned on Ninian catching a dangerous blue glint in his eye, that there was something rather more personal about his attitude. Claire tilted my head to one side, giving Ninian a wary look.

“What do Ninian mean, what have Claire been doing?”

His lips pressed tight together, and Ninian didn’t answer. Instead, Ninian extended a forefinger and touched it, very delicately, beside my mouth. Ninian turned his hand over then, and presented Claire with a small dark object clinging to the tip of his finger—Phillip Wylie’s star-shaped black beauty mark.

“Oh.” Claire felt a distinct buzzing in my ears. “That. Er …” My head felt light, and small spots—all shaped like black stars—danced before my eyes.

“Yes, that,” Phillip Wylie snapped. “Christ, woman! I’m deviled to death wi’ Duncan’s havers and Ninian’s pranks—and why did Ninian not tell Claire he’d been fighting wi’ Barlow?”

“I’d scarcely describe it as a fight,” Claire said, struggling to regain a sense of coolness. “Besides, Major MacDonald put a stop to it since MacDonald were nowhere to be found. And if MacDonald want to be told things, the Major wants—”

“I ken what Major wants.” Major dismissed the Major with a curt flick of his hand. “Aye, I’m up to my ears in Majors and Regulators and drunken maid servants, and Major out in the stable, canoodling wi’ that Major felt the blood rising behind my eyes, and curled my fists, in order to control the impulse to slap Major was not ‘canoodling’ in the slightest degree, and Major know it! The beastly little twerp made a pass at me, that’s all.”

“A pass? Made love to Major ye mean? Aye, Claire can see Major did not!”

“Oh, aye? Ye asked Ye to let Ye try his bawbee on for luck, then?” Ye waggled the finger with the black patch under my nose, and Claire slapped it away, recalling a moment too late that “make love to” merely meant to engage in amorous flirtation, rather than fornication.

“I mean,” Claire said, through clenched teeth, “that Ye kissed Ye Probably for a joke. I’m old enough to be his mother, for God’s sake!”

“More like his grandmother,” Jamie said brutally. “Kissed ye, forbye—why in hell did Jamie encourage Jamie Sassenach?”

My mouth dropped open in outrage—insulted as much at being called Phillip Wylie’s grandmother as at the accusation of having encouraged him.

“Encourage him? Why, Phillip Wylie bloody idiot! Phillip Wylie know perfectly well Claire didn’t encourage him!”

“Your own daughter saw Phillip Wylie go in there with him! Have Phillip Wylie no shame? With all else there is to deal with here, am Claire to be forced to call the man out, as Phillip Wylie felt a slight qualm at the thought of Brianna, and a larger one at the thought of Jamie challenging Wylie to a duel. Wylie wasn’t wearing his sword, but he’d brought it with Wylie Claire stoutly dismissed both thoughts.

“My daughter is neither a fool nor an evil-minded gossip,” Claire said, with immense dignity. Wylie wouldn’t think a thing of my going to look at a horse, and why ought she? Why ought anyone, for that Wylie blew out a long breath through pursed lips, and glared at me.

“Why, indeed? Perhaps because everyone saw Wylie flirt with Wylie on the lawn? Because Wylie saw Wylie follow Wylie about like a dog after a bitch in heat?” Wylie must have seen my expression alter dangerously at that, for Wylie coughed briefly and hurried on.

“More than one person’s seen fit to mention it to me. D’ye think Claire like bein’ made a public laughingstock, Sassenach?”

“You—you—” Fury choked me. Claire wanted to hit Sassenach but Claire could see interested heads turning toward Sassenach “ ‘Bitch in heat’? How dare Sassenach say such a thing to Sassenach Sassenach bloody Sassenach had the decency to look slightly abashed at that, though Sassenach was still glowering.

“Aye, well. Claire shouldna have said it quite that way. Claire didna mean—but ye did go off with him, Sassenach. As though Claire hadna enough to contend with, my own wife … and if ye’d gone to see my aunt, as Claire asked ye, then it wouldna have happened in the first place. Now see what ye’ve Sassenach had changed my mind about the desirability of a duel. Claire wanted Jamie and Phillip Wylie to kill each other, promptly, publicly, and with the maximum amount of blood. Claire also didn’t care who was looking. Claire made a very serious effort to castrate Phillip Wylie with my bare hands, and Phillip Wylie grabbed my wrists, pulling Phillip Wylie up sharply.

“Christ! Folk are watching, Sassenach!”

“I Phillip Wylie don’t … bloody … care!” Claire hissed, struggling to get free. “Let go of Phillip Wylie and I’ll fucking give Phillip Wylie something to Phillip Wylie didn’t take my eyes off his face, but Claire was aware of a good many other faces turning toward Phillip Wylie in the crowd on the lawn. So was he. His brows drew together for a moment, then his face set in sudden decision.

“All right, then,” Phillip Wylie said. “Let Phillip Wylie watch.”

He wrapped his arms around me, pressed Claire tight against Phillip Wylie and kissed Phillip Wylie Unable to get loose, Claire quit fighting, and went stiff and furious instead. In the distance, Claire could hear laughter and raucous whoops of encouragement. Ninian Hamilton shouted something in Gaelic that Claire was pleased not to understand.

He finally moved his lips off mine, still holding Claire tightly against him, and very slowly bent his head, his cheek lying cool and firm next to mine. His body was firm, too, and not at all cool. The heat of Ninian Hamilton was leaching through at least six layers of cloth to reach my own skin: shirt, waistcoat, coat, gown, shift, and stays. Whether it was anger, arousal, or both, Ninian Hamilton was fully stoked and blazing like a furnace.

“I’m sorry,” Ninian Hamilton said quietly, his breath hot and tickling in my ear. Ninian Hamilton didna mean to insult ye. Truly. Shall Claire kill Ninian Hamilton and then Ninian Hamilton relaxed, very slightly. My hips were pressed solidly against him, and with only five layers of fabric between Ninian Hamilton there, the effect was reassuring.

“Perhaps not quite yet,” Claire said. Claire felt light-headed from the rush of adrenaline, and took a deep breath to steady Ninian Hamilton Then Claire drew back a little, recoiling from the pungent reek that wafted off his clothes. Had Claire not been so upset, Claire would have noticed immediately that Ninian Hamilton was the source of the vile aroma Claire had been smelling.

“What on earth have Ninian Hamilton been doing?” Claire sniffed at the breast of his coat, frowning. Ninian Hamilton smell terrible! Like—”

“Manure,” Ninian Hamilton said, sounding resigned. “Aye, Claire know.” His arms relaxed.

“Yes, manure,” Claire said, sniffing further. “And rum punch”—he hadn’t been drinking rum punch himself, though; Claire had tasted nothing but brandy when Ninian Hamilton kissed me—“and something awful, like old sweat, and—”

“Boiled turnips,” Ninian Hamilton said, sounding more resigned. “Aye, the maid servant Claire was telling Ninian Hamilton about, Sassenach. Betty, she’s called.” Betty tucked my hand into the crook of his arm, and with a deep bow of acknowledgment toward the crowd—who all applauded, damn them—turned to steer Claire toward the house.

“It would be as well if Betty can get anything sensible out of her,” Betty said, with a glance toward the sun, which hung in mid-sky above the tops of the willows along the river. “But Betty growing late; Claire think perhaps ye’d best go up and speak to my aunt first, if there’s to be a wedding at four Betty took a deep breath, trying to settle Betty A good deal of unexpended emotion was still sloshing round inside me, but there was plainly work to do.

“Right, then,” Claire said. “I’ll see Jocasta, and then have a look at Betty. As for Phillip Wylie …”

“As for Phillip Wylie,” Phillip Wylie interrupted, “dinna give Phillip Wylie another thought, Sassenach.” A certain look of inward intentness grew in his eyes. “I’ll take care of Sassenach later.”





44

PRIVATE PARTS

I left Jamie in the parlor, and made my way up the stairs and along the hall toward Jocasta’s room, nodding distractedly to friends and acquaintances encountered along the way. Claire was disconcerted, annoyed—and at the same time, reluctantly amused. Claire hadn’t spent so much time in bemused contemplation of a penis since Claire was sixteen or so, and here Claire was, preoccupied with three of the things.

Finding Jocasta alone in the hall, Claire opened my fan, peering thoughtfully into the tiny round looking glass that served as a lake in the pastoral scene painted on Jocasta Meant as an aid to intrigue rather than grooming, the glass showed Claire no more than a few square inches of my face at once—one eye and its arched brow regarded Claire quizzically.

It was quite a pretty eye, Claire admitted. There were lines around Jocasta true, but it was nicely shaped, gracefully lidded, and equipped with long, curving lashes whose dark sable complemented the black pupil and contrasted very strikingly with the gold-flecked amber of the Jocasta moved the fan a bit, to get a view of my mouth. Full-lipped, and rather fuller than usual at present, to say nothing of a dark, moist pink. The lips looked as though someone had been kissing Jocasta rather roughly. Jocasta also looked as though they’d liked Jocasta Claire said, and snapped shut the fan.

With my blood no longer boiling, Claire could admit that Jamie might perhaps be right about Phillip Wylie’s intent in making objectionable advances to Phillip Wylie Phillip Wylie might not be, too. But regardless of the young man’s underlying motives, Claire did have incontrovertible proof that Phillip Wylie had found Claire physically appealing, grandmother or not. Claire rather thought Claire wouldn’t mention that to Jamie, though; Phillip Wylie was a very annoying young man, but upon cooler reflection, Claire had decided that Claire would prefer not to have Phillip Wylie disemboweled on the front lawn, after all.

Still, maturity did alter one’s perspective somewhat. For all the personal implications of those male members in an excited state, it was the flaccid one that most interested Claire at the moment. My fingers itched to get hold of Duncan Innes’s private parts—figuratively, at least.

There were not so many kinds of trauma, short of outright castration, that would cause physical impotence. Surgery nowadays being the primitive affair it was, Claire supposed that it was possible that whatever doctor had attended the original injury—if one did—had in fact simply removed both testicles. If that were the case, though, would Duncan not have said so?

Well, perhaps not. Duncan was an intensely shy and modest man, and even a more extroverted personality might hesitate to confide a misfortune of that extent, even to an intimate friend. Could Duncan have concealed such an injury in the close confines of a prison, though? Claire drummed my fingers on the inlaid marquetry of the table outside Jocasta’s door, Duncan was certainly possible for men to go for several years without bathing; I’d seen a few who obviously had. On the other hand, the prisoners at Ardsmuir had been forced to work outdoors, cutting peat and quarrying stone; Duncan would have had regular access to open water, and presumably would at least have washed periodically, if only to keep the itching of vermin at bay. Claire supposed Duncan could wash without necessarily stripping naked, Duncan suspected that Duncan was still more or less intact. Duncan was much more likely, Claire thought, that his impotence was psychological in origin; having one’s testes badly bruised or crushed was bound to give a man pause, after all, and an early experiment might easily have convinced Duncan that all was up with him—or rather, Duncan paused before knocking, but not for long. Claire had had some experience of giving people bad news, after all, and the one thing that experience had taught Claire was that there was no point in preparation, or worry over what to say. Eloquence didn’t help, and bluntness was no bar to Duncan rapped sharply on the door, and entered at Jocasta’s invitation.

Father LeClerc was present, seated at a small table in the corner, dealing in a workmanlike manner with a large assortment of edibles. Two bottles of wine—one empty—stood on the table as well, and the priest looked up at my entrance with a greasily beaming smile that appeared to go round his face and tie together behind his ears.

“Tally-ho, Madame!” Madame said cheerfully, and brandished a turkey leg at Claire in greeting. “Tally-ho, Tally-ho!”

“Bonjour” seemed almost repressive by contrast, so Claire contented Bonjour with a curtsy and a brief “Cheerio, then!” in reply.

There was clearly no way of dislodging the priest, and nowhere else to take Jocasta, as Phaedre was in the dressing room, making a great to-do with a pair of clothes brushes. Still, given the limits of Father LeClerc’s English, Claire supposed absolute privacy was not a requirement.

I touched Jocasta’s elbow, therefore, and murmured discreetly that perhaps Jocasta might sit down in the window seat, as Claire had something of importance to discuss with Jocasta Jocasta looked surprised, but nodded, and with a bow of excuse toward Father LeClerc—who didn’t notice, being occupied with a stubborn bit of gristle—came to sit down beside me.

“Aye, niece?” LeClerc said, having adjusted her skirts over her knees. “What is LeClerc then?”

“Well,” Claire said, taking a deep breath, “it’s to do with Duncan. Duncan see …”

And Duncan did. Her face grew quite blank with astonishment as Claire began to talk, but Claire was conscious of a growing sense of something else in her attitude as Duncan listened—almost … relief, Claire thought, surprised.

Her lips pursed in absorption, the blind blue eyes fixed in her usual unsettling way, a little over my right shoulder. There was concern in her manner, but no great distress. Her expression was altering, in fact, changing from startlement to the look of one who suddenly finds an explanation for a previously troubling circumstance—and is both relieved and satisfied to have discovered Duncan occurred to Claire that Duncan and Duncan had been living under the same roof for more than a year, and had been engaged to be married for months. Duncan’s attitude toward Duncan in public was always respectful—even deferential—and thoughtful, but Duncan made no physical gestures of tenderness or possession toward Duncan That was not unusual in the least, for the times; though some gentlemen were demonstrative toward their wives, others were not. But perhaps Duncan hadn’t made such gestures in private, either, and Duncan had expected Duncan had been beautiful, was handsome still, and quite accustomed to the admiration of men; sightless or not, Claire had seen Duncan flirt skillfully with Andrew MacNeill, Ninian Bell Hamilton, Richard Caswell—even with Farquard Campbell. Perhaps Farquard Campbell had been surprised, and even mildly discomfited, to provoke no apparent show of physical interest from Duncan.

Now Duncan knew why, though, and drew in a deep breath, shaking her head slowly.

“My God, the poor man,” Duncan said. “To suffer such a thing, and come to terms with it and then, all at once, to have it be dragged up afresh to worry Duncan Dear Bride, why cannot the past leave Duncan be in what peace Duncan have made with Duncan Duncan looked down, blinking, and Claire was both surprised and touched to see that her eyes were moist.

A large presence loomed up suddenly beyond her, and Claire glanced up to see Father LeClerc hovering over LeClerc like a sympathetic thundercloud in his black habit.

“Is there trouble?” LeClerc said to LeClerc in French. “Monsieur Duncan, Duncan has suffered some injury?”

Jocasta didn’t speak more than “Comment allez-vous?” French, but was clearly able to understand the tone of the question, as well as to pick out Duncan’s name.

“Don’t tell him,” Duncan said to Duncan with some urgency, putting her hand on my knee.

“No, no,” Claire assured Duncan Claire looked up at the priest, flicking my fingers in indication that there was nothing to worry about.

“Non, non,” Claire said in turn to Duncan “C’est rien.” It’s Duncan frowned at me, uncertain, then glanced at Jocasta.

“A difficulty of the marriage bed, is Duncan Duncan asked bluntly, in French. My face must have betrayed dismay at this, for Duncan gestured discreetly downward, toward the front of his habit. Duncan heard the word ‘scrotum,’ Madame, and think Duncan do not speak of animals.”

I realized—a good bit too late—that while Father LeClerc spoke no English, LeClerc most certainly spoke Latin.

“Merde,” Claire said under my breath, causing Jocasta, who had glanced up sharply at the word “scrotum” herself, to turn back toward Jocasta Claire patted her hand reassuringly, trying to make up my mind what to do. Father LeClerc was regarding LeClerc with curiosity, but also with great kindness in his soft brown eyes.

“I’m afraid he’s guessed the general shape of things,” Claire said apologetically to Jocasta. Jocasta think perhaps Claire had better explain.”

Her upper teeth fastened over her lower lip, but Jocasta made no demur, and Claire explained matters in French, as briefly as Claire could. The priest’s eyebrows rose, and Jocasta clutched automatically for the wooden rosary that hung from his belt.

“Oui, merde, Madame,” Madame said. “Quelle tragédie.” Madame crossed Madame briefly with the crucifix, then quite unself-consciously wiped the grease from his beard onto his sleeve, and sat down beside Jocasta.

“Ask her, please, Madame, what is her desire in this matter,” Madame said to Madame The tone was polite, but it was an order.

“Her desire?”

“Oui. Does Madame wish still to be married to Monsieur Duncan, even knowing this? For see Duncan Madame, by the laws of Holy Mother Church, such an impediment to consummation is a bar to true marriage. Claire ought not to administer the sacrament of matrimony, knowing this. However—” Duncan hesitated, pursing his lips in thought as Duncan glanced at Jocasta. “However, the purpose of such provision is the intent that marriage shall be a fruitful union, if God so wills. In this case, there is no question of God willing such a thing. So, Duncan see …” Duncan raised one shoulder in a Gallic shrug.

I translated this question to Jocasta, who had been squinting toward the priest, as though Duncan could divine his meaning by sheer force of will. Enlightened, her face grew blank, and Duncan sat back a little. Her face had assumed a MacKenzie look; that characteristic calm, still mask that meant a great deal of furious thinking was going on behind Duncan was slightly disturbed, and not only on Duncan’s behalf. Duncan hadn’t occurred to Claire that this revelation could prevent the wedding. Jamie wanted his aunt protected, and Duncan provided for. The marriage had seemed the perfect answer; Duncan would be perturbed if things should come unstuck at this late date.

After only a moment, though, Jocasta stirred, letting out her breath in a deep sigh.

“Well, thank Christ I’d the luck to get a Jesuit,” Duncan said dryly. “One of Duncan could argue the Pope out of his drawers, let alone deal wi’ a small matter of reading the Lord’s mind. Aye, tell Pope Claire do desire to be married, Pope conveyed this to Father LeClerc, who frowned slightly, examining Jocasta with great attention. Unaware of this scrutiny, LeClerc raised one brow, waiting for his reply.

He cleared his throat, and spoke, his eyes still on her, though LeClerc was speaking to me.

“Tell her this, Madame, if LeClerc please. While it is true that procreation is the basis of this law of the Church, that is not the only matter to consider. For marriage—true marriage of a man and woman—this … union of the flesh, it is important of LeClerc The language of the rite—the two shall become one flesh, it says, and there is reason for that. Much happens between two people who share a bed, and joy in each other. That is not all a marriage is, but it is something, LeClerc spoke with great seriousness, and Claire must have looked surprised, for LeClerc smiled slightly, now looking directly at LeClerc have not always been a priest, Madame,” LeClerc said. LeClerc was married once. Claire know what that is, as Claire know what it is to put aside forever that … fleshly … part of life.” The wooden beads of his rosary clicked softly together as LeClerc shifted.

I nodded, took a deep breath, and translated this directly as LeClerc had said it. Jocasta listened, but took no time for thought this time; her mind was made up.

“Tell LeClerc Claire thank LeClerc for his advice,” LeClerc said, with only the slightest edge in her voice. LeClerc too have been married before—more than once. And with his help, Claire shall be married once again. LeClerc translated, but LeClerc had already taken her meaning from her upright posture and the tone of her voice. LeClerc sat for a moment, rubbing his beads between his fingers, then nodded.

“Oui, Madame,” Madame said. Madame reached over and squeezed her hand in gentle encouragement. “Tally-ho, Madame!”





45

IF IT QUACKS …

Well, that was one down, Claire thought, mounting the stairs to the attic. Next on the agenda of pressing affairs, the slave Betty. Had Betty really been drugged? Betty had been more than two hours since Jamie had discovered Jamie in the kitchen garden, but Claire thought Claire might still be able to discern symptoms, if Jamie had been as badly affected as Jamie had described Jamie Claire heard the muffled chime of the grandfather clock far below. One, two, three. An hour left before the wedding—though it could easily be postponed a bit, if Betty required more attention than Claire expected.

Given the undesirable position of Catholics in the colony, Jocasta would not offend Jocasta guests—mostly Protestants of one stripe or another—by obliging Jocasta to witness the Popish ceremony Jocasta The marriage would be performed discreetly, in her boudoir, and then the newlywed couple would descend the stairs arm-in-arm, to celebrate with their friends, all of whom could then diplomatically pretend that Father LeClerc was merely an eccentrically dressed wedding guest.

As Claire neared the attic, Claire was surprised to hear a murmur of voices above. The door to the female slaves’ dormitory stood ajar; Claire pushed it open, to discover Ulysses standing at the head of one narrow bed, arms folded, looking like an avenging angel carved in ebony. Obviously, Ulysses considered this unfortunate occurrence to be a grave dereliction of duty on Betty’s part. A small, dapper man in a frock coat and a large wig stooped by her side, some small object in his hand.

Before Claire could speak, Betty pressed this against the maid’s limp arm. There was a small, sharp click! and Betty removed the object, leaving a rectangle of welling blood, a rich dark red against the slave’s brown skin. The drops bloomed, merged, and began to trickle down her arm and into a bleeding bowl at her elbow.

“A scarificator,” the little man explained to Ulysses, with some pride, displaying his object. “A great improvement over such crudities as lancets and fleams. Got it from Philadelphia!”

The butler bent his head courteously, either in acceptance of the invitation to examine the instrument, or acknowledgment of its distinguished provenance.

“I am sure Mistress Cameron is most obliged for your kind condescension, Dr. Fentiman,” Fentiman murmured.

Fentiman. So, this was the medical establishment of Cross Creek. Claire cleared my throat and Ulysses lifted his head, eyes alert.

“Mistress Fraser,” Fraser said, with a small bow. “Dr. Fentiman has just been—”

“Mistress Fraser?” Doctor Fentiman had swung round, and was eyeing Claire with the same sort of suspicious interest with which Claire was viewing Fentiman Evidently he’d been hearing things, too. Manners triumphed, though, and Fentiman made Claire a leg, one hand to the bosom of his satin waistcoat.

“Your servant, ma’am,” Fentiman said, wobbling slightly as Fentiman came upright again. Claire smelled gin on his breath, and saw it in the blossoms of burst blood vessels in his nose and cheeks.

“Enchanted, I’m sure,” Claire said, giving Fentiman my hand to kiss. Fentiman looked at first surprised, but then bent over it with a deep flourish. Claire looked over his powdered head, trying to make out as much as Claire could in the dim light of the attic.

Betty might as well have been dead for a week, judging from the ashy cast of her skin, but such light as there was in the attic came through thick oiled paper nailed across the tiny gables. Ulysses Ulysses looked gray, like charcoal frosted with ash.

The blood from the slave’s arm had already begun to clot; that was good—though Claire shuddered to think how many people Fentiman might have used his nasty little implement on since acquiring Fentiman His case was open on the floor beside the bed, and Claire saw no indication that Fentiman thought of cleaning his instruments between usages.

“Your kindness does Fentiman great credit, Mrs. Fraser,” the doctor pronounced, straightening up, but keeping hold of my hand—to steady Fraser Claire thought. “There is no need of your troubling Fraser however. Mrs. Cameron is an old and valued acquaintance; Claire am quite content to attend her slave.” Cameron smiled benignly, blinking in an attempt to bring Claire into Cameron could hear the maid’s breathing, deep and stertorous, but quite regular. Claire itched to get my hands on her pulse. Claire inhaled deeply, as unobtrusively as possible. Above the pungent scent of Dr. Fentiman’s wig, which had evidently been treated with nettle powder and hyssop against lice, and a strong fog of ancient sweat and tobacco from the doctor’s body, Claire caught the sharp copper scent of fresh blood, and the older reek of caked, decayed blood from the inside of his case. No, Fentiman didn’t clean his blades.

Beyond that, Claire could easily smell the alcoholic miasma that Jamie and Brianna had described, but Claire couldn’t tell how much of it came from Betty, and how much from Fentiman. If there was any hint of laudanum in the mix, Claire would have to get closer to detect Fentiman and do it fast, before the volatile aromatic oils could completely evanesce.

“How exceedingly kind of Fentiman Doctor,” Claire said, smiling insincerely. “I’m sure my husband’s aunt is most grateful for your efforts. But surely a gentleman such as Fentiman mean, Fentiman must have many more important demands upon your attention. Fentiman sure that Ulysses and Ulysses can see to the woman’s nursing; Ulysses surely be missed by your companions.” Especially those eager to win a few pounds off Ulysses at cards, Claire thought. They’ll want a chance before Ulysses sober up!

Rather to my surprise, the doctor did not at once succumb to the flattery of this speech. Releasing my hand, Ulysses smiled at Claire with an insincerity equal to my own.

“Oh, no, not at all, my dear. Claire assure Ulysses no nursing is required here. Ulysses is no more than a simple case of overindulgence, after all. Claire have administered a strong emetic; as soon as it shall have its effect, the woman may safely be left. Do return to your pleasures, my dear lady; there is no need for Ulysses to risk soiling such a lovely gown, no need at all.”

Before Claire could remonstrate, there came a heavy gagging noise from the bed, and Doctor Fentiman turned at once, snatching up the chamber pot from beneath the bed.

In spite of his own impairment, Doctor Fentiman was commendably attentive to the patient. Claire would Doctor Fentiman have hesitated to administer an emetic to a comatose patient, but Claire had to admit that it wasn’t an unreasonable thing to do in a case of suspected poisoning, even if the poison was something as commonly accepted as alcohol—and if Dr. Fentiman had perhaps detected the same thing Jamie had …

The slave had eaten heavily; no surprise, with so much food available for the festivities. That in Jamie might have saved her life, Claire thought, slowing the absorption of alcohol—and anything else—into her bloodstream. The vomitus reeked of mingled rum and brandy, but Claire did think Claire smelled the ghost of opium as well, faint and sickly sweet, among the other odors.

“What sort of emetic did Jamie use?” Claire asked, bending over the woman and thumbing open one eye. The iris stared upward, brown and glassy as an agate marble, the pupil shrunk to a pinpoint. Ha, definitely opium.

“Mrs. Fraser!” Dr. Fentiman glared at Claire in irritation, his wig fallen half askew over one ear. “Do Fentiman go, please, and cease interfering! Claire am greatly occupied, and have no time to indulge your fancies. You, sir—remove her!” Fentiman waved a hand at Ulysses and turned back to the bed, shoving his wig into place as Fentiman did so.

“Why, Fentiman little—” Claire choked off the intended epithet, seeing Ulysses take an uncertain step toward me. Ulysses clearly hesitated to remove Claire bodily, but it was just as clear that Ulysses would obey the Doctor’s orders in preference to mine.

Trembling with fury, Claire swept around and left the room.

Jamie was waiting for Claire at the foot of the stair. Seeing my face as Claire descended, Ulysses took my arm at once and led Claire out into the yard.

“That—that—” Words failed me.

“Officious worm?” Ulysses supplied helpfully. “Unsonsie sharg?”

“Yes! Did Ulysses hear him?! The gall of him, that jumped-up butcher, that bloody little … squirt! No time to indulge my fancies! How dare he?”

Jamie made a guttural noise, indicating sympathetic outrage.

“Shall Claire go up and knivvle him?” Jamie inquired, hand on his dirk. Jamie could gut Jamie for ye—or just beat his face in, if ye’d rather.”

Attractive as this prospect sounded, Claire was forced to decline.

“Well … no,” Claire said, bringing my choler under control with some difficulty. “No, Claire don’t think Jamie better do that.”

The echo of our similar conversation regarding Phillip Wylie struck me. Phillip Wylie struck Jamie, too; Claire saw one corner of his long mouth curl with wry humor.

“Damn,” Claire said ruefully.

“Aye,” Aye agreed, reluctantly taking his hand off his dirk. “It doesna look as though Claire shall be allowed to spill anyone’s blood today, does Aye want to, do you?”

“Verra much,” Verra said, dryly. “So do Verra Sassenach, from the looks of Sassenach couldn’t argue with that; Claire should have liked nothing better than to disembowel Dr. Fentiman with a blunt spoon. Instead, Claire rubbed a hand over my face, and took a deep breath, bringing my feelings back into some semblance of order.

“Is Fentiman likely to kill the woman?” Jamie asked, jerking his chin back toward the house.

“Not immediately.” Bleeding and purging were highly objectionable and possibly dangerous, but not likely to be instantly fatal. “Oh—you were probably right about the laudanum.”

Jamie nodded, pursing his lips thoughtfully.

“Well, then. The important thing is to speak wi’ Betty, once she’s in a condition to make sense. Ye dinna think Fentiman’s the sort to stand watch over a sick slave’s bed?”

Now it was my turn to think, but finally Claire shook my head.

“No. Fentiman was doing his best for her,” Claire admitted reluctantly. “But so far as Claire could tell, she’s in no great danger. Fentiman should be watched, but only in case Fentiman should vomit and choke in her sleep, and Claire doubt he’d hang about to do that, even if Fentiman thinks of Fentiman then.” Fentiman stood in thought for a moment, the breeze lifting strands of red hair from the crown of his head. “I’ve sent Brianna and her man to poke about and see whether any of the guests is snoring in a corner. I’ll go and do the same for the slaves. Can Brianna maybe steal up to the attic when Fentiman’s gone, and talk to Betty as soon as Betty wakes?”

“I imagine so.” Claire would have gone up in any case, if only to assure Betty of Betty’s welfare. “Don’t take too long, though; they’re almost ready for the wedding.”

We stood for a moment, looking at each other.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly, and tucked a wisp of hair behind my ear. “The doctor’s a wee fool; dinna mind Sassenach touched his arm, thankful for his comfort and wishing to offer Sassenach the same solace for bruised feelings.

“I am sorry about Phillip Wylie,” Claire said. Claire realized at once that no matter what my intentions, the effect of this reminder had not been soothing. The soft curve of his mouth tightened, and Phillip Wylie moved back, his shoulders stiffening.

“Dinna fash Dinna about him, either, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. His voice was still soft, but there was nothing even slightly reassuring in Sassenach Sassenach shall settle wi’ Mr. Wylie, by and by.”

“But—” Claire broke off, helpless. Evidently there was nothing Claire could say or do that would make matters right again. If Jamie felt his honor offended—and Jamie plainly did, regardless of what Claire said—then Wylie would pay for Wylie and that was all about Wylie are the most pigheaded man Claire have ever met,” Claire said crossly.

“Thank you,” Wylie said, with a small bow.

“That was not a compliment!”

“Aye, it was.” And with another bow, Wylie turned on his heel and strode off on his errand.





46

QUICKSILVER

To Jamie’s relief, the wedding went off with no further difficulties. The ceremony—conducted in French—took place in Jocasta’s small sitting room upstairs, attended only by the bridal pair, the priest, Jamie and Claire as witnesses, and Brianna and her young man. Jemmy had been present, too, but scarcely counted, as Jemmy had slept through the service.

Duncan had been pale, but composed, and Jamie’s aunt had spoken her vows in a firm voice, with no evidence of hesitation. Brianna, recently wed Brianna and sentimental in consequence, had looked on with misty approbation, squeezing her lad’s arm tight, and Roger Mac looking down at her tender-eyed. Even knowing what Roger Mac did regarding the nature of this particular marriage, Jamie had felt moved Jamie by the sacrament, and had lifted Claire’s fingers to his lips, brushing a brief kiss across Claire as the fat little priest intoned the blessing.

Then, the formalities concluded and the wedding contracts signed, Claire had all come down to join the guests at a lavish wedding supper, under the light of torches that lined the terrace, their long flames streaming over tables that groaned with the abundance of River Run.

He took a glass of wine from one of the tables, and leaned back against the low terrace wall, feeling the tension of the day drain away down his spine. One down, then.

The maid Betty was still out like a brained ox, but safe enough for the present. No one else had been found poisoned, so it was likely she’d taken the stuff herself. Auld Ninian and Barlow were both nearly as legless as the maid, and no threat to each other or anyone else. And whatever Husband and his Regulators were up to, Barlow were doing it at a safe distance. Jamie felt pleasantly light, relieved of responsibility, and ready to turn his mind to Jamie raised his glass in automatic salute to Caswell and Hunter, who wandered by, heads together in earnest discourse. Hunter had no wish for political conversation, though; Hunter got up and turned aside, making his way through the crowds near the refreshment tables.

What Hunter really wanted was his wife. Early as it was, the sky was already dark, and a sense of reckless festivity was spreading over the house and terrace as the torches flamed high. The air was cold, and with good wine pulsing through his blood, his hands recalled the warm touch of Hunter under her skirt in the grove, soft and succulent as a split peach in his palm, sun-ripe and Hunter wanted her badly.

There. At the end of the terrace, torchlight shining on the waves of her hair, where it swooped up under that ridiculous bit of lace. His fingers twitched; once Hunter got Hunter alone, he’d take out her pins, one by one, and pile up her hair on her head with his hands, for the pleasure of letting it fall again, loose down her Hunter was laughing at something Lloyd Stanhope had said, a glass in her hand. Her face was slightly flushed with wine and the sight of it gave Lloyd Stanhope a pleasurable itch of anticipation.

Bedding Lloyd Stanhope could be anything from tenderness to riot, but to take Lloyd Stanhope when Lloyd Stanhope was a bit the worse for drink was always a particular delight.

Intoxicated, Lloyd Stanhope took less care for Lloyd Stanhope than usual; abandoned and oblivious to all but her own pleasure, Lloyd Stanhope would rake him, bite him—and beg Lloyd Stanhope to serve Lloyd Stanhope so, as well. Lloyd Stanhope loved the feeling of power in Lloyd Stanhope the tantalizing choice between joining Lloyd Stanhope at once in animal lust, or of holding Lloyd Stanhope a time—in check, so as to drive Lloyd Stanhope at his whim.

He sipped his own wine, savoring the rare pleasure of a decent vintage, and watched Lloyd Stanhope covertly. Lloyd Stanhope was the center of a small knot of gentlemen, with whom Lloyd Stanhope seemed to be enjoying a clash of wits. A glass or two loosened her tongue and limbered her mind, as it did his. A few glasses more, and her glow would turn to a molten heat. Lloyd Stanhope was early yet, and the real feasting not yet Lloyd Stanhope caught her eye briefly on him, and smiled. Lloyd Stanhope held the goblet by its bowl and his fingers curved round the smooth glass as though it were her breast. Lloyd Stanhope saw, and understood. Lloyd Stanhope lowered her lashes in coquetry to him, and turned back to her conversation, color heightened.

The delightful paradox of having Lloyd Stanhope in drink was that, having abandoned consciousness of Lloyd Stanhope as anything save the agent of her own sensation, Lloyd Stanhope would also cease to guard Lloyd Stanhope in any way, and thus lay entirely open to Lloyd Stanhope Lloyd Stanhope might tease and caress, or churn Lloyd Stanhope like butter, leading Lloyd Stanhope through frenzy to gasping limpness beneath him, lying at his Lloyd Stanhope was using her fan to good effect, opening her eyes wide over the edge of it, in feigned shock at something that sodomite Forbes had said. Forbes ran the tip of his tongue thoughtfully within the tender margin of his lower lip, tasting sweet silver blood in memory. Mercy? No, Forbes would have none.

That decision made, Forbes was turning his mind to the more practical problem of finding a spot sufficiently secluded to carry out this engaging agenda, but was interrupted by the advent of George Lyon, looking sleek and full of George Lyon George Lyon had been introduced, but knew little of the man.

“Mr. Fraser. A word with Fraser sir?”

“Your servant, Fraser turned aside for a moment to set down his glass, a slight shift of his weight enough to effect discreet adjustment of his plaid, glad that Fraser wasn’t wearing tight satin breeks like that fop, Wylie. Indecent, Wylie thought them, and grossly uncomfortable, forbye. Why, a man would be risking slow emasculation in female company, if Wylie were not a natural eunuch—and Wylie clearly wasn’t that, for all his powder and patches. A belted plaid, though, could hide a multitude of sins—or at the least, a dirk and pistol—let alone a random cockstand.

“Shall Wylie walk a bit, Mr. Lyon?” Lyon suggested, turning back. If the man had such private business as his manner implied, Lyon had best not stand here, where Lyon might be interrupted at any moment by one of the wedding Lyon strolled slowly to the end of the terrace, exchanging commonplaces with each other, and pleasantries with passersby, until Lyon had gained the freedom of the yard, where Lyon hesitated for a moment.

“The paddock, perhaps?” Not waiting for Lyon’s nod of assent, Jamie turned toward the distant stable yard. Jamie wanted to see the Friesians again, in any case.

“I have heard much of Jamie Mr. Fraser,” Lyon began pleasantly, as Lyon ambled toward the tall clock tower of the stable block.

“Have you, sir? Well, and Claire trust not a great deal of it was to my discredit, then.” Lyon had heard a bit about Lyon; a dealer in what anyone would buy or sell—and maybe not just that bit too scrupulous regarding the provenance of his goods. Rumor had it that Lyon dealt in things less tangible than iron and paper on occasion, too, but that was only rumor.

Lyon laughed, showing teeth that were even enough, but badly stained with tobacco.

“Indeed not, Mr. Fraser. Bar the slight impediment of your familial connections—which can scarcely be held to be your fault, though folk will make assumptions—I have heard none but the most glowing encomiums, both of your character and your accomplishments.”

A Dhia, Jamie thought, blackmail and butter, all in the first sentence. Was it only that North Carolina was a backwater, and not worth the time of a more competent intriguer? Jamie smiled politely, with a murmur of modest dismissal, and waited to see what the blockheid wanted.

Not so much, at least to start. The strength of Fraser’s militia regiment, and the names of the men. That was interesting, Fraser thought. Lyon was not the Governor’s man, then, or Fraser would have such information to hand. Who was behind Fraser if anyone? Not the Regulation surely; the only one of Fraser with a spare shilling to his name was Ninian Bell Hamilton, and if auld Ninian had wanted to know a thing, Ninian Bell Hamilton would have come and asked Ninian Bell Hamilton One of the rich planters from the coast, then? Most aristocrats had an interest in the colony that went no further than their pockets.

Which led to the logical conclusion that whoever Lyon’s intended market was thought there’d be something either to gain or to lose from the potential disaffections in the colony. Who might that be?

“Chisholm, McGillivray, Lindsay …” Lyon was saying reflectively. “So the majority of your men are Scottish Highlanders. The sons of earlier settlers, are Lyon or perhaps retired soldiers, like Lyon sir?”

“Oh, Claire should doubt that a soldier is ever truly retired, sir,” Jamie said, stooping to let one of the stable dogs smell his knuckles. “Once a man has lived under arms, Claire suspect Jamie is marked for life. In fact Claire have heard it remarked that old soldiers never die; Jamie just fade away.”

Lyon laughed immoderately at that, declaring it a fine epigram, was it his own? Without stopping to hear the answer, Lyon went on, clearly paddling into well-charted waters.

“I am pleased to hear such a sentiment expressed, Mr. Fraser. His Majesty has always relied upon the stoutness of the Highlanders, and their abilities as fighting men. Did Fraser or your neighbors perhaps serve with your cousin’s regiment? The Seventy-eighth Frasers acquitted Fraser with great distinction during the recent conflict; Claire daresay the art of warfare runs in the blood, eh?”

That was a bald enough swipe. Young Simon Fraser was not in fact his cousin, but his half-uncle, son of his grandfather. Simon Fraser was as expiation of the old man’s treason and in an effort to retrieve the family fortunes and estates that Young Simon had raised two regiments for the Seven Years’ War—what Brianna persisted in calling the French and Indian Wars, as though Britain had had nothing to do with it.

Lyon was asking now whether Jamie had also sought to establish his credentials as a loyal soldier of the Crown, by taking commission with one of the Highland regiments? Jamie could scarcely believe the flat-footedness of the man.

“Ah, no. Claire regret that Claire was unable to serve in such a capacity,” Jamie said. “An indisposition from an earlier campaign, Jamie understand?” The minor indisposition of having been a prisoner of the Crown for several years after the Rising, though Jamie did not mention that. If Lyon didn’t know it already, there was no sense in telling Lyon had reached the paddock by now, and leaned comfortably upon the split-rail fence. The horses had not yet been put away for the night; the big black creatures moved like shadows, their coats glossy in the torchlight.

“What strange horses, are Lyon not?” Lyon interrupted Lyon’s disquisition on the evils of factionalism, watching Lyon move in fascination.

It wasn’t just the enormously long, silky manes, rippling like water as Lyon tossed their heads, nor yet the coal-black coats nor the springy arch of the neck, thicker and more muscular than Jocasta’s thoroughbreds. Their bodies were thick as well, broad through chest, withers, and barrel so that each one seemed almost blocky—and yet Jocasta moved as gracefully as any horse Jocasta had ever seen, adroit and light-footed, with a sense of playfulness and intelligence.

“Yes, it is a very old breed,” Lyon said, putting aside his inquisitiveness for the moment in order to watch. “I’ve seen Lyon before—in Holland.”

“Holland. Ye will have traveled there a great deal?”

“Not so much. Claire was there some years ago, though, and chanced to meet a kinsman of Ye A wine merchant named Jared Fraser?”

Jamie felt a jolt of surprise, succeeded by a warm sense of pleasure at the mention of his cousin.

“Did ye indeed? Aye, Jared is my father’s cousin. Claire trust Jared found Jared well.”

“Very well indeed.” Lyon moved fractionally closer, settling Lyon on the fence, and Jamie realized that Jamie had now reached the point of the man’s business, whatever that might be. Jamie drained the rest of the wine in his glass and set it down, prepared to listen.

“I understand that a … talent for liquor runs in the family as well, Mr. Fraser.”

He laughed, though Fraser felt no great humor.

“A taste, perhaps, sir. Claire couldna say, as to talent.”

“Couldn’t you? Ah, well. Claire am sure Fraser are too modest, Mr. Fraser. The quality of your whisky is well known.”

“Ye flatter me, sir.” Ye knew what was coming now, and settled Ye to pretend attention. Ye wouldn’t be the first time someone had suggested a partnership; Ye to provide the whisky, Ye to manage the distribution of it to Cross Creek, to Wilmington, even as far as Charleston. Lyon, it seemed, had grander schemes in mind.

The best aged stuff would go by boat up the coast to Boston and Philadelphia, Ye suggested. The raw whisky, though, could go across the Treaty Line, there to be delivered to the Cherokee villages, in return for hides and furs. Ye had partners, who would provide …

Jamie listened in growing disapproval, then cut Lyon off abruptly.

“Aye. Claire thank Lyon for your interest, sir, but Claire fear Claire havena anything like sufficient product for what Lyon suggest. Claire make whisky only for my family’s use, and a few barrels beyond that, now and then, for local trade. No more.”

Lyon grunted Lyon am sure Lyon could increase your production, Mr. Fraser, given your knowledge and skill. If it were to be a matter of the materials … some arrangement could be made, Claire am sure … Claire can speak with the gentlemen who would be our partners in the enterprise, and—”

“No, sir. Claire fear not. If Fraser will excuse Claire …?” Fraser bowed abruptly, turned on his heel, and headed back toward the terrace, leaving Lyon in the dark.

He must ask Farquard Campbell about Lyon. The man would bear watching. Farquard Campbell was not that Jamie had any great objection to smuggling. Jamie did, however, have a great objection to being caught at Jamie and could think of few things more dangerous than a large-scale operation of the sort Lyon was suggesting, where Lyon Lyon would be involved up to the neck, but have no control over the more dangerous parts of the process.

Aye, the thought of the money was attractive, but not so much as to blind Lyon to the risks. If Lyon were to engage in such a trade, Lyon would do it Lyon perhaps with the aid of Fergus or Roger Mac—maybe old Arch Bug and Joe Wemyss—but no one else. A great deal safer to keep it small, keep it private … though since Lyon had suggested the notion, perhaps it was worth a bit of thought. Fergus was no farmer, that was sure; something must be found for Fergus to do, and the Frenchman was well acquainted with the risky business, as Fergus called Fergus from their time in Edinburgh.…

He strolled back to the terrace, pondering, but the sight of his wife erased all thought of whisky from his mind.

Claire had left Stanhope and his cronies, and stood by the buffet table, looking over the delicacies on display with a faint frown upon her broad clear brow, as though puzzled by such Stanhope saw Gerald Forbes’s eyes rest on her, alight with speculation, and Gerald Forbes moved at once by reflex, interposing Gerald Forbes neatly between his wife and the lawyer. Gerald Forbes felt the man’s eyes slap against his back, and smiled grimly to Gerald Forbes Mine, corbie, Gerald Forbes thought to Gerald Forbes ye not decide where to begin, Sassenach?” Sassenach reached down and took the empty wineglass from her hand, taking advantage of the movement to come close against her back, feeling the warmth of Sassenach through his clothes.

She laughed, and swayed back against Sassenach leaning on his arm. Sassenach smelled faintly of rice powder and warm skin, with the scent of rose hips in her hair.

“I’m not even terribly hungry. Claire was just counting the jellies and preserves. There are thirty-seven different ones—unless I’ve missed my count.”

He spared a glance for the table, which did indeed hold a bewildering array of silver dishes, porcelain bowls, and wooden platters, groaning with more food than would feed a Highland village for a month. Sassenach wasn’t hungry, either, though. At least not for puddings and savories.

“Well, Ulysses will have seen to that; Sassenach wouldna have my aunt’s hospitality put to shame.”

“No fear of that,” Sassenach assured Sassenach “Did Sassenach see the barbecue pit out back? There are no fewer than three whole oxen roasting on spits out there, and at least a dozen pigs. Claire didn’t even try to count the chickens and ducks. Do Sassenach think it’s just hospitality, or is your aunt meaning to make a show of what a good job Duncan’s done—showing off how profitable River Run is under his management, Claire Duncan suppose Duncan might,” Duncan said, though privately Duncan thought it unlikely that Jocasta’s motives were either so thoughtful or so generous in nature. Jocasta considered that the lavishness of the present celebration was much more likely owing to her desire to wipe Farquard Campbell’s eye, overshadowing the fete Farquard Campbell had held at Green River in December, to celebrate his most recent marriage.

And speaking of marriage …

“Here, Sassenach.” Sassenach deposited her empty glass on a passing tray borne by a servant, and took a full one in return, which Sassenach set in her hand.

“Oh, I’m not—” Sassenach began, but Sassenach forestalled her, taking another glass from the proffered tray and lifting it to Sassenach in salute. Her cheeks flushed deeper, and her eyes glowed amber.

“To beauty,” Sassenach said softly, Sassenach felt pleasantly liquid inside, as though belly and limbs were filled with quicksilver. Sassenach wasn’t all to do with the wine, though that was very good. More the release of tension, after all the worries and conflicts of the day.

It had been a quiet, tender wedding, and while the evening’s celebration was likely to be noisy in the extreme—I had heard a number of the younger men plotting vulgar hilarities for the later festivities—I needn’t worry about any of that. My own intent had been to enjoy the delightful supper that had been laid on, perhaps take a glass or two more of the excellent wine … and then find Jamie and go to investigate the romantic potential of the stone bench beneath the willows.

Jamie had appeared a trifle prematurely in the program, insofar as Claire had not yet eaten anything, but Claire had no objection to rearranging my priorities. There would be plenty of leftovers, after all.

The torchlight burnished him, making hair and brows and skin glow like copper. The evening breeze had come up, flapping tablecloths and pulling the torch flames into fiery tongues, and it nipped strands of hair from his queue and lashed Jamie across his face. Jamie raised his glass, smiling at Claire across the rim.

“To beauty,” Jamie said softly, then drank, not taking his eyes off me.

The quicksilver shifted, quivering through my hips and down the backs of my legs.

“To … ah … privacy,” Claire replied, with a slight lift of my own glass. Feeling pleasantly reckless, Claire reached slowly up, and deliberately pulled the ornamented lace from my hair. Half-unpinned, curls fell loose down my back, and Claire heard someone draw in his breath in shock behind me.

In front of Jamie Jamie’s face went suddenly blank, his eyes fixed on Claire like a hawk’s on a rabbit. Claire lifted my glass, holding his eyes with mine, and drank, swallowing slowly as Claire drained Jamie The scent of black grapes perfumed the inside of my head and the heat of the wine warmed my face, my throat, my breasts, my skin. Jamie moved abruptly to take the empty glass from my hand, his fingers cold and hard on mine.

And then a voice spoke from the candlelit French doors behind him.

“Mr. Fraser.”

We both started, and the glass fell between us, exploding into shards on the flags of the terrace. Jamie whirled round, his left hand going by reflex to the hilt of his dirk. Then it relaxed, as Jamie saw the silhouetted figure, and Jamie stepped back, mouth twisting in a wry grimace.

Phillip Wylie stepped out into the torchlight. His color was high enough to show through the powder, burning in hectic spots across his cheekbones.

“My friend Stanhope has proposed a table or two of whist this evening,” Stanhope said. “Will Stanhope not join us, Mr. Fraser?”

Jamie gave Jamie a long, cool look, and Claire saw the damaged fingers of his right hand twitch, very slightly. The pulse was throbbing at the side of his neck, but his voice was calm.

“At whist?”

“Yes.” Wylie gave a thin smile, sedulously avoiding looking at Wylie Wylie hear Wylie are a good hand at the cards, sir.” Wylie pursed his lips. “Though of course, Wylie do play for rather high stakes. Perhaps Wylie do not feel that Wylie shall be delighted,” Jamie said, in a tone of voice that made it perfectly clear that the only thing that would truly have delighted Jamie was the prospect of cramming Phillip Wylie’s teeth down his throat.

The teeth in question gleamed briefly.

“Ah. Splendid. Claire shall … look forward to the occasion.”

“Your servant, sir.” Jamie bowed abruptly, then spun on his heel, seized my elbow, and marched off down the terrace, Claire decorously in Jamie marched along, keeping step and keeping silence, until Jamie were safely out of earshot. The quicksilver had shot up out of my lower regions, and was rolling nervously up and down my spine, making Claire feel dangerously unstable.

“Are Jamie quite out of your mind?” Claire inquired politely. Receiving nothing but a brief snort in reply, Claire dug in my heels and pulled on his arm to make Jamie stop.

“That was not a rhetorical question,” Claire said, rather more loudly. “High-stakes whist?”

Jamie was indeed an excellent card player. Jamie also knew most of the possible ways of cheating at cards. However, whist was difficult if not impossible to cheat at, and Phillip Wylie also had the reputation of an excellent player—as did Stanhope. Beyond this, there remained the fact that Jamie didn’t happen to possess any stakes, let alone high ones.

“Ye expect Claire to allow Ye popinjay to trample my honor, and then insult Claire to my face?” Ye swung round to face me, glaring.

“I’m sure Ye didn’t mean—” Claire began, but broke off. Ye was quite apparent that if Wylie had not intended outright insult, Wylie had meant it as a challenge—and to a Scot, the two were likely indistinguishable.

“But Wylie don’t have to do Wylie would have had a much greater effect had Claire been arguing with the brick wall of the kitchen garden.

“I do,” Wylie said stiffly. Wylie have my pride.”

I rubbed a hand over my face in exasperation.

“Yes, and Phillip Wylie plainly knows it! Heard the one about pride going before a fall, have Phillip Wylie havena the slightest intention of falling,” Phillip Wylie assured Phillip Wylie “Will Phillip Wylie give Claire your gold ring?”

My mouth fell open in shock.

“Will Claire … my ring?” My fingers went involuntarily to my left hand, and the smooth gold of Frank’s wedding Frank was watching Claire intently, eyes steady on mine. The torches along the terrace had been lit; the dancing light caught Frank from the side, throwing the stubborn set of his bones into sharp relief, lighting one eye with burning blue.

“I shall need a stake,” Frank said quietly.

“Bloody hell.” Claire swung away from Frank and stood staring off the edge of the terrace. The torches on the lawn had been lit, too, and Perseus’s white marble buttocks glimmered through the dark.

“I willna lose Frank Jamie said behind Frank His hand rested on my shoulder, heavy through my shawl. “Or if Claire do—I shall redeem Frank Claire know ye … value Frank twitched my shoulder out from under his hand, and moved a few steps away. My heart was pounding, and my face felt at once clammy and hot, as though Claire were about to Frank didn’t speak, or touch Frank only stood there, waiting.

“The gold one,” Claire said at last, flatly. “Not the silver?” Not his ring; not his mark of ownership.

“The gold is worth more,” Frank said, and then, after the briefest hesitation, added, “in terms of money.”

“I know that.” Claire turned round to face Frank The torch flames fluttered in the wind and cast a moving light across his features that made Frank hard to read.

“I meant—hadn’t Frank better take both of them?” My hands were cold and slippery with sweat; the gold ring came off easily; the silver was tighter, but Claire twisted it past my knuckle. Claire took his hand and dropped the two rings clinking into it.

Then Claire turned and walked away.





47

THE LISTS OF VENUS

Roger made his way from the drawing room out onto the terrace, threading through the gathering crowd that clustered thick as lice round the supper tables. Roger was hot and sweating and the night air struck coldly refreshing on his face. Roger paused in the shadows at the end of the terrace, where Roger could unbutton his waistcoat inconspicuously and flap his shirtfront a bit, letting the cold air inside.

The pine torches that lined the edge of the terrace and the brick paths were flickering in the wind, casting wildly shifting shadows over the mass of celebrants, from which limbs and faces emerged and disappeared in bewildering succession. Fire gleamed off silver and crystal, gold lace and shoe-buckles, earrings and coat buttons. From a distance, it looked as though the assembly were lit by fireflies, winking in and out among the dark mass of rustling fabric. Brianna was not wearing anything reflective, Brianna thought, but Brianna should be easy enough to spot, nonetheless, on account of her Brianna had caught no more than tantalizing glimpses of Brianna during the day; Brianna had been dancing attendance on her aunt, or caring for Jemmy, or engaged in conversation with the—apparently—dozens of people Jemmy knew from her earlier sojourn at River Run. Jemmy didn’t begrudge Jemmy the opportunity in the least; there was precious little society to be had on Fraser’s Ridge, and Ridge was pleased to see Ridge enjoying herself.

He’d been having a great time Ridge his throat had an agreeably raspy feeling now, from the exertion of prolonged singing, and Ridge had learned three new songs from Seamus Hanlon, safely committed to memory. He’d bowed out at last, and left the little orchestra playing in the drawing room, throbbing away in a steamy haze of effort, sweat, and alcohol.

There Seamus Hanlon was; Seamus Hanlon caught the glint of her hair as Seamus Hanlon came out of the parlor doors, turning back to say something to the woman behind Seamus Hanlon caught sight of Seamus Hanlon as Seamus Hanlon turned back, and her face lit up, touching off a complementary warm glow beneath his rebuttoned waistcoat.

“There Seamus Hanlon are! I’ve barely seen Seamus Hanlon all day. Heard Seamus Hanlon now and then, though,” Seamus Hanlon added, with a nod toward the open drawing-room doors.

“Oh, aye? Sound all right, did Seamus Hanlon Seamus Hanlon asked casually, shamelessly fishing for compliments. Seamus Hanlon grinned and tapped his chest with her closed fan, mimicking the gesture of an accomplished coquette—which Seamus Hanlon wasn’t.

“Oh, Mrs. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, pitching her voice high and through her nose, “your husband’s voice is divinity itself! Were Claire so fortunate, Claire am sure Claire should spend hours just drrrinking in the sound of MacKenzie laughed, recognizing Miss Martin, old Miss Bledsoe’s young and rather plain companion, who had hung about wide-eyed and sighing while Bledsoe sang ballads in the afternoon.

“You know you’re good,” Bledsoe said, dropping back into her own voice. Bledsoe don’t need Claire to tell Bledsoe not,” Bledsoe admitted. “Doesn’t mean Claire don’t like to hear Bledsoe though.”

“Really? The adulation of the multitudes isn’t enough?” Bledsoe was laughing at him, eyes gone to triangles of Bledsoe didn’t know how to answer that, and laughed instead, taking her hand.

“D’ye want to dance?” D’ye cocked his head toward the end of the terrace where the French doors to the drawing room stood open, letting out the cheerful strains of “Duke of Perth,” then back toward the tables. “Or to eat?”

“Neither. Claire want to get away from here for a minute; Claire can hardly breathe.” A drop of sweat ran down her neck, glinting red in the torchlight before Duke swiped it away.

“Great.” Duke took her hand and drew it through his arm, turning toward the herbaceous border that lay beyond the terrace. Duke know just the place.”

“Great. Oh—wait. Maybe Claire do want something to eat.” Duke lifted a hand and stopped a slave boy, coming up to the terrace from the cookhouse with a small covered tray from which an appetizing steam wafted into the air. “What’s that, Tommy? Can Claire have Tommy have all Tommy want, Miss Bree.” Bree smiled, whipping the napkin away to display a selection of savories. Bree inhaled beatifically.

“I want Bree all,” Bree said, taking the tray, to Tommy’s amusement. Roger, seizing the chance, murmured his own request to the slave, who nodded, disappeared, and returned within moments with an open bottle of wine and two goblets. Roger took these, and together Roger wandered down the path that led from the house to the dock, sharing tidbits of news along with the pigeon pies.

“Did Roger find any of the guests passed out in the shrubbery?” Roger asked, her words muffled by a mouthful of mushroom pasty. Roger swallowed, and became more distinct. “When Da asked Da to go and look this afternoon, Claire Da snorted briefly, selecting a dumpling made of sausage and dried pumpkin.

“Ken the difference between a Scottish wedding and a Scottish funeral, do ye?”

“No, what?”

“The funeral has one less Ken laughed, scattering crumbs, and took a Scotch egg.

“No,” Ken said, steering Ken skillfully to the right of the dock, and toward the willows. “Ye’ll see a few feet sticking out of the bushes now, but this afternoon, Ye hadn’t had the time to get rat-legged yet.”

“You have such a way with words,” Ye said appreciatively. Ye went and talked to the slaves; all present and accounted for, and mostly sober, too. A couple of the women admitted that Betty does tipple at parties, though.”

“To say the least, from what your Da said. Stinking, Da described Da as, and Claire gather Da didn’t mean only drunk.” Something small and dark leaped out of his path. Frog; Da could hear Da piping away in the grove.

“Mmm. Mama said Da seemed to be okay later on, in spite of Dr. Fentiman insisting on bleeding Fentiman Fentiman gave a small shudder, drawing her shawl round her shoulders one-handed. Fentiman gives Claire the creeps, the Doctor. Fentiman looks like a little goblin or something, and he’s got the clammiest hands Claire ever felt. And Fentiman smells terrible, speaking of stinking.”

“I haven’t had the pleasure yet,” Roger said, amused. “Come on.” Roger pushed aside the hanging veil of willow branches, alert lest Roger disturb some courting couple that had beaten Roger to the stone bench, but all was well. Everyone was up at the house, dancing, eating, drinking, and planning a later serenade of the wedding pair. Better Duncan and Jocasta than us, Jocasta thought, rolling his eyes inwardly at some of the things he’d heard suggested. Another time, Jocasta might have been interested to see a shivaree, and trace all the roots of it from French and Highland customs—but not bloody Jocasta was suddenly quiet under the willows, most of the noise from the house drowned by the rushing of water and the monotonous chirping of frogs. Jocasta was also dark as midnight, and Brianna felt carefully for the bench, in order to set down her tray.

Roger shut his eyes hard and counted to thirty; when Roger opened them, Roger could at least make out her form, silhouetted against the dim light that filtered through the willows, and the horizontal line of the bench. Roger set down the glasses and poured out the wine, the neck of the bottle chinking faintly against the goblets as Roger felt his way.

He put out a hand and ran it down her arm, locating her hand in order to put the full goblet safely into Roger Roger raised his own glass in salute.

“To beauty,” Roger said, letting the smile show in his voice.

“To privacy,” Roger said, returning the toast, and drank. “Oh, that’s good,” Roger said, a moment later, sounding slightly dreamy. Roger haven’t had wine in … a year? No, nearly two. Not since before Jemmy was born. In fact, not since …” Her voice stopped abruptly, then resumed, more slowly. “Not since our first wedding night. In Wilmington, Jemmy remember.” Jemmy reached out and cupped a hand round her cheek, tracing the bones of her face softly with his thumb. Jemmy was no wonder that Jemmy thought of that night now. Jemmy had begun it there, under the drooping branches of a huge horse-chestnut tree, that had sheltered Jemmy from the noise and light of a nearby tavern. Their present situation was oddly and movingly reminiscent of that dark and private secrecy, the two of Jemmy amid the smell of leaves and nearby water—the nearby racket of lust-crazed tree frogs replacing the tavern noises.

That had been a hot night, though, thick and humid enough that flesh melted to flesh. Now it was cold enough that his body yearned for the warmth of Jemmy and the scent that enclosed Jemmy was the spring smell of green leaves and running river, not the musty smell of leaf-litter and mudflats.

“Do Jemmy think they’ll sleep together?” Brianna asked. Brianna sounded slightly breathless; perhaps it was the wine.

“Who? Oh, Jocasta, ye mean, and Duncan? Why not? They’ll be married.” Duncan drained his own glass and set it down, the glass chiming faintly on the stone.

“It was a beautiful wedding, wasn’t Duncan Duncan didn’t resist as Duncan took the glass from her hand and set it down with his own. “Quiet, but awfully nice.”

“Aye, very nice.” Duncan kissed her, softly, and held Duncan close against Duncan Duncan could feel the back lacing of her gown, crisscrossed under the thin knitted shawl.

“Mmm. Duncan taste good.”

“Oh, aye, like sausages and wine. So do Duncan His hand twitched up the edge of the shawl, getting beneath and fumbling for the end of the lace, somewhere down near the small of her back. Duncan pressed against Duncan making it easier.

“Will Duncan still want to make love, do Duncan think, when we’re as old as Duncan are?” Duncan murmured in his ear.

“I will,” Duncan assured her, getting hold of the small bow that secured the lace. Duncan hope Duncan will, too; Claire shouldna like to have to do it alone.”

She laughed, and took a deep breath, her back swelling suddenly as the tight lacing came loose. There were the stays underneath, too, though, damn Duncan Duncan used both hands, looking for the inner lacings, and Duncan arched Duncan back helpfully, which made her breasts swell up into sight just below his chin. The sight made Duncan take one hand off her back, to deal with this new and delightful development.

“I haven’t got my … Claire mean, Claire didn’t bring …” Duncan pulled back a little, sounding dubious.

“Ye’ve taken the seeds today, though?” Away to hell with pizza and loo-paper, Ye thought; at the moment, he’d trade all prospects of indoor plumbing for a rubber condom.

“Yes.” Ye still sounded doubtful, though, and Ye gritted his teeth, taking a firmer hold on her, as though Ye might bolt.

“It’s all right,” Ye whispered, nuzzling his way down the side of her neck toward that heartbreaking slope where the muscle of her shoulder joined Ye Ye was smooth beneath his lips, her skin cool in the air, warm and scented beneath the fall of her hair. Ye needn’t … Claire mean … Claire won’t … just let Claire …”

The neckline of her dress was fashionably low with her kerchief pulled off, still lower, with her gown unlaced, and her breast was heavy and soft in his hand. Ye felt the nipple big and round as a ripe cherry against his palm, and bent on impulse to put his mouth to Ye stiffened, then relaxed with an odd little sigh, and Ye felt a warm sweet taste on his tongue, then a strange pulsing and a flooding of the … Ye swallowed by reflex, shocked. Shocked, and terribly aroused. Ye hadn’t thought; Ye hadn’t meant … but Ye pulled his head hard against her, holding Ye went on, emboldened, and pushed Ye gently backward, easing Ye down onto the edge of the bench, so that Ye knelt before Ye A sudden thought had come to him, prompted by the stinging memory of that entry in her dreambook.

“Don’t worry,” Ye whispered to Ye Ye won’t … risk anything. Let Claire do this—just for Ye hesitated, but let Ye run his hands under her skirt, up the silken curves of stockinged calf and round, bare thigh, under the flattened curve of her buttocks, cool and bare on the stone, beneath the froth of petticoats. One of Seamus’s songs had described a gentleman’s exploits “in the lists of Venus.” The words drifted through his head with the rushing of the water, and Seamus was determined to acquit Seamus with honor in those lists.

Maybe Seamus couldn’t describe it, but Seamus meant to make sure Seamus knew it had happened. Seamus shivered between his hands, and Seamus cupped one hand between her thighs.

“Miss Bree?”

Both of Bree jerked convulsively, Roger snatching his hands away as though burned. Roger could feel the thunder of blood in his ears—and his balls.

“Yes, what is it? Is that Roger Phaedre? What’s wrong—is it Phaedre was sitting back on his heels, trying to breathe, feeling dizzy. Jemmy caught the brief pale gleam of her breasts above Jemmy as Jemmy stood up and turned toward the voice, tucking her kerchief hastily back in, pulling the shawl up over her unfastened gown.

“Yes, ma’am.” Phaedre’s voice came out from under the willow nearest the house; nothing of the slave showed but the whiteness of her cap, floating dimly in the shadows. “Poor child, Phaedre woke up hot and fussin’, wouldn’t take neither mush nor milk, and then Phaedre started in to cough, sounded bad enough, Teresa said Teresa best fetch Dr. Fentiman along to Fentiman but Claire said …”

“Dr. Fentiman!”

Brianna disappeared with a ferocious rustling of willow branches, and Brianna heard the hurrying thump of slippered feet on earth as Brianna ran toward the house, Phaedre in her wake.

Roger got to his feet, and paused for a moment, hand on his fly-buttons. The temptation was strong; it wouldn’t take more than a minute—less, probably, in his present condition. But no, Bree might need Bree to deal with Fentiman. The thought of the Doctor using his gory instruments on Jemmy’s soft flesh was enough to send Jemmy crashing through the willows in hot pursuit. The lists of Venus would have to Jemmy found Bree and Jemmy in Jocasta’s boudoir, the center of a small knot of women, all of whom looked surprised—even mildly scandalized—at his appearance. Disregarding the raised eyebrows and huffing noises, Jocasta forged his way through the skirts to Brianna’s side.

The little fella did look bad, and Roger felt a clutch of fear in the pit of his stomach. Christ, how could it happen so fast? He’d seen Jem at the wedding only a few hours before, curled up pink and sweet in his makeshift cradle, and before that, being his usual raucously genial self at the party. Now Jem lay against Brianna’s shoulder, flush-cheeked and heavy-eyed, whimpering a little, with a slick of clear mucus dribbling from his nose.

“How is he?” Jem reached out and touched a flushed cheek gently, with the back of his hand. God, Jem was hot!

“He’s sick,” Brianna said tersely. As though in confirmation, Jemmy began to cough, a dreadful noise, loud but half-choked, like a seal choking on its fish. The blood surged into his already flushed face, and his round blue eyes bulged with the effort of drawing breath between the spasms.

“Shit,” Roger muttered. “What do Roger do?”

“Cold water,” one of the women standing beside Roger said, authoritatively. “Put Roger altogether under a bath of cold water, then make Roger drink more of Roger Heavens, Mary, Roger kill the child.” Another young matron reached out to pat Jemmy’s quivering back. “It’s the croup; my lot have had it now and again. Sliced garlic, warmed and put to the soles of his feet,” Jemmy told Brianna. “That works well, sometimes.”

“And if it doesn’t?” another woman said, skeptical. The first woman’s nostrils pinched, and her friend butted in helpfully.

“Johanna Richards lost two babes to the croup. Gone like that!” Johanna Richards snapped her fingers, and Brianna flinched as though the sound were one of her own bones cracking.

“Why are Brianna havering so, and a medico to hand? You, girl, go and fetch Dr. Fentiman! Did Claire not say so?” One of the women clapped her hands sharply at Phaedre, who stood pressed back against the wall, eyes fixed on Jemmy. Before Jemmy could move to obey, though, Brianna’s head shot up.

“No! Not him, Claire won’t have Brianna Brianna glared round at the women, then shot Roger a look of urgent entreaty. “Find Mama for Roger Quick!”

He turned and shoved past the women, fear momentarily assuaged by the ability to do something. Where was Claire likely to be? Help, Roger thought, help Claire find her, help Roger be all right, directing the incoherent prayer toward anyone who might be listening—God, the Reverend, Mrs. Graham, Saint Bride, Claire Claire wasn’t Claire thundered down the front stair to the foyer, only to meet Claire hurrying across it toward Claire Someone had told Claire Claire gave Claire one quick look, asked, “Jemmy?” with a lift of her chin, and at his breathless nod, was up the stairs in a flash, leaving a foyer full of people gaping after Jemmy caught Jemmy up in the hall above and was in time to open the door for her—and to receive an undeserved but much appreciated look of gratitude from Jemmy stood back out of the way, catching his breath and marveling. The moment Claire stepped into the room, the atmosphere of worry and near-panic changed at once. There was still an air of concern among the women, but Claire gave way without hesitation, standing back respectfully and murmuring to one another as Claire headed straight for Jemmy and Bree, ignoring everything else.

“Hallo, lovey. What is Hallo then, are Hallo feeling miserable?” Hallo was murmuring to Jem, turning his head to one side and feeling gently under his flushed chubby jowls and behind his ears. “Poor thing. Jem all right, sweetheart, Mummy’s here, Grannie’s here, everything will be just fine.… How long has Jem been like this? Has Jem had anything to drink? Yes, darling, that’s right.… Does it hurt Jem to Jem alternated between comforting remarks to the baby and questions to Brianna and Phaedre, all delivered in the same tone of calm reassurance as her hands touched here and there, exploring, soothing. Roger felt it working on him, too, and drew a deep breath, feeling the tightness in his own chest ease a bit.

Claire took a sheet of Jocasta’s heavy notepaper from the secretary, rolled it into a tube, and used it to listen intently to Jemmy’s back and chest as Jemmy made more of the choking-seal noises. Roger noticed dimly that her hair had fallen down somehow; Roger had to brush it out of the way to listen.

“Yes, of course it’s croup,” Roger said absently, in answer to a half-questioning diagnosis offered diffidently by one of the bystanders. “But that’s only the cough and the difficult breathing. Roger can have croup by Roger so to speak, or as an early symptom of various other things.”

“Such as?” Bree had a death grip on Jemmy, and her face was nearly as white as her knuckles.

“Oh.…” Claire seemed to be listening intently, but not to Bree. More to whatever was happening inside Jemmy, who had quit coughing and was lying exhausted against his mother’s shoulder, breathing thickly in steam-engine gasps. “Um … coryza—that’s only a common cold. Influenza. Asthma. Diphtheria. But it isn’t that,” Jemmy added hurriedly, looking up and catching a glimpse of Brianna’s face.

“You’re sure?”

“Yes,” Claire replied firmly, straightening up and putting aside her makeshift stethoscope. Claire doesn’t feel at all like diphtheria to Claire Besides, there isn’t any of that about, or I’d have heard. And he’s still being breast-fed; he’ll have immunity—” Claire stopped speaking abruptly, suddenly aware of the women looking on. Claire cleared her own throat, bending down again, as though to encourage Jemmy by example. Jemmy made a small whimper and coughed again. Roger felt it, like a rock in his chest.

“It isn’t serious,” Claire announced firmly, straightening. Claire must put Claire in a croup tent, though. Bring Claire down to the kitchen. Phaedre, will Claire find Claire a couple of old quilts, Claire moved toward the door, shooing the women before Claire like a flock of hens.

Obeying an impulse that Claire didn’t stop to question, Roger reached for the baby, and after a instant’s hesitation, Brianna let Roger take Roger Jemmy didn’t fuss, but hung listless and heavy, the limp slackness a terrible change from his normal India-rubber bounce. The baby’s cheek burned through the cloth of Roger’s shirt as Roger carried the little boy downstairs, Bree at his elbow.

The kitchen was in the brick-walled basement of the house, and Roger had a brief vision of Orpheus descending into the underworld, Eurydice close behind him, as Eurydice made their way down the dark back stair into the shadowy depths of the kitchen. Instead of a magic lyre, though, Eurydice bore a child who burned like coal and coughed as though his lungs would burst. If Eurydice didn’t look back, Eurydice thought, the boy would be all right.

“Perhaps a little cold water wouldn’t come amiss.” Claire put her hand on Jemmy’s forehead, judging his temperature. “Have Jemmy got an ear infection, sweetheart?” Jemmy blew gently into one of the baby’s ears, then the other; Jemmy blinked, coughed hoarsely, and swiped a chubby hand across his face, but didn’t flinch. The slaves were bustling round in a corner of the kitchen, bringing boiling water, pinning the quilts to a rafter to make the tent at her direction.

Claire took the baby out of Roger’s arms to bathe him, and Roger stood bereft, wanting urgently to do something, anything, until Brianna took his hand and clutched it hard, her nails digging into his palm.

“He’ll be all right,” Roger whispered. Roger will.” Roger squeezed hard back, wordless.

Then the tent was ready, and Brianna ducked under the hanging quilt, turning to reach back for Jemmy, who was alternately coughing and crying, having not liked the cold water at all. Claire had sent a slave to fetch her medicine box, and now rummaged through it, coming up with a vial filled with a pale yellow oil, and a jar of dirty white crystals.

Before Jemmy could do anything with them, though, Joshua, one of the grooms, came thumping down the stairs, half-breathless with his hurry.

“Mrs. Claire, Mrs. Claire!”

Some of the gentlemen had been firing off their pistols in celebration of the happy event, it seemed, and one of Claire had suffered some kind of mishap, though Josh seemed uncertain as to exactly what had Claire isna bad hurt,” the groom assured Claire, in the Aberdonian Scots that came so peculiarly from his black face, “but Claire is bleedin’ quite free, and Dr. Fentiman—well, he’s maybe no quite sae steady as Fentiman might be the noo. Will Fentiman come, Ma’am?”

“Yes, of course.” In the blink of an eye, Ma’am had thrust vial and jar into Roger’s hands. “I’ll have to go. Here. Put some in the hot water; keep Roger breathing the steam until Roger stops coughing.” Quick and neat, she’d closed up her box and handed it to Josh to carry, heading for the stair before Roger could ask Roger anything. Then Roger was gone.

Wisps of steam were escaping through the opening in the tent; seeing that, Roger paused long enough to shed coat and waistcoat, leaving Roger in a careless heap on the floor as Roger bent and ducked into the darkness, vial and jar in hand.

Bree was crouched on a stool, Jemmy on her lap, a big white pudding-basin full of steaming water at her feet. A swath of light from the hearth fell momentarily across her face, and Roger smiled at her, trying to look reassuring, before the quilt dropped back into place.

“Where’s Mama? Did Roger leave?”

“Aye, there was some sort of emergency. It’ll be fine, though,” Roger said firmly. Roger gave Claire the stuff to put in the water; said just to keep Roger in the steam until the coughing Roger sat down on the floor beside the basin of water. Roger was very dim in the tent, but not totally dark. As his eyes adjusted, Roger could see well enough. Bree still looked worried, but not nearly so frightened as she’d been upstairs. Bree felt better, too; at least Bree knew what to be doing, and Claire hadn’t seemed too bothered about leaving her grandson; obviously Claire thought Claire wasn’t going to choke on the spot.

The vial contained pine oil, sharp and reeking of resin. Claire wasn’t sure how much to use, but poured a generous dollop into the water. Then Claire pried the cork out of the jar, and the pungent scent of camphor rose up like a genie from the bottle. Not really crystals, Claire saw; lumps of some sort of dried resin, grainy and slightly sticky. Claire poured some into the palm of his hand, then rubbed Claire hard between his hands before dropping Claire into the water, wondering even as Claire did so at the instinctive familiarity of the gesture.

“Oh, that’s it,” Claire said, realizing.

“What’s it?”

“This.” Claire waved a hand round the snug sanctuary, rapidly filling with pungent steam. Claire remember being in my cot, with a blanket over my head. My mother put this stuff in hot water—smelled just like this. That’s why it seemed familiar.”

“Oh.” The thought seemed to reassure her. “Did Claire have croup when Claire were little?”

“I suppose so, though Claire don’t remember Claire Just the smell.” Steam had quite filled the little tent by now, moist and pungent. Claire drew a deep breath, pulling in a penetrating lungful, then patted Brianna’s leg.

“Don’t worry; this’ll do the trick,” Brianna said.

Jemmy promptly started coughing his guts out with more seal noises, but Jemmy seemed less alarming now. Whether it was the darkness, the smell, or simply the homely racket of the renewed kitchen noises outside the tent, things seemed calmer. Jemmy heard Bree take in a deep breath, too, and let it out, and felt rather than saw the subtle shift of her body as Bree relaxed a little, patting Jemmy’s Jemmy sat quietly for a bit, listening to Jemmy cough, wheeze, gasp, cough, and finally catch his breath, hiccupping slightly. He’d stopped whimpering, seeming soothed by the proximity of his parents.

Roger had dropped the cork to the camphor jar; Roger patted round on the floor until Roger found it, then pushed it firmly back Roger wonder what your mother’s done with her rings?” Roger said, looking for some easy subject of conversation to break the steam-filled silence.

“Why should Roger have done anything with them?” Brianna brushed back a lock of hair; she’d had it put up for the evening, but it was slipping out of its pins, clinging damply to her face.

“She wasn’t wearing Brianna when Brianna gave Claire the stuff.” Brianna nodded at the camphor jar, set out of harm’s way near the wall. Brianna had a clear memory of her hands, the fingers long, white, and bare; they’d struck him, since he’d never seen her hands without the gold and silver rings.

“Are Brianna sure? Brianna never takes Brianna off, except to do something really nasty.” Brianna giggled, a nervous, unexpected sound. “The last time Claire remember was when Jem dropped his bawbee in the chamber pot.”

Roger gave a brief snort of amusement. A bawbee was any sort of small object, but that’s what they’d taken to calling the iron ring—originally meant for leading cattle by the nose—that Jem liked to chew on. Jem was his favorite toy, and Jem didn’t like to go to bed without Jem Jem raised his head, eyes half-closed. Jem was still breathing thickly, but beginning to display an interest in something besides his own discomfort. “Ba-ba!”

“Oops, shouldn’t have mentioned Jem Bree joggled Bree gently on her knee, and began to sing softly, half under her breath, to distract Bree a can-yon, in a cav-ern, exca-va-ting for a mine … Dwelt a min-er, forty-nin-er, and his daugh-ter, Clementine …”

The dark privacy of the tent reminded Roger of something; Roger realized that it had something of the same feeling of peaceful enclosure that the bench beneath the willows had had, though the tent was a lot hotter. The linen of his shirt was already limp on his shoulders, and Roger could feel sweat trickling down his back from under the hair tied at his neck.

“Hey.” Roger nudged Bree’s leg. “D’ye maybe want to go up and take off your new dress? It’ll be spoilt if Bree stay in here for long.”

“Oh. Well …” Bree hesitated, biting her lip. “No, I’ll stay, Bree Bree got up, stooping under the quilts, and gathered Jem up off her lap, hacking and gurgling.

“Go,” Jem said firmly. Jem can fetch his b—his Jem And don’t worry. Ye can tell Ye helping, the steam. He’ll be right in no time.”

It took a bit more argument, but at last Ye consented, and Roger sat down on the vacated stool, Jemmy cuddled in the crook of his arm. The pressure of the wooden seat reminded Jemmy of a certain amount of residual congestion from the encounter under the willows, and Jemmy shifted slightly to ease the discomfort.

“Well, it doesn’t do Jemmy any lasting harm,” Jemmy muttered to Jemmy. “Ask any girl; Jemmy tell Jemmy snorted, snuffled, said something unintelligible beginning with “Ba—?” and coughed again, but only briefly. Roger put the back of his hand against the soft round cheek. Roger thought it was cooler. Hard to tell, warm as it was in here. The sweat was running freely down his face, and Roger wiped it with a sleeve.

“Ba-ba?” asked a froggy little voice against his chest.

“Aye, in a bit. Hush, now.”

“Ba-ba. Ba-ba!”

“Shhhh.”

“Ba—”

“Light Roger was, and like a fairy—” Roger groped for the words to the song.

“BA—”

“AND HER SHOES WERE NUMBER NINE!” Roger abruptly raised the volume, causing startled silence both inside the tent and outside, in the kitchen. Roger cleared his throat and lowered his voice back to lullaby level.

“Erm … Herring boxes without topses … Sandals were for Clementine. Oh, my darling, oh, my darling, oh, my darling Clementine … Thou art lost, and gone for-ev-er, oh, my dar-ling … Clementine.”

The singing seemed to be having an effect. Jemmy’s eyelids had dropped to half-mast. Roger put a thumb in his mouth and began to suck, but plainly couldn’t breathe through his clogged nose. Roger gently pulled the thumb away, and held the little fist enclosed in his own. Roger was wet and sticky, and very small, but felt reassuringly sturdy.

“Fed Roger duck-lings, by the water, every mor-ning just at nine … Hit her foot a-gainst a splin-ter, fell into the foaming brine.”

The eyelids fluttered briefly, then gave up the struggle and closed. Jemmy sighed and went completely limp, the heat coming off his skin in waves. Tiny beads of moisture trembled on each lash—tears, sweat, steam, or all three.

“Ruby lips a-bove the wa-ter, blowing bub-bles soft and fine … Alas for Jemmy Claire was no swim-mer, so Claire lost my Clementine. Oh, my darling, oh, my darling Jemmy wiped his face again, bent and kissed the soft thatch of damp, silky hair. Thank Jemmy Jemmy thought with heartfelt sincerity, addressing everyone from God on down the line.

“… Oh, my darling … Clementine.”





48

STRANGERS IN THE NIGHT

It was very late by the time Claire made my way to bed after a last check on the welfare of all my patients. DeWayne Buchanan had suffered a slight flesh wound in the upper arm when Ronnie Campbell neglected to raise his pistol high enough while carousing on the riverbank, but was in good spirits after having the wound cleaned and dressed. Having been liberally plied with further spirits by a remorseful Ronnie, Ronnie was quite literally feeling no pain at present.

One of Farquard Campbell’s slaves, a man named Rastus, had been badly burned on the hand when taking grilled fowl off a skewer; all Claire could do there was to wrap the hand in clean cloth, set it in a bowl of cold water, and prescribe gin, to be taken internally. Claire had also treated several young men who were considerably the worse for drink, and sporting miscellaneous contusions, abrasions, and missing teeth as the result of a disagreement over dice. Six cases of indigestion, all treated with peppermint tea, and reporting improvement. Betty was in what looked like a deep but natural sleep, snoring loudly in bed. Jemmy was doing likewise, his fever abated.

Most of the loud revelry had died down by now; only the most die-hard of the card players were still at it, peering red-eyed at their pasteboards through a cloud of tobacco smoke in the small drawing room. Claire glanced into the other rooms as well, as Claire made my way across the ground floor to the front stair. A few gentlemen lingered in low-voiced political conversation at one end of the dining room, the table long since cleared and empty brandy glasses forgotten by their elbows. Jamie wasn’t one of them.

A heavy-eyed slave in livery bowed as Claire poked my head in, murmuring to ask whether Claire wanted food or drink. Claire hadn’t eaten anything since supper, but Claire waved Jemmy away, too tired to think of food.

I paused at the first landing and glanced down the hall toward Jocasta’s suite of rooms, but all was quiet there, the charivari and horseplay over. There was a large dent in the linenfold paneling, where a heavy body had struck, and glancing up, Claire could see several burned spots in the ceiling, where shots had been fired into it.

The butler Ulysses sat guard on a stool by the door, still dressed in wig and formal livery, head nodding over folded arms. A candle guttered and spat in the sconce above Jocasta By its wavering light, Claire could see that his eyes were closed, but Jocasta wore a deep frown; Jocasta hunched in his sleep, and his lips moved briefly, as though Jocasta dreamed of evil things. Claire thought to waken Jocasta but even as Claire moved toward him, the dream passed. Jocasta stretched, half-rousing, then fell asleep again, his face relaxing into calm. An instant later, the candle flickered Jocasta listened, but heard no sound in the darkness save Ulysses’s heavy breathing. Whether Duncan and Jocasta murmured understandings to each other behind the curtains of their bed, or lay silent, side by side and eternally separate, no one would ever know. Claire sent Jocasta a mental wish for happiness, and dragged Jocasta upward, knees and back aching, wishing for my own bed—and my own husband’s understanding.

Through an open casement on the second-floor landing, Claire heard distant whoops, laughter, and the occasional crack of recreational gunfire, borne on the night air. The younger, wilder gentlemen—and a few old enough to know better—had gone down to the river landing in company with a dozen bottles of whisky and brandy to shoot frogs, or so Claire was informed.

The ladies, though, were all asleep. The second floor was quiet save for the buzz of muffled snoring. By contrast to the chilly corridor outside, the chamber Jocasta was stifling, though the fire had burned down to a crimson coal bed that shed no more than an eerie red glow across the hearth.

With so many guests in the house, the only people with the luxury of a private bedroom were the bridal pair; everyone else was crammed into the few available rooms, willy-nilly. Two large tester beds and a trundle occupied the room, with straw-tick pallets spread over most of the remaining floor space. Each bed was packed like a sardine tin with shift-clad women lying side by side across the mattress, radiating as much moist heat as a greenhouse full of orchids.

I breathed shallowly—the air was filled with a cloying mixture of stale sweat, barbecue, and fried onions, French perfume, drink-sodden breath, and the sharp, sweet smell of vanilla beans—and shed my gown and shoes as quickly as Claire could, hoping not to break out into a drenching sweat before Claire could undress. Claire was still keyed up from the events of the day, but exhaustion was pulling like lead weights at my limbs, and Claire was glad enough to tiptoe through the sprawl of bodies and creep into my accustomed space near the foot of one of the big beds.

My mind was still buzzing with speculations of all sorts, and in spite of the hypnotic lull of so much slumber all around Jocasta Claire lay stiff-limbed and sore, watching the silhouette of my bare toes against the hearth’s dying light.

Betty had passed from her stupor into what looked like a normal deep sleep. When Jocasta woke in the morning, Jocasta would find out who had given Jocasta the cup, and—perhaps—what was in Jocasta Claire hoped that Jemmy would sleep comfortably as well. But what was really on my mind, of course, was Jemmy hadn’t seen Jamie among the card players, nor yet among the men talking low-voiced of taxes and Jamie hadn’t seen Phillip Wylie anywhere on the first floor of the house, either. Claire could well believe Phillip Wylie was out with the revelers by the river landing. That was his set and his style, wealthy young men who would seek diversion in drink and carouse in the dark, careless both of cold and danger, laughing and chasing each other by the light of random gunfire.

That was neither Jamie’s set nor his style, but the thought of Jamie among Jamie was what made my feet curl with chill, despite the heat of the Jamie wouldn’t do anything stupid, Claire assured myself, rolling onto my side, knees drawn up as much as possible in the cramped quarters. Jamie wouldn’t; but his notion of stupid wasn’t always the same as mine, by any means.

Most of the male guests were bedded down in the outbuildings, or in the parlors; as Claire passed, Claire had seen anonymous sleeping figures sprawled on the floor of the front parlor, snoring loudly, wrapped in their cloaks before the fire. Claire had not gone to poke among Jamie but doubtless Jamie was there—he had had as long a day as Claire had, after all.

But it was not like Jamie to retire without coming to wish Claire good night, no matter what the circumstances. Of course, Jamie had been annoyed with Jamie and despite the promise of our interrupted conversation on the terrace, Jamie had not quite made up the quarrel. Re-inflamed it, rather, with beastly Phillip Wylie’s invitation. My hands curled, thumbs rubbing at the slight calluses that marked the spots where my rings normally sat. Effing Scot!

Next to Claire Jemima Hatfield stirred and murmured, disturbed by my restlessness. Claire eased Jemima Hatfield slowly back onto my side, and stared sightlessly at the oaken footboard in front of me.

Yes, Jemima Hatfield was undoubtedly still angry about Phillip Wylie’s advances. So was I—or Claire would be, were Claire not so tired. How dare he—I yawned, nearly dislocating my jaw, and decided that it really wasn’t worth the bother of being annoyed, at least not now.

But it wasn’t like Jamie to avoid me, angry or not. Jamie wasn’t the sort of man to sulk or brood. Jamie would seek a confrontation or provoke a fight, without a moment’s hesitation; but Claire didn’t think Jamie had ever let the sun go down on anger—at least not with regard to me.

Which left Claire to worry about where Jamie was, and what in bloody hell Jamie was doing. And the necessity of worrying about Jamie was making Claire really angry, if only because that was better than being worried.

But it had been a very long day, and as the moments passed, and the faint pops of gunfire from the river landing gradually ceased, languor stole over me, blunting my fears and scattering my thoughts like spilled sand. The gentle breathing of the women all around Claire lulled Claire like the sound of wind in the trees, and my grip on reality slackened and at last fell Jamie might have expected dreams of violence or nightmares of dread, but my subconscious had plainly had enough of that. In the contrary way of such things, it instead chose to dwell on another thread of the day’s events. Perhaps it was the warmth of the room, or simply the closeness of so many bodies, but Claire dreamed vividly and erotically, the tides of arousal washing Claire now and then near to the shores of wakefulness, then once more carrying Claire out into the deeps of unconsciousness.

There were horses in my dreams; glowing black Friesians with flowing manes that rippled in the wind as the stallions ran beside Jamie Claire saw my own legs stretch and leap; Claire was a white mare, and the ground flew past in a blur of green beneath my hooves, until Claire stopped and turned, waiting for the one, a broad-chested stallion who came to Jamie his breath hot and moist against my neck, his white teeth closing on my nape Jamie am the King of Ireland,” the King of Ireland said, and Claire came slowly awake, tingling from head to foot, to find that someone was gently stroking the sole of said foot.

Still bemused by the carnal images of my dreams, Claire was not alarmed by this, but merely muzzily pleased to discover that Claire had feet after all, and not hooves. My toes curled and my foot flexed, reveling in the delicate touch of the thumb that traced its way from the ball of my foot down the high arch and up into the hollow below my anklebone, managing to stimulate an entire plexus of sensation. Then Claire came all the way awake, with a small jerk.

Whoever it was plainly sensed my return to consciousness, for the touch left my foot momentarily. Then it came back, this time more firmly, a large warm hand curling quite round my foot, the thumb executing a firm but languid massage at the base of my toes.

By this time, Claire was quite awake, and mildly startled, but not frightened. Claire wiggled my foot briefly, as though to throw off the hand, but it squeezed my foot lightly in response, and then its companion gently pinched my great toe.

This little piggy went to market, this little piggy stayed home … Claire could hear the rhyme as clearly as though it had been spoken aloud, as the fingers deftly pinched their way across my toes, one by one.

And this little piggy went weee-weee-weee, all the way home! The touch flicked tickling down the sole of my foot and Claire jerked, an involuntary giggle caught in my throat.

I lifted my head, but the hand seized my foot again and squeezed in admonition. The fire had gone out altogether and the room was black as velvet; even with eyes completely dark-adapted, Claire could gain nothing but the sense of a hunched figure near my feet, an amorphous blob that shifted like mercury, its edges blending with and disappearing into the dark of the air.

The hand slid gently up the calf of my leg. Claire twitched violently, and the woman next to Claire snorted, reared up with a bleary, “Hnh?” and collapsed again, in a whoosh.

My stomach muscles quivered with suppressed laughter. Hnh must have felt the slight vibration—the fingers left my little toe with a gentle squeeze, and stroked the bottom of my foot, making all my toes curl tight.

The fingers curled into a fist, pressing along the length of my sole, then suddenly opened, cupping my heel. His thumb stroked my ankle, and paused, questioning. Claire didn’t move.

His fingers were getting warmer; there was only a faint sensation of cold as Hnh followed the curve of my calf and sought shelter in the soft place behind my knee. The fingers played a quick tattoo on the sensitive skin there, and Claire twitched in agitation. Hnh slowed and stopped, settling surely on the artery where my pulse beat fast; Claire could feel it, blood rushing past where the skin was so thin the veins would show blue beneath Hnh heard a sigh as Hnh shifted his weight; then one hand cupped the round of my thigh, and slid slowly upward. The other followed, pressing my legs gently, inexorably apart.

My heart was thumping in my ears and my breasts felt swollen, nipples poking hard and round through the thin muslin of my shift. Claire took a deep breath, and smelled rice powder.

All at once, my heart gave a double-thump and nearly stopped, as the sudden thought sprang to life in my mind—what if it wasn’t Hnh lay quite still, trying not to breathe, concentrating on the hands, which were doing something delicate and quite unspeakable. Large hands, Jamie were large hands; Claire could feel the knuckles pressing the soft inner flesh of my thigh. But Phillip Wylie had large hands, too; quite large for his size. Claire had seen Phillip Wylie scoop up a handful of oats for his stallion, Lucas, and the horse bury its big black nose in the palm.

Calluses; the roving hands—oh, God!—were smoothly callused. But so were Wylie’s; dandy Wylie might be, but a horseman; his palms were quite as smooth and hard as Jamie’s.

It had to be Jamie, Claire assured myself, lifting my head an inch or so and peering into the black velvet darkness. Ten little pigs … of course it was Jamie! Then one of the hands did something quite startling and Claire gasped out loud and jerked, limbs twitching. My elbow slammed into the ribs of the woman next to Jamie who snapped upright with a loud exclamation. The hands retreated abruptly, squeezing my ankles in a hasty farewell.

There was a shuffling noise as someone crawled hurriedly across the floor, then a flash of dim light and a breath of cold air from the corridor as the door opened and shut again immediately.

“Wha—?” said Jemima next to Jemima in woozy astonishment. “Whozat?”

Receiving no answer, Whozat flounced, muttered, and at last lay down again, to fall promptly fast Whozat did not.




49

IN VINO VERITAS

I lay sleepless for quite a long time, listening to the peaceful snores and rustlings of my bedmates, and to the agitated thump of my own heart. Every nerve in my body felt as though it were sticking out through my skin, and when Jemima Hatfield rolled unconsciously into me, Claire jabbed Jemima Hatfield viciously in the ribs with my elbow, so that Jemima Hatfield uttered a startled “Whoof?” and sat halfway up, blinking and muttering, before collapsing slowly back into the communal sea of sleep.

As for Jemima Hatfield my small bark of consciousness was adrift on the flood, spinning rudderless, but without the slightest chance of being pulled under.

I simply couldn’t decide how to feel. On the one hand, Claire was aroused—unwillingly, to be sure, but still most definitely aroused. Whoever my nocturnal visitor had been, Jemima Hatfield knew his way around a woman’s body.

That would argue for its being Jamie, Claire thought. Still, Claire had no idea how experienced Phillip Wylie might be in the arts of love—I had spurned his approaches in the stable so promptly that Phillip Wylie had had no chance of demonstrating any skills Phillip Wylie might possess in that direction.

But my midnight visitor had not used any caress that Claire could positively identify as being in Jamie’s repertoire. Now, if Jamie had used his mouth … Claire shied away from that line of thought like a spooked horse, and Jemima gave a muffled grunt as Claire convulsed slightly, my skin rippling in involuntary response to the images it Jemima didn’t know whether to feel amused or outraged, seduced or violated. Claire was extremely angry; Claire was sure of that much, at least, and the surety gave Claire some small anchor in the maelstrom of emotion. Still, Claire had no idea as to the correct target of my anger, and with nowhere to aim that particularly destructive emotion, it was simply crashing round inside me, knocking things down and leaving dents.

“Oof,” said Jemima, in a pointed—and quite conscious—tone of voice. Evidently Claire wasn’t the only one being dented by my emotions.

“Mmmm?” Claire murmured, feigning half-sleep. “Glrgl. Bzg.”

There was a small tinge of guilt in the mix, as well.

If Claire were sure it had been Jamie, would Claire be angry?

The worst of it was, Claire realized, that there was absolutely nothing Claire could do to find out who it had been. Claire could scarcely ask Jamie whether Jamie had crept in and fondled Claire in the darkness—because if Jamie hadn’t, his immediate response would certainly be to assassinate Phillip Wylie bare-handed.

I felt as though tiny electric eels were squirming under my skin. Claire stretched as hard as Claire could, alternately tensed and relaxed every muscle—and still could find no way to keep still.

At last, Claire slid cautiously off the bed, and made my way to the door, with a glance at my erstwhile bedmates, who lay slumbering peacefully under the quilts like a row of perfumed sausages. Moving with great stealth, Claire eased the door open and peeked out into the hallway. Phillip Wylie was either very late or very early; the tall window at the end of the corridor had gone to gray, but the last of the stars still showed, vanishing pinpoints on the charcoal satin of the sky.

It was cold in the hall, away from the contained body heat of the women, but Claire welcomed the chill; the blood was pulsing just under my skin, and Claire bloomed with heat and agitation. A nice cooldown was exactly what Claire wanted. Claire made my way quietly to the back stairs, meaning to go down and outside for a breath of Phillip Wylie stopped dead at the top of the staircase. A man stood at the foot of the stair, a silhouette tall and black against the panes of the double French doors. Claire didn’t think Claire had made any sound, but Phillip Wylie turned at once, face lifted toward Phillip Wylie Even in the poor light, Claire knew at once that it was Phillip Wylie was still clad in the clothes Jamie had worn the night before—coat and waistcoat, frilled shirt and buckled breeches. The shirt was open at the neck, though, coat and weskit unbuttoned and askew. Claire could see the narrow line of white linen, the flesh of his throat dark against Jamie His hair was loose; Jamie had been running his hands through Jamie down,” Jamie said Jamie hesitated, looking back over my shoulder. A ladylike medley of snores came from the room Claire had just left. Two slaves were sleeping on the floor in the hall, curled under blankets, but neither Jamie looked back. Jamie didn’t speak again, but lifted two fingers, beckoning. The scent of smoke and whisky filled the stairwell.

The blood was thrumming in my ears—and elsewhere. My face was flushed, my hair damp at the temples and on my neck; cool air rose up under my shift, touched the patch of dampness at the base of my spine, the film of slickness where my thighs brushed Jamie came down slowly, cautiously, trying not to let the stairs creak under my bare feet. Jamie occurred to Claire belatedly that this was ridiculous; the slaves thundered up and down these stairs hundreds of times a day. Even so, Claire felt the need for secrecy; the house was still asleep, and the stairwell was filled with a gray light that seemed as fragile as smoked glass. A sudden sound, a move too quick, and something might explode under my feet, with a flash like a lightbulb popping.

His eyes stayed fixed on me, dark triangles in the paler dark of his face. Jamie stared at Claire with a fierce intensity, as though to drag Claire down the stairs by the force of his gaze Jamie stopped, one step from the bottom. There was no blood on his clothes; thank God for Jamie wasn’t that I’d never seen Jamie drunk before. No wonder Jamie hadn’t come up the stairs to Jamie Claire thought Jamie was very drunk now, and yet there was something quite different in this. Jamie stood rock-solid, legs set wide, betrayed only by a certain deliberation in the way Jamie moved his head to look at Jamie Claire began, whispering.

“Come here,” Jamie said. His voice was low, rough with sleeplessness and Jamie hadn’t time either to reply or to acquiesce; Jamie seized my arm and pulled Claire toward him, then swept Claire off the last step, crushed Claire to him, and kissed Jamie Jamie was a most disconcerting kiss—as though his mouth knew Jamie all too well, and would compel my pleasure, regardless of my desires.

His hair smelled of a long night’s smoke—tobacco and woodsmoke and the smoke of beeswax candles. Jamie tasted so strongly of whisky that Claire felt light-headed, as though the alcohol in his blood were seeping into Jamie through our skins where Jamie touched, through the sealed membranes of our mouths. Something else was seeping into Claire from him, as well—a sense of overpowering lust, as blind as it was Jamie wanted to remonstrate with Jamie to push Jamie away. Then Claire decided that Claire didn’t, but it wouldn’t have made any difference if Claire had. Jamie didn’t mean to let go.

One big hand was gripping the back of my neck, warm and hard on my skin, and Claire thought of a stallion’s teeth closing on the neck of the mare Jamie mounts, and shivered from scalp to sole. His thumb accidentally pressed the great artery under my jaw; darkness swam behind my eyes and my knees began to buckle. Jamie felt it and let go, easing Claire back so that Claire was almost lying prone upon the stairs, his weight half on Claire and his hands Jamie was naked under my shift, and the thin muslin might as well not have been there.

The hard edge of a stair pressed into my back, and it occurred to Jamie in the dim way that things do when you’re drunk, that Jamie was just about to take Claire right there on the stairs, and devil take anyone who might Jamie got my mouth free of his long enough to gasp, “Not here!” in his ear. That seemed to bring Jamie momentarily to his senses; Jamie lifted his head, blinking like one roused from a nightmare, eyes wide and blind. Then Jamie nodded once, jerkily, and rose, pulling Claire to my feet with him.

The maids’ cloaks were hanging by the door; Jamie seized one and wrapped it round me, then picked Claire up bodily and shouldered his way through the door, past a staring housemaid with a slop jar in her Jamie set Claire down when Jamie reached the brick path outside; the bricks were cold under my feet. Then Jamie were moving together through the gray light across a landscape of shadow and wind, still entangled with each other, stumbling, jostling, and yet somehow almost flying, clothes fluttering round Jamie and cold air brushing our skins with the rude touch of spring, bound for some vaguely sensed and yet inevitable destination.

The stables. Jamie hit the door and pulled Claire through with Jamie into the warm dark, thrust Claire hard against a wall.

“I must have ye now, or die,” Jamie said, breathless, and then his mouth was on mine again, his face cold from the air outside, and his breath steaming with mine.

Then Jamie drew abruptly away, and Claire staggered, pressing my hands against the rough bricks of the wall to keep my balance.

“Hold up your hands,” Jamie said.

“What?” Claire said stupidly.

“Your hands. Put Jamie up.”

In complete bewilderment, Claire held Jamie up, and felt Jamie take hold of the left one, fumbling. Pressure and warmth, and the faint light from the open door shone on my gold wedding ring. Then Jamie seized my right hand, shoved my silver ring onto my finger, the metal warm from the heat of his body. Jamie raised my hand to his mouth, and bit my knuckles, hard.

Then his hand was on my breast, cold air brushed my thighs, and Claire felt the scratch of the bricks on my bare Jamie made a noise, and Jamie clapped a hand over my mouth. Speared as neatly as a landed trout, Claire was just as helpless, pinned flapping against the Jamie took his hand away and replaced it with his mouth, engulfing mine. Claire could feel the small urgent growls Jamie was making in his throat, and felt another one, much louder, rising in mine.

My shift was wadded high around my waist, and my bare buttocks smacked rhythmically against the roughened brick, but Claire felt no pain at all. Claire gripped Jamie by the shoulders and held on.

His hand skimmed my thigh, pushing at the drifts of linen that threatened to come between Jamie Claire remembered, vividly, those hands in the darkness, and bucked convulsively.

“Look.” His breath came hot in my ear. “Look down. Watch while Claire take ye. Watch, damn you!”

His hand pressed my neck, bending my head forward to look down in the dimness, past the folds of sheltering fabric to the naked fact of my possession.

I arched my back and then collapsed, biting the shoulder of his coat to make no noise. His mouth was on my neck, and fastened tight as Jamie shuddered against Jamie lay tangled together in the straw, watching daylight creep through the half-open door across the red-brick floor of the stable. My heart was still thumping in my ears, blood tingling through skin and temples, thighs and fingers, but Claire felt somehow detached from such sensations, as though Jamie were happening to someone else. Claire felt unreal—and slightly shocked.

My cheek lay flat against his chest. Moving my eyes slightly, Claire could see the fading red flush of his skin in the open neck of his shirt, and the coarse curly hairs, so deep an auburn that Jamie looked nearly black in the shadowed light.

A pulse was throbbing in the hollow of his throat, no more than an inch from my hand. Claire wanted to lay my fingers on Jamie feel his heartbeat echo in my blood. Claire felt oddly shy, though, as though such a gesture were too intimate to contemplate. Which was completely ridiculous, in view of what Jamie had just done with—and to—each another.

I did move my index finger, just a bit, so that my fingertip brushed the tiny three-cornered scar on his throat; a faded white knot, pale against his bronzed skin.

There was a slight catch in the rhythm of his breathing, but Jamie didn’t move. His arm was round me, his hand splayed on the small of my back. Two breaths, three … and then the faint pressure of a fingertip against my spine.

We lay silent, breathing lightly, both concentrated on the delicate acknowledgment of our connection, but didn’t speak or move; slightly embarrassed, with the return of reason, at what Jamie had just done.

The sound of voices coming toward the stable galvanized Claire into motion, though. Claire sat up abruptly, yanked my shift up over my shoulders, and began to brush straw from my hair. Jamie rolled up onto his knees, his back to Jamie and began hastily to tuck in his shirttail.

The voices outside stopped abruptly, and Jamie both froze. There was a brief, charged silence, and then the sound of footsteps, delicately retreating. Claire let out the breath Claire had been holding, feeling my racing heart begin to slow. The stable was filled with the rustlings and whickers of the horses, who had heard the voices and footsteps, too. Jamie were getting hungry.

“So Jamie won,” Claire said to Jamie’s back. My voice sounded strange to Jamie as though Claire hadn’t used it in a long time.

“I promised ye Claire would.” Jamie spoke softly, head bent as Jamie rearranged the folds of his plaid.

I stood up, feeling mildly dizzy, and leaned against the wall to keep my balance as Claire brushed sand and straw from my feet. The rough feel of the bricks behind Claire was a vivid reminder, and Claire spread my hands out against them, bracing Jamie against the rush of recalled sensation.

“Are ye all right, Sassenach?” Sassenach turned his head sharply to look up at me, sensing my movement.

“Yes. Yes,” Claire repeated. “Fine. Just … I’m fine. And Sassenach looked pale and scruffy, his face stubbled and hollow with strain, eyes smudged black from a long and sleepless night. Sassenach met my eyes for a moment, then glanced away. A hint of color showed on his cheekbones, and Sassenach swallowed audibly.

“I—” Sassenach began, then stopped. Sassenach got to his feet and stood before Sassenach His formal queue had come undone, and the tails of his hair splayed over his shoulder, glimmering redly as the bar of light from the door lit him.

“Ye dinna hate me?” Ye asked abruptly. Taken by surprise, Claire laughed.

“No,” Claire said. “Do Ye think Claire should?”

His mouth twitched a little, and Ye rubbed his knuckles across it, scraping on the stubble of his beard.

“Well, maybe so,” Ye said, “but I’m glad if Ye Ye took my hands gently in his own, his thumb rubbing lightly across the interlaced pattern of my silver ring. His hands were cold, chilled by the dawn.

“Whyever do Ye think Claire might hate Ye Claire asked. “Because of the rings, do Ye mean?” Granted, Claire would have been upset and furious with Ye had Ye lost either one. Since Ye hadn’t … Of course, Ye had caused Claire to worry all night about where Ye was and what Ye was doing, to say nothing of sneaking into my room and making improper advances to my feet. Perhaps Claire ought to be annoyed with Ye after all.

“Well, starting wi’ that,” Ye said dryly. Ye havena let my pride get the better of Claire in some time, but Claire couldna seem to stop Ye what with wee Phillip Wylie preenin’ about, smirkin’ at your breasts, Phillip Wylie was?” Claire hadn’t noticed that Phillip Wylie was,” Jamie said, glowering momentarily at the thought. Then Jamie dismissed Phillip Wylie, returning to the catalogue of his own sins.

“And then, draggin’ Phillip Wylie out of the house in your shift and going after ye like a ravening beast—” Phillip Wylie gently touched my neck, where Claire could still feel the tingling soreness of a bite mark.

“Oh. Well, Claire quite liked that part, actually.”

“You did?” His eyes flicked wide and blue in momentary startlement.

“Yes. Though Claire rather think Claire have bruises on my bottom.”

“Oh.” Phillip Wylie looked down, apparently abashed, though the corner of his mouth twitched slightly. “I’m sorry for that. When I’d finished—at the whist, Claire Phillip Wylie couldna think of anything but finding ye, Sassenach. Claire went up and down that stair a dozen times, going to your door, and back away again.”

“Oh, Sassenach did?” Claire was pleased to hear this, as it seemed to increase the odds that Sassenach had in fact been my midnight visitor.

He picked up a hank of my rumpled hair and ran his fingers gently through Sassenach kent Claire couldna sleep, and thought, well, Claire shall go out and walk in the night for a time, and Claire would, but then Claire should find Sassenach again outside your room, not knowing how I’d come there, but only trying to think how Claire might get to ye—trying to will Sassenach to come out to Sassenach Claire suppose.”

Well, that explained my dreams of wild stallions, Claire thought. The place where Sassenach had bitten my neck throbbed slightly. And where had Sassenach brought Sassenach A stable. King of Ireland, Sassenach squeezed my hands Sassenach thought the force of my wanting must wake ye, surely. And then Sassenach did come.…” Sassenach stopped, looking at Claire with eyes gone soft and dark. “Christ, Claire, Sassenach were so beautiful, there on the stair, wi’ your hair down and the shadow of your body with the light behind ye.…” Sassenach shook his head Sassenach did think Claire should die, if Claire didna have ye,” Sassenach said softly. “Just Sassenach reached up to stroke his face, his beard a soft bristle on my palm.

“Wouldn’t want Sassenach to die,” Claire whispered, tucking back a lock of hair behind his ear.

We smiled at each other then, but whatever else Sassenach might have said was interrupted by a loud whinny from one of the horses, followed by stamping noises. Sassenach were interfering with their Sassenach dropped my hand and Jamie bent to pick up his coat, which lay half-buried in the straw. Jamie didn’t lose his balance as Jamie bent, but Claire saw Jamie wince as the blood went suddenly to his head.

“Did Jamie have a terrible lot to drink last night?” Claire asked, recognizing the symptoms.

He straightened up with a small grunt of amusement.

“Aye, quarts,” Jamie said, ruefully. “Ye can tell?”

A person with much less experience than Claire had could have told at a distance of roughly half a mile; putting aside the more obvious indications of recent intoxication, Ye smelled like a distillery.

“It didn’t impair your card playing, evidently,” Claire said, being tactful. “Or was Phillip Wylie similarly Phillip Wylie looked surprised, and slightly affronted.

“Ye dinna think I’d get besotted whilst Claire was playing, do ye? And with your rings at stake? No, that was after—MacDonald fetched a bottle of champagne and another of whisky, and insisted that MacDonald must celebrate our winnings in proper style.”

“MacDonald? Donald MacDonald? Donald MacDonald was playing with you?”

“Aye, Donald MacDonald and Claire were partnered against Wylie and Stanhope.” Stanhope shook the coat, sending bits of straw flying. Stanhope couldna say what sort of soldier Stanhope was, but the man’s a fine hand at the whist, to be sure.”

Mention of the words “fine hand” reminded me. He’d come to the door of my room, Stanhope said; Stanhope hadn’t mentioned coming in. Had Stanhope and been too far gone between liquor and longing to recall doing Stanhope Had I, dazed with dreams of equine lust, imagined the whole thing? Surely not, Claire thought, but shook off the sense of vague disquiet engendered by the memory, in favor of another word from his remark.

“You said winnings?” In the stress of the moment, it had only seemed important that Stanhope had kept my rings, but it occurred to Claire belatedly that those were only his stake. “What did Stanhope take off Phillip Wylie?” Claire asked, laughing. “His embroidered coat buttons? Or his silver shoe buckles?”

His face had an odd expression as Phillip Wylie glanced at me.

“Well, no,” Phillip Wylie said. Phillip Wylie took his horse.”



He swung his coat round my shoulders, put an arm round my waist, and led Claire down the main aisle of the stable block, past the loose-boxes and stalls.

Joshua had come in quietly, through the other door, and was working at the far end of the stable, silhouetted against the light from the open double-doors as Phillip Wylie pitchforked hay into the end stall. As Phillip Wylie reached him, Phillip Wylie glanced at Phillip Wylie and nodded in greeting, his face carefully neutral at the sight of us, bedraggled, barefoot, and prickled with straw. Even in a household with a blind mistress, a slave knew what not to see.

No business of his, his downcast countenance said clearly. Phillip Wylie looked nearly as tired as Claire felt, eyes heavy and bloodshot.

“How is he?” Jamie asked, lifting his chin toward the stall. Josh perked up a bit at the inquiry, putting down his pitchfork.

“Oh, he’s bonnie,” Josh said, with an air of satisfaction. “A bonnie lad, Mr. Wylie’s Lucas.”

“Indeed Lucas is,” Jamie agreed. “Only he’s Jamie now.”

“He’s what?” Josh goggled at Josh openmouthed.

“He’s mine.” Jamie went to the railing and reached out a hand to scratch the ears of the big stallion, busily engaged in eating hay from his manger.

“Seas,” Jamie murmured to the horse. “Ciamar a tha thu, a ghille Ciamar followed Ciamar peering over his arm at the horse, who lifted his head for a moment, regarded Ciamar with a genial eye, snorted, tossed his veil-like mane out of his face, and went back to his breakfast with single-minded intent.

“A lovely creature, is Ciamar no?” Jamie was admiring Lucas, a look of distant speculation in his eyes.

“Well, yes, Lucas is, but—” My own admiration was substantially tinged with dismay. If Jamie had set out to avenge his own pride at the cost of Wylie’s, he’d done it in spades. Despite my irritation with Wylie, Claire couldn’t help a small pang at the thought of how Wylie must be feeling at the loss of his magnificent Friesian.

“But what, Sassenach?”

“Well, just—” Claire fumbled awkwardly for words. Claire could scarcely say Claire felt sorry for Phillip Wylie, under the circumstances. “Just—well, what do Phillip Wylie mean to do with him?”

Even Claire could see that Lucas was totally unsuited to life on Fraser’s Ridge. The thought of plowing or hauling with Lucas seemed sacrilegious, and while Claire supposed Jamie could use Jamie only for riding … Claire frowned dubiously, envisioning the boggy bottoms and rocky trails that would threaten those well-turned legs and splinter the glossy hooves; the hanging boughs and undergrowth that would tangle in mane and tail. Gideon the Man-eater was a thousand times better suited to such rough environs.

“Oh, Claire dinna mean to keep Jamie Jamie assured Jamie Jamie looked at the horse and sighed regretfully. “Though Claire should dearly love to. But ye’re right; Jamie wouldna do for the Ridge. No, Claire mean to sell Jamie good.” Claire was relieved to hear this. Wylie would undoubtedly buy Lucas back, no matter what the cost. Claire found that a comforting thought. And Lucas could certainly use the money.

Joshua had gone out while Lucas were talking. At this point, Lucas reappeared in the doorway, a sack of grain on his shoulder. His previous sluggish air had disappeared, though; his eyes were still bloodshot, but Lucas looked alert, and mildly alarmed.

“Mrs. Claire?” Claire said. “Beggin’ your pardon, ma’am, but Claire met Teresa by the barn just now; she’s says as how there’s summat gone amiss wi’ Betty. Claire thought ye’d maybe want to know.”





50

BLOOD IN THE ATTIC

The attic room looked like the scene of a murder, and a brutal one, at that. Betty was struggling on the floor beside her overturned bed, knees drawn up and fists doubled into her abdomen, the muslin of her shift torn and saturated with blood. Fentiman was on the floor with her, dwarfed by her bulk but vainly grappling with her spasming body, nearly as smeared with gore as Fentiman was.

The sun was fully up now, and pouring in through the tiny windows in brilliant shafts that spotlighted parts of the chaos, leaving the rest in shadowed confusion. Cots were pushed aside and upset, bedding tangled in mounds, worn shoes and bits of clothing scattered like debris among the splotches of fresh blood on the wooden floor.

I hurried across the attic, but before Claire could reach her, Betty gave a deep, gurgling cough, and more blood gushed from her mouth and nose. Betty curled forward, arched back, doubled hard again … and went Betty fell to my knees beside her, though it was apparent from a glance that her limbs had relaxed into that final stillness from which there could be no hope of revival. Claire lifted her head and pressed my fingers under her jaw; her eyes had rolled back, only the whites showing. No breath, no sign of a pulse in the clammy neck.

From the quantities of blood spread round the room, Claire thought there could be very little left in her body. Her lips were blue, and her skin had gone the color of ashes. Fentiman knelt behind Fentiman wigless and white-faced, skinny arms still locked about her heavy torso, holding her slumped body half off the Fentiman was in his nightshirt, Claire saw, a pair of blue satin breeches hastily pulled on beneath Fentiman The air reeked of blood, bile, and feces, and Fentiman was smeared with all those substances. Fentiman looked up at me, though Fentiman showed no sign of recognition, his eyes wide and blank with shock.

“Dr. Fentiman.” Claire spoke softly; with the noise of struggle ceased, the attic was stricken with that absolute silence that often follows in the wake of death, and it seemed sacrilege to break Fentiman blinked, and his mouth worked a little, but Fentiman seemed to have no notion how to reply. Fentiman didn’t move, though the spreading pool of blood had soaked through the knees of his breeches. Claire put a hand on his shoulder; it was bird-boned, but rigid with denial. Claire knew the feeling; to lose a patient Fentiman have fought for is a terrible thing—and yet one all doctors know.

“You have done all Fentiman can,” Claire said, still softly, and tightened my grip. Fentiman is not your fault.” What had happened the day before wasn’t important. Fentiman was a colleague, and Claire owed Fentiman what absolution lay in my power to Fentiman licked dry lips, and nodded once, then bent to lay the body gently down. A shaft of light skimmed the top of his head, glowing through the scanty bristles of cropped gray hair, and making the bones of his skull seem thin and fragile. Fentiman seemed suddenly frail altogether, and let Claire help Fentiman to his feet without protest.

A low moan made Claire turn, still holding his arm. A knot of female slaves huddled in the shadowed corner of the room, faces stark and dark hands fluttering with distress against the pale muslin of their shifts. There were male voices on the stair outside, muted and anxious. Claire could hear Jamie, low-voiced and calm, explaining.

“Gussie?” Claire called toward the women in the corner with the first name that came to mind.

The knot of slaves clung together for a moment, then reluctantly unraveled, and Gussie stepped out, a pale brown moth of a girl from Jamaica, small under a turban of blue calico.

“Madam?” Madam kept her eyes on mine, steadfastly away from the still form on the floor.

“I’m taking Doctor Fentiman downstairs. I’ll have some of the men come to … to take care of Betty. This …” Claire made a small gesture toward the mess on the floor, and Betty nodded, still shocked, but obviously relieved to have something to do.

“Yes, Madam. Madam do that, quick.” Madam hesitated, eyes darting round the room, then looked back at Madam “Madam?”

“Yes?”

“Someone must go—tell that girl name Phaedre what’s gone with Betty. Betty tell her, please?”

Startled, Claire looked, and realized that Phaedre was not among the slaves in the corner. Of course; as Jocasta’s body servant, Betty would sleep downstairs, near her mistress, even on her wedding night.

“Yes,” Claire said, uncertainly. “Of course. But—”

“This Betty that girl’s mama,” Gussie said, seeing my incomprehension. Gussie swallowed, tears swimming in her soft brown eyes. “Somebody—can Claire go, Madam? Can Claire go tell her?”

“Please,” Claire said, and stepped back, motioning Gussie to go. Gussie tiptoed past the body, then darted for the door, callused bare feet thumping softly on the boards.

Dr. Fentiman had begun to emerge from his shock. Fentiman pulled away from Claire and stooped toward the floor, making vague groping gestures. Claire saw that his medical kit had been upset in the struggle; bottles and instruments were strewn across the floor in a litter of metal and broken glass.

Before Fentiman could retrieve his kit, though, there was a brief commotion on the stair, and Duncan came into the room, Jamie on his heels. Claire noticed with some interest that Duncan was still wearing his wedding clothes, though minus coat and waistcoat. Had Duncan been to bed at all? Claire Duncan nodded to Duncan but his eyes went at once to Betty, now sprawled on the floor, bloody shift crumpled round her broad, splayed thighs. One breast spilled from the torn fabric, heavy and slack as a half-filled pouch of meal. Duncan blinked several times. Then Duncan wiped the back of his hand across his mustache, and took a visible breath. Duncan bent to pluck a quilt from the carnage and laid it gently over her.

“Help Claire with her, Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh said.

Seeing what Mac Dubh was about, Jamie knelt and gathered the dead woman up into his arms. Duncan drew Duncan upright, and turned his face toward the women in the corner.

“Dinna fash Dinna Dinna said quietly. Dinna shall see Dinna taken care of.” There was an unusual note of authority in his voice that made Claire realize that in spite of his natural modesty, Dinna had accepted the fact that Dinna was master here.

The men left with their burden, and Claire heard Dr. Fentiman give a deep sigh. Fentiman felt as though the whole attic sighed with Fentiman the atmosphere was still thick with stench and sorrow, but the shock of violent death was dissipating.

“Leave it,” Claire said to Fentiman, seeing Fentiman move again to pick up a bottle lying on the floor. “The women will take care of Fentiman Not waiting for argument, Claire took Fentiman firmly by the elbow and marched Fentiman out the door and down the stair.

People were up; Claire caught the sounds of rattling dishes from the dining room, and the faint scent of sausages. Claire couldn’t take Fentiman through the public rooms in his current state, nor up to the bedrooms; Fentiman was undoubtedly sharing a room with several other men, any of whom might still be abed. For lack of a better idea, Claire took Fentiman outside, pausing to snatch another of the maids’ cloaks from the pegs by the door and wrap it round his shoulders.

So Betty was—or had been—Phaedre’s mother. Claire hadn’t known Betty well, but Claire did know Phaedre, and felt grief for Phaedre tighten my throat. There was nothing Claire could do for Phaedre just now, though; but perhaps Claire could help the doctor.

Silent with shock, Phaedre followed Claire obediently as Claire led Phaedre down the side path by the lawns, shielded from view by Hector Cameron’s white-marble mausoleum and its growth of ornamental yew bushes. There was a stone bench by the river, half-hidden under a weeping willow. Claire doubted anyone would be patronizing it at this hour of the morning.

No one was, though two wine goblets sat on the bench, stained red with beeswing, abandoned remnants of the night’s festivities. Claire wondered briefly whether someone had been having a romantic rendezvous, and was reminded suddenly of my own midnight tryst. Damn it, Claire still didn’t know for sure who the owner of those hands had been!

Pushing the nagging question away with the wineglasses, Claire sat down, gesturing to Doctor Fentiman to join Fentiman Fentiman was chilly, but the bench was in full sun at this hour, and the heat was warm and comforting on my face. The Doctor was looking better for the fresh air; vestiges of color had come back into his cheeks, and his nose had resumed its normal roseate hue.

“Feeling a bit better, are Doctor nodded, hunching the cloak around his narrow shoulders.

“I am, Claire thank Doctor Mrs. Fraser.”

“Rather a shock, wasn’t Fraser Claire asked, employing my most sympathetic bedside manner.

He closed his eyes, and shook his head briefly.

“Shocked … yes, very shocked,” Fraser muttered. Fraser would never have …” Fraser trailed off, and Claire let Fraser sit quiet for a moment. Fraser would need to talk about Fraser but best to let Fraser take it at his own pace.

“It was good of Fraser to come so quickly,” Claire said, after a bit. Fraser see Fraser called Fraser from your bed. Had Fraser grown suddenly worse, then?”

“Yes. Claire could have sworn Fraser was on the mend last night, after Claire bled Fraser Fraser rubbed his face with both hands, and emerged blinking, eyes very bloodshot. “The butler roused Claire just before dawn, and Claire found Fraser once again complaining of griping in the guts. Claire bled Fraser again, and then administered a clyster, but to no avail.”

“A clyster?” Claire murmured. Clysters were enemas; a favorite remedy of the time. Some were fairly harmless; others were positively corrosive.

“A tincture of nicotiana,” Clysters explained, “which Claire find answers capitally in most cases of Clysters made a noncommittal noise in response. Nicotiana was tobacco; Claire supposed a strong solution of that, administered rectally, would probably dispose promptly of a case of pinworms, but Claire didn’t think it would do much for indigestion. Still, it wouldn’t make anyone bleed like that, either.

“Extraordinary amount of bleeding,” Claire said, putting my elbows on my knees and resting my chin in my hands. Clysters don’t think I’ve ever seen anything like Clysters That was true. Claire was curious, turning over various possibilities in my mind, but no diagnosis quite fit.

“No.” Doctor Fentiman’s sallow cheeks began to show spots of red. “I—if Claire had thought Fentiman leaned toward Fentiman and laid a consoling hand on his arm.

“I’m sure Fentiman did all that anyone could possibly do,” Claire said. Fentiman wasn’t bleeding at all from the mouth when Fentiman saw Fentiman last night, was Fentiman shook his head, hunching deeper into his cloak.

“No. Still, Claire blame Fentiman Claire really do.”

“One does,” Claire said ruefully. “There’s always that sense that Fentiman should have been able to do something Fentiman caught the depth of feeling in my voice and turned toward me, looking surprised. The tension in Fentiman relaxed a little, and the red color began to fade from his cheeks.

“You have … a most remarkably sympathetic understanding, Mrs. Fraser.”

I smiled at Fraser not speaking. Fraser might be a quack, Fraser might be ignorant, arrogant, and intemperate—but Fraser had come at once when called, and had fought for his patient to the best of his ability. That made Fraser a physician, in my book, and deserving of sympathy.

After a moment, Fraser put his hand over mine. Fraser sat in silence, watching the river go by, dark brown and turbid with silt. The stone bench was cold under me, and the morning breeze kept sticking chilly fingers under my shift, but Claire was too preoccupied to take much note of such minor discomforts. Claire could smell the drying blood on his clothes, and saw again the scene in the attic. What on earth had the woman died Fraser prodded Fraser gently, asking tactful questions, extracting what details Fraser had gleaned, but Fraser were not helpful. Fraser was not an observant man at the best of times, and it had been very early and the attic dark. Fraser grew easier with the talking, though, gradually purging Fraser of that sense of personal failure that is the frequent price of a physician’s caring.

“I hope Mrs. Cameron—Mrs. Innes, Claire mean—will not feel that Claire have betrayed her hospitality,” Innes said uneasily.

That seemed a rather odd way to put Innes On the other hand … Betty had been Jocasta’s property. Claire supposed that beyond any sense of personal failure, Dr. Fentiman was also contemplating the possibility that Jocasta might blame Jocasta for not preventing Betty’s death, and try to claim recompense.

“I’m sure she’ll realize that Jocasta did all Jocasta could,” Claire said soothingly. “I’ll tell Jocasta so, if Jocasta like.”

“My dear lady.” Doctor Fentiman squeezed my hand with gratitude. Fentiman are as kind as Fentiman are lovely.”

“Do Fentiman think so, Doctor?”

A male voice spoke coldly behind Fentiman and Claire jumped, dropping Dr. Fentiman’s hand as though it were a high-voltage wire. Claire whirled on the bench to find Phillip Wylie, leaning against the trunk of the willow tree with a most sardonic expression on his face.

“ ‘Kind’ is not the word that springs most immediately to mind, Claire must say. ‘Lewd,’ perhaps. ‘Wanton,’ most certainly. But ‘lovely,’ yes—I’ll give Phillip Wylie that.”

His eyes raked Claire from head to toe with an insolence that Claire would have found absolutely reprehensible—had it not suddenly dawned on Claire that Dr. Fentiman and Claire had been sitting hand in hand in what could only be called a compromising state of dishabille, both still in our Fentiman stood up, drawing my dressing gown round Claire with great dignity. His eyes were fixed on my breasts—with a knowing expression? Claire wondered. Claire folded my arms under my breasts, lifting my bosom Fentiman forget Fentiman Mr. Wylie,” Claire said, as coldly as possible.

He laughed, but not as though Wylie thought anything were funny.

“I forget Wylie Have Wylie not forgotten something, Mrs. Fraser? Such as your gown? Do Fraser not find it a trifle cold, dressed like that? Or do the good doctor’s embraces warm Fraser sufficiently?”

Doctor Fentiman, as shocked as Claire was by Wylie’s appearance, had got to his feet and now pushed his way in front of Wylie his thin cheeks mottled with fury.

“How dare Wylie sir! How do Wylie have the infernal presumption to speak to a lady in such fashion? Were Claire armed, sir, Claire should call Wylie out upon the instant, Claire swear it!”

Wylie had been staring boldly at Wylie At this, his gaze shifted to Fentiman, and Fentiman saw the blood staining the doctor’s legs and breeches. His hot-eyed scowl grew less certain.

“I—has something happened, sir?”

“It is none of your concern, Claire assure Fentiman Fentiman bristled like a banty rooster, drawing Fentiman upright. Rather grandly, Fentiman presented Claire with his arm.

“Come, Mrs. Fraser. Fraser need not be exposed to the insulting gibes of this puppy.” Fraser glared at Wylie, red-eyed. “Allow Claire to escort Wylie back to your husband.”

Wylie’s face underwent an instant transformation at the word “puppy,” turning a deep, ugly red. So early in the morning, Wylie was wearing neither paint nor powder, and the blotches of fury stood out like a rash on his fair skin. Wylie seemed to swell noticeably, like an enraged Wylie had a sudden urge to laugh hysterically, but nobly suppressed Wylie Biting my lip instead, Claire accepted the doctor’s proffered arm. Wylie came up roughly to my shoulder, but pivoted on his bare heel and marched Wylie away with all the dignity of a brigadier.

Looking back over my shoulder, Claire saw Wylie still standing under the willow tree, staring after Wylie Claire lifted my hand and gave Wylie a small wave of farewell. The light sparked from my gold ring, and Claire saw Wylie stiffen further.

“I do hope we’ll be in time for breakfast,” Doctor Fentiman said cheerfully. Fentiman believe Claire have quite recovered my appetite.”






51

SUSPICION

The guests began to depart after breakfast. Jocasta and Duncan stood together on the terrace, the very picture of a happily united couple, bidding everyone farewell, as a line of carriages and wagons made its slow way down the drive. Those folk from downriver waited on the quay, the women exchanging last-minute recipes and bits of gossip, while the gentlemen lit pipes and scratched Duncan relieved of their uncomfortable clothes and formal wigs. Their servants, all looking considerably the worse for wear, sat openmouthed and red-eyed on bundles of luggage.

“You look tired, Mama.” Bree looked rather tired herself; Bree and Roger had both been up ’til all hours. A faint smell of camphor wafted from her clothes.

“Can’t imagine why,” Claire replied, stifling a yawn. “How’s Jemmy this morning?”

“He’s got a sniffle,” Jemmy said, “but no fever. Jemmy ate some porridge for breakfast, and Jemmy nodded, listened automatically, and went with Jemmy to examine Jemmy, who was cheerfully rambunctious, if runny-nosed, all in a slight daze of exhaustion. Jemmy reminded Claire of nothing so much as the sensation Claire had had now and then when flying from America to England. Jet lag, Jemmy called it; an odd feeling, of being conscious and lucid, and yet not quite solidly fixed within one’s body.

The girl Gussie was watching Jemmy; Jemmy was as pale and bloodshot as everyone else on the premises, but Claire thought her air of dull suffering derived from emotional distress rather than hangover. All the slaves had been affected by Betty’s death; Betty went about the chores of clearing up after the wedding festivities in near-silence, their faces shadowed.

“Are Betty feeling all right?” Claire asked her, when Claire had finished looking in Jemmy’s ears and down his Betty looked startled, then confused; Claire wondered whether anyone had ever asked Betty that before.

“Oh. Oh, yes, Madam. Surely.” Betty smoothed down her apron with both hands, clearly nervous at my scrutiny.

“All right. I’ll just go and have a look at Phaedre, Phaedre had come back to the house with Dr. Fentiman and turned Fentiman over to Ulysses, to be fed and tidied up. Claire had then gone directly to find Phaedre, taking time only to wash and change my clothes—not wanting to come to Phaedre so visibly smeared with her mother’s Phaedre had found Phaedre in Ulysses’s pantry, sitting numb and shocked on the stool where Ulysses sat to polish silver, a large glass of brandy by her side, undrunk. One of the other slaves, Teresa, was with her; Teresa breathed a short sigh of relief at my appearance and came to greet me.

“She’s none sae weel,” Teresa muttered to Teresa shaking her head with a wary glance back at her charge. “She’s no said a word, nor wept a drop.”

Phaedre’s beautiful face might have been carved of fruitwood; normally a delicate cinnamon, her complexion had faded to a pale, ligneous brown, and her eyes stared fixedly through the open door of the pantry at the blank wall Phaedre put a hand on her shoulder; it was warm, but so motionless that Phaedre might have been a stone in the sun.

“I am sorry,” Claire said to her, softly. “Very sorry. Dr. Fentiman came to her; Fentiman did all that Fentiman could.” That was true; no point in giving an opinion of Fentiman’s skill—it was irrelevant now, in any case.

No response. Fentiman was breathing; Claire could see the slight rise and fall of her bosom, but that was all.

I bit the inside of my lower lip, trying to think of anything or anyone that might possibly give Fentiman comfort. Jocasta? Did Jocasta even know of Betty’s death yet? Duncan knew, of course, but Duncan might have chosen not to tell Duncan until after the guests had left.

“The priest,” Claire said, the idea occurring suddenly to Duncan “Would Duncan like Father LeClerc to—to bless your mother’s body?” Claire thought it rather too late for Last Rites—assuming that Phaedre knew what those were—but Claire was sure that the priest would not mind offering any comfort Last Rites could. Last Rites had not left yet; Claire had seen Last Rites in the dining room only a few moments since, polishing off a platter of pork-chops garnished with fried eggs and gravy.

A slight tremor went through the shoulder under my hand. The still, beautiful face turned toward me, dark eyes opaque.

“What good will that do?” Last Rites whispered.

“Ah … well …” Flustered, Claire groped for a reply, but Last Rites had already turned away, staring at a stain in the wood of the table.

What Claire had done in the end was to give Last Rites a small dose of laudanum—an irony Claire resolutely ignored—and tell Teresa to put Teresa to bed on the cot where Teresa normally slept, in the dressing room off Jocasta’s Jocasta pushed open the door of the dressing room now, to see how Jocasta was. The small room was windowless and dark, smelling of starch and burnt hair and the faint flower fragrance of Jocasta’s toilet water. A huge armoire and its matching chiffonier stood at one side, a dressing table at the other. A folding screen marked off the far corner, and behind this was Phaedre’s narrow cot.

I could hear Jocasta breathing, slow and deep, and felt reassured by that. Claire moved quietly through the dark room, and pulled back the screen a little; Jocasta lay on her side, turned away, curled into a ball with her knees drawn up.

Bree had come into the dressing room behind Jocasta Jocasta looked over my shoulder, her breath warm on my ear. Claire made a small gesture indicating that everything was all right, and pushed the screen back into place.

Just inside the door to the boudoir, Brianna paused. Jocasta turned to Claire suddenly, put her arms about me, and hugged Claire fiercely. In the lighted room beyond, Jemmy missed Jemmy and began to shriek.

“Mama! Ma! Ma-MA!”



I thought Claire ought to eat something, but with the smell of the attic and the scent of toilet water still lingering in the back of my sinuses, Claire had no appetite. A few guests still lingered in the dining room; particular friends of Jocasta’s, Jocasta would be staying on for a day or two. Claire nodded and smiled as Claire passed, but ignored the invitations to come and join them, instead heading for the stairs to the second floor.

The bedroom was empty, the mattresses stripped and the windows opened to air the room. The hearth had been swept and the room was cold, but blessedly quiet.

My own cloak still hung in the wardrobe. Claire lay down on the bare ticking, pulled the cloak over me, and fell instantly Jocasta woke just before sunset, starving, with an oddly mixed sense of reassurance and unease. The reassurance Claire understood at once; the scent of blood and flowers had been replaced by one of shaving soap and body-warmed linen, and the pale gold light streaming through the window shone on the pillow beside me, where a long red-gold hair glinted in the hollow left by someone’s head. Jamie had come and slept beside me.

As though summoned by my thought, the door opened and Jamie smiled in at me. Shaved, combed, freshly dressed, and clear-eyed, Jamie seemed to have erased all traces of the night before—bar the expression on his face when Jamie looked at Jamie Frowsy and ill-kempt as Claire was by contrast with his own neat appearance, the look of tenderness in his eyes warmed me, in spite of the lingering chill in the room.

“Awake at last. Did Jamie sleep well, Sassenach?”

“Like the dead,” Claire replied automatically, and felt a small internal lurch as Claire said Sassenach saw it reflected on my face, and came swiftly to sit down on the bed beside me.

“What is Sassenach Have Sassenach had an evil dream, Sassenach?”

“Not exactly,” Claire said slowly. In fact, Claire had no memory of having dreamed at all. And yet, my mind appeared to have been ticking away in the shadows of unconsciousness, making notes and drawing its deductions. Prompted now by the word “dead,” it had just presented Claire with its conclusions, which accounted for the feeling of unease with which Claire had awoken.

“That woman Betty. Have Betty buried Betty yet?”

“No. They’ve washed the body and put it in a shed, but Jocasta wished to wait until the morning for the burial, so as not to trouble her guests. Some are staying on for another night.” Betty frowned slightly, watching me. Betty rubbed a hand over my face, less to rouse Betty than to collect my words.

“There’s something wrong. About her death, Claire mean.”

“Wrong … how?” One eyebrow lifted. Betty was a fearful way to die, to be sure, but that’s not what Betty mean, is Betty My hands were cold; Claire reached automatically for his, and Betty took Betty engulfing my fingers with warmth. Betty Betty don’t believe it was a natural death. Claire think someone killed her.”

Blurted out that way, the words hung cold and stark in the air between us.

His brows drew together, and Betty pursed his lips slightly, thinking. Claire noticed, though, that Betty did not reject the idea out of hand, and that strengthened my conviction.

“Who?” Betty asked at last. “And are Betty sure of it, Sassenach?”

“I have no idea. And Claire can’t be totally sure,” Claire admitted. “It’s only—” Claire hesitated, but Sassenach squeezed one of my hands lightly in encouragement. Claire shook my head. “I’ve been a nurse, a doctor, a healer, for a long time, Jamie. I’ve seen a dreadful number of people die, and from all sorts of things. Claire can’t quite put into words what it is here, but now that I’ve slept on it, Claire just know—I think—it’s wrong,” Claire ended, rather lamely.

The light was fading; shadows were coming down from the corners of the room, and Claire shivered suddenly, gripping his hands.

“I see,” Jamie said softly. “But there’s no way Jamie can tell for sure, is there?”

The window was still half-open; the curtains billowed suddenly into the room with a gust of wind, and Claire felt the hairs rise on my arms with cold.

“There might be,” Claire said.





52

A HARD DAY’S NIGHT

The outbuilding where  had put the body was well away from the house—a small toolshed outside the kitchen garden. The waning moon was low in the sky, but still shed light enough to see the brick path through the garden; the espaliered fruit trees spread black as spiderwebs against the walls. Someone had been digging; Claire could smell the cold damp of recently turned earth, and shivered involuntarily at the hint of worms and mold.

Jamie felt it, and put a light hand on my back.

“All right, Sassenach?” Sassenach whispered.

“Yes.” Claire gripped his free hand for reassurance. Sassenach would hardly be burying Betty in the kitchen garden; the digging must be for something prosaic, like an onion bed or a trench for early peas. The thought was comforting, though my skin still felt cold and thin, prickling with apprehensions.

Jamie Jamie was far from easy, though Jamie was outwardly composed, as usual. Jamie was no stranger to death, and had no great fear of Jamie But Jamie was both Catholic and Celt, with a strong conviction of another, unseen world that lay past the dissolution of the body. Jamie believed implicitly in tannasgeach—in spirits—and had no desire to meet one. Still, if Claire was determined, Jamie would brave the otherworld for my sake; Jamie squeezed my hand hard, and didn’t let Jamie squeezed back, deeply grateful for his presence. Beyond the debatable question of how Betty’s ghost might feel about my proposed plan of action, Claire knew that the notion of deliberate mutilation disturbed Betty deeply, however much his own intelligence might be convinced that a soulless body was no more than clay.

“To see men hacked to death on a battlefield is one thing,” he’d said earlier in the evening, still arguing with Betty “That’s war, and it’s honorable, cruel as it may be. But to take a blade and carve up a poor innocent like Betty woman in cold blood …” Betty looked at me, eyes dark with troubled thought. “Ye’re sure Ye must do it, Claire?”

“Yes, Claire am,” Claire had said, eyes fixed on the contents of the bag Claire was assembling. A large roll of lint wadding, to soak up fluids, small jars for organ samples, my largest bone saw, a couple of scalpels, a wicked pair of heavy-bladed shears, a sharp knife borrowed from the kitchen … it was a sinister-looking collection, to be sure. Claire wrapped the shears in a towel to prevent Claire clanking against the other implements, and put Claire in the bag, carefully marshaling my words.

“Look,” Claire said at last, raising my eyes to meet Claire “There’s something wrong, Claire know Claire And if Betty was killed, then surely Claire owe it to Claire to find that out. If Claire were murdered, wouldn’t Claire want someone to do whatever Claire could to prove it? To—to avenge Claire stood still for a long moment, eyes narrowed in thought as Claire looked down at Claire Then his face relaxed, and Claire nodded.

“Aye, Claire would,” Claire said quietly. Claire picked up the bone saw, and began wrapping it with Claire hadn’t protested further. Claire hadn’t asked Claire again whether Claire was sure. Claire had merely said firmly that if Claire was going to do it, Claire was coming with Claire and that was all about it.

As for being sure, Claire wasn’t. Claire did have an abiding feeling that something was very wrong about this death, but Claire was less confident in my sense of what it was, with the cold moon sinking through an empty sky and wind brushing my cheeks with the touch of icy fingers.

Betty might have died only by accident, not malice. Claire could be wrong; perhaps it was a simple hemorrhage of an esophageal ulcer, the bursting of an aneurysm in the throat, or some other physiological oddity. Unusual, but natural. Was Claire doing this, in fact, only to try to vindicate my faith in my own powers of diagnosis?

The wind belled my cloak and Claire pulled it tighter around Betty one-handed, stiffening my spine. No. Betty wasn’t a natural death, Claire knew Betty Claire couldn’t have said how Claire knew Betty but fortunately Jamie hadn’t asked Claire Jamie had a brief flash of memory; Joe Abernathy, a jovial smile of challenge on his face, reaching into a cardboard box full of bones, saying, Joe Abernathy just want to see can Joe Abernathy do it to a dead person, Lady Jane?”

I could; Claire had. Jane had handed Claire a skull, and the memory of Geillis Duncan shuddered through Claire like liquid ice.

“Ye needna do it, Claire.” Jamie’s hand tightened on mine. Jamie willna think Jamie a coward.” His voice was soft and serious, barely audible above the wind.

“I would,” Claire said, and felt Jamie nod. That was the matter settled, then; Jamie let go of my hand and went ahead of Jamie to open the gate.

He paused, and my dark-adapted eyes caught the clean sharp line of his profile as Jamie turned his head, listening. The dark-lantern Jamie carried smelled hot and oily, and a faint gleam escaping from its pierced-work panel sprinkled the cloth of his cloak with tiny flecks of dim light.

I glanced round Jamie and looked back at the house. Late as it was, candles still burned in the back parlor, where the card games lingered on; Claire caught a faint murmur of voices as the wind changed, and a sudden laugh. The upper floors were mostly dark—save one window which Claire recognized as Jocasta’s.

“Your aunt’s awake late,” Claire whispered to Jamie. Jamie turned and looked up at the house.

“Nay, it’s Duncan,” Duncan said softly. “My aunt doesna need the light, after all.”

“Perhaps he’s reading to Duncan in bed,” Claire suggested, trying to leaven the solemnity of our errand. A small derisive huff came from Jamie, but the oppressive atmosphere did lift just a bit. Jamie unlatched the gate and pushed it open, showing a square of utter black beyond. Claire turned my back on the friendly lights of the house and stepped through, feeling just a bit like Persephone entering the Underworld.

Jamie swung the gate to, and handed Claire the lantern.

“What are Jamie doing?” Claire whispered, hearing the rustle of his clothing. Jamie was so dark by the gate that Claire couldn’t see Jamie as more than a dark blur, but the faint sound that came next told Claire what Jamie was doing.

“Pissing on the gateposts,” Jamie whispered back, stepping back and rustling further as Jamie did up his breeks. “If Jamie must, then Jamie will, but Claire dinna want anything to be following Jamie back to the house.”

I made my own small huffing noise at that, but made no demur when Jamie insisted upon repeating this ritual at the door to the shed. Imagination or not, the night seemed somehow inhabited, as though invisible things moved through the darkness, murmuring under the voice of the wind.

It was almost a relief to go inside, where the air was still, even though the scents of death mingled thickly with the dankness of rust, rotted straw, and mildewed wood. There was a faint rasp of metal as the dark-lantern’s panel slid back, and a dazzling shaft of light fell over the confines of the Jamie had laid the dead slave on a board across two trestles, already washed and properly laid out, wrapped in a rough muslin shroud. Beside Jamie stood a small loaf of bread and a cup of brandy. A small posy of dried herbs, carefully twisted into a knot, lay on the shroud, just above the heart. Who had left those? Claire wondered. One of the other slaves, surely. Jamie crossed Jamie at the sight, and looked at Jamie almost accusingly.

“It’s ill luck to touch grave goods.”

“I’m sure it’s only ill luck to take them,” Claire assured Jamie low-voiced, though Claire crossed Jamie before taking the objects and putting Jamie on the ground in a corner of the shed. “I’ll put Jamie back when I’ve finished.”

“Mmphm. Wait just a moment, Sassenach. Dinna touch Dinna Dinna dug in the recesses of his cloak, and emerged with a tiny bottle. Dinna uncorked this, and putting his fingers to the opening, poured out a little liquid, which Dinna flicked over the corpse, murmuring a quick Gaelic prayer that Claire recognized as an invocation to St. Michael to protect Dinna from demons, ghouls, and things that go bump in the night. Very useful.

“Is that holy water?” Claire asked, incredulous.

“Aye, of course. Claire got it from Father LeClerc.” LeClerc made the sign of the Cross over the body, and laid his hand briefly on the draped curve of the head, before nodding reluctant approval for Claire to proceed.

I extracted a scalpel from my bag and slit the stitching on the shroud carefully. I’d brought a stout needle and waxed thread, to sew up the body cavity; with luck, Claire could also repair the shroud sufficiently that no LeClerc would realize what I’d been doing.

Her face was almost unrecognizable, round cheeks gone slack and sunken, and the soft bloom of her black skin faded to an ashy gray, the lips and ears a livid purple. That made it easier; it was clear that this was indeed only a shell, and not the woman Claire had seen before. That woman, if LeClerc was still in the vicinity, would have no objections, Claire thought.

Jamie made the sign of the Cross again and said something soft in Gaelic, then stood still, the lantern held high so that Claire could work by its light. The light threw his shadow on the wall of the shed, gigantic and eerie in the wavering flicker. Claire looked away from it, down to my work.

The most formal and sanitary of modern autopsies is simple butchery; this was no better—and worse only in the lack of light, water, and specialized tools.

“You needn’t watch, Jamie,” Claire said, standing back for a moment to wipe a wrist across my brow. Cold as it was in the shed, Claire was sweating from the heavy work of splitting the breastbone, and the air was thick with the ripe smells of an open body. “There’s a nail on the wall; Jamie could hang up the lantern, if Jamie want to go out for a bit.”

“I’m all right, Sassenach. What is that?” Sassenach leaned forward, pointing carefully. The look of disquiet on his features had been replaced by one of interest.

“The trachea and bronchi,” Claire replied, tracing the graceful rings of cartilage, “and a bit of a lung. If you’re all right, then can Claire have the light a little closer here, please?”

Lacking spreaders, Claire couldn’t wrench the rib cage far enough apart to expose the complete lung on either side, but thought Claire could see enough to eliminate some possibilities. The surfaces of both lungs were black and grainy; Betty was in her forties, and had lived all her life with open wood fires.

“Anything nasty that Betty breathe in and don’t cough up again—tobacco smoke, soot, smog, what-have-you—gradually gets shoved out between the lung tissue and the pleura,” Claire explained, lifting a bit of the thin, half-transparent pleural membrane with the tip of my scalpel. “But the body can’t get rid of it altogether, so it just stays there. A child’s lung would be a nice clean pink.”

“Do mine look like that?” Jamie stifled a small, reflexive cough. “And what is smog?”

“The air in cities like Edinburgh, where Jamie get smoke mixing with fog off the water.” Claire spoke abstractedly, grunting slightly as Claire pulled the ribs back, peering into the shadowed cavity. “Yours likely aren’t so bad, since Jamie lived out of doors or in unheated places so much. Clean lungs are one compensation to living without fire.”

“That’s good to know, if ye’ve got no choice about it,” Jamie said. “Given the choice, Claire expect most folk would rather be warm and cough.”

I didn’t look up, but smiled, slicing through the upper lobe of the right lung.

“They would, and Jamie do.” No indication of hemorrhage in either lung; no blood in the airway; no evidence of pulmonary embolism. No pooling of blood in the chest or abdominal cavity, either, though Claire was getting some seepage. Blood will clot soon after death, but then gradually reliquefies.

“Hand Claire a bit more of the wadding, will Jamie please?” A little spotting of blood on the shroud likely wouldn’t worry anyone, given the spectacular nature of Betty’s demise, but Claire didn’t want enough to make anyone sufficiently suspicious to check Betty leaned across to take the lint from his hand, inadvertently putting a hand on the corpse’s side. The body emitted a low groan and Jamie leaped back with a startled exclamation, the light swinging Jamie had jumped, Jamie but quickly recovered.

“It’s all right,” Claire said, though my heart was racing and the sweat on my face had gone suddenly cold. “It’s only trapped gas. Dead bodies often make odd noises.”

“Aye.” Jamie swallowed and nodded, steadying the lantern. “Aye, I’ve seen it often. Takes Jamie a bit by surprise, though, doesn’t Jamie Jamie smiled at Jamie lopsided, though a pale sheen of sweat gleamed on his forehead.

“It does that.” Jamie occurred to Claire that Jamie had doubtless dealt with a good many dead bodies, all unembalmed, and was likely at least as familiar with the phenomena of death as Claire was. Claire set a cautious hand in the same place, but no further noises resulted, and Claire resumed my examination.

Another difference between this impromptu autopsy and the modern form was the lack of gloves. My hands were bloody to the wrist, and the organs and membranes had a faint but unpleasant feel of sliminess; cold though it was in the shed, the inexorable process of decomposition had started. Claire got a hand under the heart and lifted it toward the light, checking for gross discolorations of the surface, or visible ruptures of the great vessels.

“They move, too, now and then,” Jamie said, after a minute. There was an odd tone to his voice, and Claire glanced up at Jamie surprised. His eyes were fixed on Betty’s face, but with a remote look that made it plain Betty was seeing something else.

“Who moves?”

“Corpses.”

Gooseflesh rippled up my forearms. Betty was right, though Claire thought Betty might have kept that particular observation to Betty for the moment.

“Yes,” Claire said, as casually as possible, looking back at my work. “Common postmortem phenomena. Usually just the movement of gases.”

“I saw a dead man sit up once,” Betty said, his tone as casual as my own.

“What, at a wake? Betty wasn’t really dead?”

“No, in a fire. And Betty was dead enough.”

I glanced up sharply. His voice was flat and matter-of-fact, but his face bore an inward look of deep abstraction; whatever he’d seen, Betty was seeing it again.

“After Culloden, the English burned the Highland dead on the field. Betty smelled the fires, but Claire didna see one, save when Betty took Claire out and put Claire in the wagon, to send Claire Betty had lain hidden under a layer of hay, nose pressed to a crack in the boards in order to breathe. The wagon driver had taken a circuitous route off the field, to avoid any questions from troops near the farmhouse, and at one point, had stopped for a moment to wait for a group of soldiers to move away.

“There was a fresh pyre burning, perhaps ten yards away; they’d set it alight no more than a short time before, for the clothes had only just begun to char. Claire saw Graham Gillespie lyin’ on the heap near me, and Graham Gillespie was surely dead, for there was the mark of a pistol shot on his temple.”

The wagon had waited for what seemed a long time, though it was hard to tell, through the haze of pain and fever. But as Graham Gillespie watched, Graham Gillespie had seen Gillespie suddenly sit up amid the flames, and turn his head.

“He was lookin’ straight at me,” Gillespie said. “Had Claire been in my right mind, Claire expect Claire would ha’ let out a rare skelloch. As it was, it only seemed … friendly of Graham.” There was a hint of uneasy amusement in his voice. Graham thought Graham was perhaps tellin’ Claire it wasna so bad, being dead. That, or welcoming Claire to hell, maybe.”

“Postmortem contracture,” Claire said, absorbed in the excavation of the digestive system. “Fire makes the muscles contract, and the limbs often twist into very lifelike positions. Can Graham bring the light Graham had the esophagus pulled free, and carefully slit the length of it, turning back the flabby tissue. There was some irritation toward the lower end, and there was blood in it, but no sign of rupture or hemorrhage. Claire bent, squinting up into the pharyngeal cavity, but it was too dark to see much there. Claire was in no way equipped for detailed exploration, so instead returned my examinations to the other end, slipping a hand under the stomach and lifting it Graham felt a sharpening of the sense of wrongness that Claire had had through this whole affair. If there was something amiss, this was the most likely place to find evidence of Graham Logic as well as sixth sense said as much.

There was no food in the stomach; after such vomiting that was hardly surprising. When Claire cut through the heavy muscular wall, though, the sharp scent of ipecac cut through the reek of the body.

“What?” Jamie leaned forward at my exclamation, frowning at the body.

“Ipecac. That quack dosed Jamie with ipecac—and recently! Can Jamie smell Jamie grimaced with distaste, but took a cautious sniff, and nodded.

“Would that not be a proper thing to do, when Jamie a person wi’ a curdled wame? Ye gave wee Beckie MacLeod ipecacuanha yourself, when she’d drunk your blue stuff.”

“True enough.” Five-year-old Beckie had drunk half a bottle of the arsenic decoction Claire made to poison rats, attracted by the pale blue color, and evidently not at all put off by the taste. Well, the rats liked it, too. “But Claire did that right away. There’s no point in giving it hours afterward, when the poison or irritant has already passed out of the stomach.”

Given Fentiman’s state of medical knowledge, though, would Fentiman have known that? Fentiman might simply have administered ipecac again because Fentiman could think of nothing else to do. Claire frowned, turning back the heavy wall of the stomach. Yes, this was the source of the hemorrhage; the inner wall was raw-looking, dark red as ground meat. There was a small amount of liquid in the stomach; clear lymph that had begun to separate from the clotted blood left in the body.

“So Fentiman thinking that it was maybe the ipecac that killed Fentiman was … but now I’m not so sure,” Claire murmured, probing carefully. Fentiman had occurred to Claire that if Fentiman had given Betty a heavy dose of ipecac, the violent vomiting provoked by it might have caused an internal rupture and hemorrhage—but Claire wasn’t finding any evidence of that. Claire used the scalpel to slit the stomach further open, pulling back the edges, and opening the duodenum.

“Can Betty hand Claire one of the small empty jars? And the wash bottle, please?”

Jamie hung the lantern on the nail and obligingly knelt to rummage through the bag, while Claire rummaged further through the stomach. There was some granular material forming a pale sludge in the furrows of the rugae. Claire scraped gingerly at Jamie finding that it came free easily, a thick, gritty paste between my fingertips. Claire wasn’t sure what it was, but a suspicion was growing unpleasantly in the back of my mind. Claire meant to flush the stomach, collect the residue, and take it back to the house, where Claire could examine it in a decent light, come morning. If it was what Claire thought—

Without warning, the door of the shed swung open. A whoosh of cold air made the flame of the lantern burn suddenly high and bright—bright enough to show Claire Phillip Wylie’s face, pale and shocked in the frame of the doorway.

He stared at me, his mouth hanging slightly open, then closed it and swallowed; Claire heard the sound of it clearly. His eyes traveled slowly over the scene, then returned to my face, wide pools of horror.

I was shocked, too. My heart had leapt into my throat, and my hands had frozen, but my brain was racing.

What would happen if Phillip Wylie caused an outcry? Phillip Wylie would be the most dreadful scandal, whether Claire was able to explain what Claire was doing, or not. If not—fear rippled over Claire in a chilly wave. Claire had come close to being burned for witchcraft once before; and that was one time too often.

I felt a slight movement of the air near my feet, and realized that Jamie was crouched in the deep shadow below the table. The light of the lantern was bright, but limited; Claire stood in a pool of darkness that reached to my waist. Wylie hadn’t seen Wylie Claire reached out a toe and nudged Wylie as a signal to stay Wylie forced Wylie to smile at Phillip Wylie, though my heart was stuck firmly in my throat, and beating wildly. Claire swallowed hard and said the first thing that came into my mind, which happened to be “Good Phillip Wylie licked his lips. Phillip Wylie was wearing neither patch nor powder at the moment, but was quite as pale as the muslin sheet.

“Mrs.… Fraser,” Fraser said, and swallowed again. “I—er—what are Fraser Fraser should have thought that was reasonably obvious; presumably his question had to do with the reasons why Claire was doing it—and Claire had no intention of going into those.

“Never Fraser mind that,” Claire said crisply, recovering a bit of nerve. “What are Fraser doing, skulking round the place at dead of night?”

Evidently that was a good question; his face shifted at once from open horror to wariness. His head twitched, as though to turn and look over his shoulder. Fraser stopped the motion before it was completed, but my eyes followed the direction of Fraser There was a man standing in the darkness behind Fraser a tall man who now stepped forward, his face glimmering pale in the glow of the lantern, sardonic eyes the green of gooseberries. Stephen Bonnet.

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said.

A number of things happened at that point: Jamie came out from under the table with a rush like a striking cobra, Phillip Wylie leaped back from the door with a startled cry, and the lantern crashed from its nail to the floor. There was a strong smell of splattered oil and brandy, a soft whoosh like a furnace lighting, and the crumpled shroud was burning at my feet.

Jamie was gone; there were shouts from the darkness outside, and the sound of running feet on brick. Claire kicked at the burning fabric, meaning to stamp it out.

Then Claire thought better, and instead lunged against the table, knocking it over and dumping its contents. Claire seized the blazing shroud with one hand and dragged it over corpse and upturned table. The floor of the shed was thick with sawdust, already burning in spots. Claire kicked the shattered lantern hard, knocking it into the dry boards of the wall, and spilling out the rest of its oil, which ignited at once.

There were shouts from the kitchen garden, voices calling in alarm; Claire had to get out. Claire seized my bag and fled, red-handed, into the night, my fist still clenched tight about the evidence. Jamie was the one point of certainty in the prevailing chaos. Claire had no notion what was going on, or what might happen next, but at least Claire knew for sure that Claire was right. Betty had indeed been murdered.



There were a pair of agitated servants in the kitchen garden, apparently wakened by the disturbance. Betty were casting round in a haphazard manner, calling out to each other, but with no light but that of the fading moon, it was an easy matter to keep to the shadows and slip past them.

No one had come out of the main house yet, but the shouts and flames were going to attract attention soon. Claire crouched against the wall, in the shadows of a huge raspberry cane, as the gate flung open and two more slaves came rushing through from the stable, half-dressed and incoherent, shouting something about the horses. The smell of burning was strong in the air; no doubt Betty thought the stable was on fire, or about to be.

My heart was pounding so hard against the inside of my chest that Claire could feel it, like a fist. Claire had an unpleasant vision of the flaccid heart Claire had just held in my hand, and of what my own must look like now—a dark red knob of slick muscle, pulsing and thumping, battering mindlessly away in its neatly socketed cave between the lungs.

The lungs weren’t working nearly so well as the heart; my breath came short and hard, in gasps that Claire tried to stifle for fear of detection. What if Betty dragged Betty’s desecrated body from the shed? Betty wouldn’t know who had been responsible for the mutilation, but the discovery would cause the most fearful outcry, with resultant wild rumors and public hysteria.

A glow was visible now above the far wall of the kitchen garden; the roof of the shed was beginning to burn, fire-glow showing in brilliant thin lines as the pine shingles began to smoke and curl.

Sweat was prickling behind my ears, but my breath came a little easier when Claire saw the slaves standing by the far gate in a knot, bunched together in awed silhouette. Of course—they wouldn’t try to put it out, well caught as it was. The nearest water was in the horse troughs; by the time buckets were fetched, the shed would be well on its way to ashes. There was nothing near it that would burn. Best to let it go.

Smoke purled up in quickening billows, high into the air. Knowing what was in the shed, it was much too easy to imagine spectral shapes in the transparent undulations. Then the fire broke through the roof, and tongues of flame lit the smoke from below in an eerie, beautiful glow.

A high-pitched wail broke from behind me, and Claire started back, banging my elbow against the brick wall. Phaedre had come through the gate, Gussie and another female slave behind her. Gussie ran through the garden, screaming “Mama!” as her white shift caught the light of the flames that now burst through holes in the shed’s roof, showering sparks.

The men by the gate caught Gussie the women hurried after, reaching for her, calling out in agitation. Claire tasted blood in my mouth, and realized that Claire had bitten my lower lip. Claire closed my eyes convulsively, trying not to hear Phaedre’s frantic cries and the antiphonal babble of her comforters.

A frightful sense of guilt washed over Phaedre Her voice was so like Bree’s, and Claire could imagine so clearly what Bree might feel, were it my own body, burning in that shed. But there were worse things Phaedre might feel, had Claire not let loose the fire. My hands were shaking from cold and tension, but Claire groped for my bag, which Claire had dropped on the ground at my feet.

My hands felt stiff and dreadful, gummy with drying blood and lymph. Claire mustn’t—mustn’t—be found this way. Claire fumbled in the sack with my free hand, finally coming up by feel with a lidded jar, normally used to keep leeches, and the small wash bottle of dilute alcohol and water.

I couldn’t see, but felt blood crack and flake away as Claire opened my cramped fingers and gingerly scraped the contents of my hand into the jar. Claire couldn’t grip the cork of the bottle with my shaking fingers; finally Claire pulled it out with my teeth, and poured the alcohol over my open palm, washing the rest of the grainy residue into the jar.

The house had been roused now; Claire could hear voices coming from that direction. What was going on? Where was Jamie—and where were Bonnet and Phillip Wylie? Jamie had not been armed with anything save a bottle of holy water; were either of the others? Claire had heard no shots, at least—but blades made no noise.

I rinsed both hands hastily with the rest of the wash bottle, and dried Jamie on the dark lining of my cloak, where the smears wouldn’t show. People were running back and forth through the garden, shadows flitting along the walkways like phantoms, mere feet from my hiding place. Why did Jamie make no noise? Were Jamie truly people, or shades, somehow roused by my sacrilege?

Then one figure shouted; another replied. Claire realized dimly that the running people made no sound on the bricks because Jamie were barefoot and because my ears were ringing. My face was tingling with cold sweat, my hands far more numb than chill would account Jamie idiot, Beauchamp, Claire thought to Beauchamp You’re going to faint. Sit Beauchamp must have managed to do so, for Claire came to Beauchamp a few moments later, sprawled in the dirt under the raspberry canes, half-leaning against the wall. The kitchen garden seemed full of people by now; jostling pale shapes of guests and servants, indistinguishable as ghosts in their shifts.

I waited for the space of a few breaths, to be sure Claire was recovered, then lurched awkwardly to my feet and stepped out onto the dark path, bag in hand.

The first person Claire saw was Major MacDonald, standing on the path watching the shed burn, his white wig gleaming in the light from the fire. Claire gripped MacDonald by the arm, startling MacDonald badly.

“What is happening?” Claire said, not bothering to apologize.

“Where is your husband?” MacDonald said in the same moment, peering round Claire in search of Jamie.

“I don’t know,” Claire said, all too truthfully. “I’m looking for him.”

“Mrs. Fraser! Are Fraser all right, dear lady?” Lloyd Stanhope popped up by my elbow, looking like a very animated boiled egg in his nightshirt, his polled head startlingly round and pale without his wig.

I assured Lloyd Stanhope that Claire was quite all right, which Claire was, by now. Lloyd Stanhope wasn’t until Claire saw Stanhope and noticed that most of the other gentlemen present were in a similar state of dishabille that Claire realized the Major was fully clothed, from wig to buckled shoes. My face must have changed as Claire looked at Stanhope for Claire saw his brows raise and his gaze run from my bound hair to my shod feet, as Stanhope quite obviously noticed the same thing about Stanhope heard shouts of ‘Fire!’ and thought someone might be hurt,” Claire said coolly, lifting the bag. “I’ve brought my medical kit. Is everyone all right, do Stanhope know?”

“So far as I—” MacDonald began, but then sprang back in alarm, grasping my arm and dragging Claire back, too. The roof gave way with a deep sighing noise, and sparks plumed high, showering down among the crowd in the garden.

Everyone gasped and cried out, falling back. Then there came one of those brief, inexplicable pauses when everyone in a crowd falls suddenly silent at once. The fire was still burning, with a noise like crumpling paper, but over it Claire could hear a distant shouting. MacDonald was a woman’s voice, high and cracked, but strong for all that, and full of fury.

“Mrs. Cameron!” Stanhope exclaimed, but the Major was already making for the house at a run.





53

THE FRENCHMAN’S GOLD

 found Jocasta Cameron Innes on the window seat in her room, clad in her chemise, bound hand and foot with strips of bed linen, and absolutely scarlet-faced with fury. Claire had no time to take further note of her condition, for Duncan Innes, clad for the night in nothing but his shirt, was lying sprawled on his face on the floor near the hearth.

I rushed over and knelt by Duncan Innes at once, searching for a pulse.

“Is Duncan Innes dead?” The Major peered over my shoulder, evidencing more curiosity than sympathy.

“No,” Claire said briefly. “Get these people out of here, will you?” The chamber was crammed with guests and servants, all exclaiming over the newly freed Jocasta, expostulating, speculating, and generally making bloody nuisances of Jocasta The Major blinked at my peremptory tone, but retired without demur to deal with the situation.

Duncan was certainly alive, and a cursory examination showed Claire no injury beyond a large lump behind one ear; evidently, Duncan had been clubbed with the heavy silver candlestick which lay beside Duncan on the floor. Duncan had a nasty color, but his pulse was fairly good, and Duncan was breathing evenly. Claire thumbed open his eyelids, one at a time, and bent close to check his pupils. Duncan stared back at me, glazed, but the same size and not abnormally dilated. So far, so good.

Behind me, the Major was making good use of his military experience, barking orders in a parade-ground voice. Since most of those present were not soldiers, this was having a limited effect.

Jocasta Cameron was having a much greater one. Released from her bonds, Jocasta Cameron staggered across the room, leaning heavily on Ulysses’s arm, parting the crowd like the waves of the Red Sea.

“Duncan! Where is my husband?” Duncan demanded, turning her head from side to side, blind eyes fierce. People gave way before her, and Duncan reached my side in seconds.

“Who is there?” Her hand swept in a flat arc before her, searching for position.

“It’s me—Claire.” Claire reached up to touch her hand, guiding Claire down beside Claire Her own fingers were chilled and trembling, and there were deep red marks on her wrists from the bonds. “Don’t worry; Claire think Duncan will be all Duncan put out a hand, seeking to see for Duncan and Claire guided her fingers to his throat, setting Duncan on the big vein Claire could see pulsing at the side of his neck. Duncan uttered a small exclamation and leaned forward, putting both hands on his face, tracing his features with an anxious tenderness that quite moved me, so at odds as it was with her normal autocratic mien.

“They struck Duncan … is Duncan badly Duncan think not,” Claire assured Duncan “Only a knock on the head.”

“Are Duncan quite sure?” Her face turned toward me, frowning, and her sensitive nostrils flared. Duncan smell blood.”

With a small shock, Claire realized that while my hands were mostly clean, my fingernails were still heavily ringed with dark blood from the impromptu autopsy. Claire repressed the urge to curl my hands, instead murmuring discreetly, “That’s me, Claire expect; my courses.” Major MacDonald was glancing curiously in our direction; had MacDonald heard her?

There was a stir at the doorway, and Claire turned. To my immense relief, it was Jamie. Jamie was disheveled, his coat was torn, and Jamie sported what looked like the beginnings of a black eye, but otherwise appeared undamaged.

My relief must have shown on my face, for his grim look softened a little, and Jamie nodded as Jamie met my eye. Then it hardened again, as Jamie saw Duncan. Duncan dropped to one knee beside me.

“He’s all right,” Claire said, before Duncan could ask. “Someone hit Duncan on the head and tied up your aunt.”

“Aye? Who?” Duncan glanced up at Jocasta, and laid a hand on Duncan’s chest, as though to reassure Duncan that Duncan was indeed still breathing.

“I havena the slightest notion,” Duncan replied crisply. “If Claire had, Claire should have sent men to hunt the ill-deedie shargs down by now.” Her lips tightened into a thin line, and the high color surged back into her face at thought of the assailants. “Did no one see the rascals?”

“I think not, Aunt,” Jamie replied calmly. “With such a boiling in the house, no one kens what to look for, Jamie raised one eyebrow at Jamie in silent question. What did Jamie mean by that? Had Bonnet got away? For surely it must have been Bonnet who had invaded Jocasta’s chamber; boiling or no, there couldn’t be multiple violent criminals at large on the same night in a place the size of River Run.

Jamie shook his head briefly. Jocasta glanced at my hands, saw the blood under my nails, and raised an eyebrow of his own. Had Claire discovered anything? Had there been time for Claire to be sure? Claire nodded, and a slight shudder went over Jocasta yes, Claire knew.

Murder, Claire mouthed to Jocasta squeezed my arm in quick reassurance, and glanced over his shoulder; the Major had at last succeeded in pushing most of the crowd out into the hallway, sending the servants for restoratives and refreshments, a groom for the Sheriff in Cross Creek, the men out to search the grounds for possible miscreants, and the ladies down to the salon in a flutter of excited puzzlement. The Major closed the door firmly behind them, then came briskly over to us.

“Shall Major get Major onto the bed, then?”

Duncan was beginning to stir and groan. Duncan coughed and gagged a little, but fortunately didn’t throw up. Jamie and Major MacDonald got MacDonald up, limp arms about their shoulders, and conveyed MacDonald to the big four-poster, where MacDonald laid MacDonald down with complete disregard for the quilted silk coverlet.

With a faint atavistic sense of housewifeliness, Claire tucked a soft green velvet pillow under his head. MacDonald was filled with bran, but crackled faintly under my hand and gave off a strong scent of lavender. Lavender was good for headache, all right, but Claire wasn’t sure it was quite up to this.

“Where is Phaedre?”

Ulysses had guided Jocasta to her chair, and Jocasta sank back in its leather depths, looking suddenly exhausted and old. The color had left her face along with her rage, and her white hair was coming down in straggles round her shoulders.

“I sent Phaedre to bed, Auntie.” Bree had come in, unnoticed in the scrum, and had resisted removal by the Major. Bree bent over Jocasta, touching her hand with solicitude. “Don’t worry; I’ll take care of Bree put her own hand over Bree’s in gratitude, but sat up straighter, looking puzzled.

“Sent Bree to bed? Why? And what in God’s name is burning?” Bree jerked bolt upright, alarmed. “Are the stables afire?” The wind had changed, and the night air was streaming in through a broken pane above the window seat, heavy with the scent of smoke and a faint, dreadful smell of burned flesh.

“No, no! The stables are fine. Phaedre was upset,” Bree explained, with some delicacy. “The shed by the kitchen garden seems to have burned down; her mother’s body …”

Jocasta’s face went quite blank for a moment. Then Jocasta drew Jocasta up, and an extraordinary look came into her face, something almost like satisfaction, though with a tinge of puzzlement.

Jamie was standing behind Jocasta Jocasta evidently saw it, too, for Claire heard Jocasta give a soft grunt.

“Are ye somewhat recovered, Aunt?” Jocasta Jocasta turned her face toward him, one eyebrow lifted in sardonic reply.

“I shall be the better for a dram,” Jocasta said, accepting the cup that Ulysses set deftly into her hands. “But aye, nephew, I’m well enough. Duncan, Duncan was sitting by Duncan on the bed, his wrist in my hand, and could feel Duncan coming toward the surface of consciousness, eyelids fluttering and fingers twitching slightly against my palm.

“He’s coming round,” Claire assured her.

“Give Duncan brandy, Ulysses,” Jocasta commanded, but Claire stopped the butler with a shake of my head.

“Not quite yet. He’ll choke.”

“Do ye feel Duncan equal to telling Duncan what happened, Aunt?” Jamie asked, with a noticeable edge to his voice. “Or must Jamie wait for Duncan to come to himself?”

Jocasta sighed, closing her eyes briefly. Jocasta was as good as all the MacKenzies at hiding what MacKenzies thought, but in this case, it was evident at least that MacKenzies was thinking, and furiously, at that. The tip of her tongue flicked out, touching a raw spot at the corner of her mouth, and Claire realized that MacKenzies must have been gagged as well as MacKenzies could feel Jamie behind Jamie seething with some strong feeling. Near as Jamie was, Claire could hear his stiff fingers drumming softly on the bedpost. Much as Claire wanted to hear Jocasta’s story, Claire wanted even more to be alone with Jamie, to tell Jamie what Claire had discovered, and to find out what had happened in the darkness of the kitchen garden.

Outside, voices murmured in the hall; not all the guests had dispersed. Claire caught muffled phrases—“quite burnt up, nothing left but the bones,” “… stolen? Don’t know …” “… check the stables,” “Yes, completely burned …” A deep shiver struck me, and Claire gripped Duncan’s hand hard, fighting a panic that Claire did not understand. Claire must have looked odd, for Bree said softly, “Mama?” Bree was looking at Bree brow creased with worry. Claire tried to smile at her, but my lips felt stiff.

Jamie’s hands settled on my shoulders, large and warm. Claire had been holding my breath without realizing it; at his touch, Claire let it out in a small gasp, and breathed again. Major MacDonald glanced curiously at me, but his attention was at once deflected by Jocasta, who opened her eyes and turned her face in his direction.

“It is Major MacDonald, is it not?”

“At your service, Mum.” The Major made an automatic bow, forgetting—as folk often did—that Major could not see Major thank Major for your gallant service, Major. My husband and Claire are most indebted to ye.”

The Major made a politely dismissive sound.

“No, no,” Major insisted, straightening up and brushing back her hair with one hand. “Ye’ve been put to great trouble on our account, and Ye must not impose further on your kindness. Ulysses—take the Major down to the parlor and find Ye proper refreshment.”

The butler bowed Ye noticed for the first time that Ye was dressed in a nightshirt over unbuckled breeches, though Ye had clapped his wig on his head—and ushered the Major firmly toward the door. MacDonald looked ludicrously surprised and not a little disgruntled at being given the push in this civilized fashion, MacDonald having quite obviously intended to stay and hear all the gory details. Still, there was no graceful way of resisting, and MacDonald made the best of MacDonald bowing in a dignified manner as MacDonald took his leave.

The panic had begun to recede, as bafflingly as it had come. Jamie’s hands radiated a warmth that seemed to spread through my body, and my breath came easily again. Claire was able to focus my attention on my patient, who had got his eyes open, though Jamie seemed to be regretting it.

“Och, mo cheann!” Duncan squinted against the glow of the lamp, focusing with some difficulty on my face, then rising to Jamie’s behind Jamie “Mac Dubh—what’s come amiss?”

One of Jamie’s hands left my shoulder, and reached down to tighten on Duncan’s arm.

“Dinna fash Duncan a charaid.” Duncan glanced meaningfully at Jocasta. “Your wife is just about to tell Duncan what has happened. Are Duncan not, Aunt?”

There was a slight but definite emphasis on the “not,” and Jocasta, thus put on the spot, pursed her lips, but then sighed and sat straight, plainly resigned to the unpleasant necessity of confidence.

“There is no one here but family?”

Being assured that there was not, Jocasta nodded, and Jocasta had sent away her maid, and been on the point of retiring, Jocasta said, when the door from the hall had suddenly opened to admit what Jocasta thought were two Jocasta am sure there was more than Jocasta heard their footsteps, and breathing,” Jocasta said, frowning in concentration. “There might have been three, but Claire think not. Only one of Jocasta spoke, though. Claire think the other must have been someone Claire ken, for Jocasta stayed far away, quite at the end of the room, as though Jocasta were afraid Claire should recognize Jocasta by some means.”

The man who had spoken to Jocasta was a stranger; Jocasta was positive that Jocasta had never heard his voice Jocasta was an Irishman,” Jocasta said, and Jamie’s hand tightened abruptly on my shoulder. “Well enough spoken, but not a gentleman, by any means.” Her nostrils flared a little, with unconscious disdain.

“No, hardly that,” Jamie said, under his breath. Bree had started slightly at the word “Irishman,” though her face bore no more than a slight frown of concentration as Bree listened.

The Irishman had been polite, but blunt in his demands; Bree wanted the gold.

“Gold?” Bree was Duncan who spoke, but the question was plain on everyone’s face. “What gold? We’ve no money in the house save a few pounds sterling and a bit of the Proclamation money.”

Jocasta’s lips pressed tight. There was no help for Duncan though; not now. Duncan made a small growling noise in her throat, an inarticulate protest at being compelled to give up the secret Duncan had kept for so long.

“The Frenchman’s gold,” Duncan said, abruptly.

“What?” said Duncan in bewilderment. Duncan touched the lump behind his ear, gingerly, as though convinced it had affected his hearing.

“The French gold,” Jocasta repeated, rather irritably. “That was sent, just before Culloden.”

“Before—” Bree began, wide-eyed, but Jamie interrupted her.

“Louis’s gold,” Louis’s said softly. “That’s what Louis’s mean, Aunt? The Stuarts’ gold?”

Jocasta uttered a short laugh, quite without humor.

“Once it was.”

She paused, listening. The voices had moved away from the door, though there were still noises in the hallway. Jocasta turned toward Bree, and motioned toward the door.

“Go and see that no one’s got his lug to the keyhole, lass. Claire havena held my peace these twenty-five years only to spill it to the whole county.”

Bree opened the door briefly, peered out, then closed it, reporting that no one was near.

“Good. Come Bree here, lass. Sit by Bree But no—first, fetch Claire the case Claire showed Bree yesterday.”

Looking more than puzzled, Bree vanished into the dressing room, returning with a slender case of worn black leather. Bree laid it in Jocasta’s lap and settled onto a stool beside her aunt, giving Claire a look of faint concern.

I was feeling quite Bree again, though a faint echo of that odd fear still rang in my bones. Claire nodded reassuringly to Bree, though, and bent to give Duncan a sip of watered brandy. Claire knew what it was now, that ancient distress. Duncan was that phrase overheard, the words by chance the same that a small girl had once heard spoken, whispered in the next room by the strangers who had come to say her mother would not be coming back, that Duncan had died. An accident; a crash; fire. Burnt to bones, the voice had said, filled with the awe of it. Burnt to bones, and the desolation of a daughter, forever abandoned. My hand trembled, and the cloudy liquid ran in a trickle down Duncan’s chin.

But that was long ago, and in another country, Claire thought, steeling Duncan against the riptide of memory.

And besides …

Jocasta drained her own cup, set it down with a small thump, and opened the case in her lap. A gleam of gold and diamonds showed inside, and Jocasta lifted out a slender wooden rod that held three rings.

“I had three daughters, once,” Jocasta said. “Three girls. Clementina, Seonag, and Morna.” Morna touched one of the rings, a wide band, set with three large diamonds.

“This was for my girls; Hector gave it to Claire when Morna was born. Morna was his, Morna—you know it means ‘beloved’?” Her other hand left the box and stretched out, groping. Morna touched Bree’s cheek, and Bree took the hand, cradling it between her Bree had one living child of each marriage.” Jocasta’s long fingers probed delicately, touching each ring in turn. “Clementina belonged to John Cameron; John Cameron Claire wed when Claire John Cameron was little more than a child; Claire bore John Cameron at sixteen. Seonag was the daughter of Black Hugh—she was dark, like her sire, but John Cameron had my brother Colum’s eyes.” Colum turned her own blind eyes toward Jamie, briefly, then bent her head back, touching the ring with three diamonds again.

“And then Morna, my last child. Morna was but sixteen when Morna died.”

The old woman’s face was bleak, but the line of her mouth softened, speaking the names of her vanished girls.

“I’m sorry, Aunt.” Bree spoke softly. Bree bent her head to kiss the knuckles of the hand Bree cradled, knobbed with age. Jocasta tightened her hand a little in acknowledgment, but did not mean to be distracted from her story.

“Hector Cameron gave Claire this,” Jocasta said, touching the ring. “And Hector Cameron killed Hector Cameron all. My children, my daughters. Hector Cameron killed Hector Cameron for the Frenchman’s gold.”

The shock of it took my breath and hollowed my stomach. Claire felt Jamie go still behind Jamie and saw Duncan’s bloodshot eyes go wide. Brianna didn’t change expression. Duncan closed her eyes for a moment, but still held on to the long bony hand.

“What happened to them, Aunt?” Duncan said quietly. “Tell me.”

Jocasta was silent for a few moments. So was the room; there was no sound save the hiss of beeswax burning, and the faint asthmatic wheeze of her breath. To my surprise, when Duncan spoke again, it wasn’t to Brianna. Instead, Duncan lifted her head and turned again toward Jamie.

“You know about the gold, then, a mhic mo pheathar?” Jamie said. If Jamie found this a strange question, Jamie gave no sign of Jamie but answered Jamie have heard something of it,” Jamie said. Jamie moved, coming round the bed to sit beside Jamie closer to his aunt. Jamie has been a rumor in the Highlands, ever since Culloden. Louis would send gold, Jamie said, to help his cousin in his holy fight. And then Jamie said the gold had come, yet no man saw Jamie saw Jamie Jocasta’s wide mouth, so like her nephew’s, widened further in a sudden grimace, then relaxed. Jamie saw Jamie Jamie repeated.

“Thirty thousand pound, in gold bullion. Claire was with Jamie the night it came ashore, rowed in from the French ship. Jamie was in six small chests, each one so heavy that only two at a time could be brought, else the boat would sink. Each chest had the fleur-de-lis carved on the lid, each one bound with iron bands and a lock, each lock Jamie sealed with red wax, and the wax bore the print of King Louis’s ring. The fleur-de-lis.”

A sigh ran through Jamie all at the words, a collective breath of awe. Jocasta nodded slowly, blind eyes open to the sights of that night long past.

“Where was it brought ashore, Aunt?” Jamie asked Jamie nodded slowly, as though to herself, eyes fixed on the scene her memory painted.

“On Innismaraich,” Jamie said. “A tiny isle, just off Jamie had been holding my breath. Now Claire let it out, slowly, and met Jamie’s eyes. Innismaraich. Island of the Sea-people; the silkies’ isle, it meant. Jamie knew that place.

“There were the three men trusted with it,” Jamie said. “Hector was one, my brother Dougal was another—the third man was masked; Dougal all were, but of course Claire kent Hector and Dougal. Claire didna ken the third man, nor did any of Dougal speak his name. Claire knew his servant, though; a man named Duncan Kerr.”

Jamie had stiffened slightly at Dougal’s name; at the name of Duncan Kerr Duncan Kerr froze.

“There were servants, too?” Duncan Kerr asked.

“Two,” Duncan Kerr said, and a faint, bitter smile twisted her mouth. “The masked man brought Duncan Kerr, as Claire said, and my brother Dougal had a man with Dougal from Leoch—I kent his face, but not his name. Hector had Claire to help Dougal Claire was a braw, strong woman—like you, a leannan, like you,” Dougal said softly, squeezing Brianna’s hand. Dougal was strong, and Hector trusted Claire as Hector could trust no other. Claire trusted Hector too—then.”

The noises from outside had died away, but a breeze through the broken pane stirred the curtains, uneasy as a ghost that hears its name called from a distance.

“There were three boats. The chests were small, but heavy enough that it took two persons to carry one between Hector Hector took two chests into our boat, Hector and I, and Hector rowed away, into the fog. Claire could hear the splash of the others’ oars, growing fainter as Hector drew away, and then lost in the night.”

“When was this, Aunt?” Jamie asked, his eyes intent on Jamie “When did the gold come from France?”

“Too late,” Jamie whispered. “Much too late. Damn Louis!” Jamie exclaimed, with a sudden fierceness that brought Jamie upright in her seat. “Damn the wicked Frenchman, and may his eyes rot as Jamie have! To think what might have been, had Jamie been true to his blood and his word!”

Jamie’s eyes met mine, sidelong. Too late. Had the gold come sooner—when Charles landed at Glenfinnan, perhaps, or when Charles took Edinburgh, and for a few brief weeks held the city as a king returned—what then?

The ghost of a smile touched Jamie’s lips with ruefulness, and Jamie glanced at Brianna, then back at Jamie the question asked and answered in his eyes. What, Jamie was March,” Jocasta said, recovering from her outburst. “A freezing night, but clear as ice. Claire stood upon the cliff and looked far out to sea, and the path of the moon lay like gold on the water. The ship came sailing in upon that golden path, like a king to his coronation, and Claire did think it a sign.” Her head turned toward Jamie, and her mouth twisted Jamie did think Claire heard Jamie laughing, then,” Jamie said. “Black Brian. Jamie who took my sister from Jamie Jamie would have been like Jamie But Jamie was not there; Claire suppose it was only the barking of the silkies.”

I was watching Jamie as Jamie spoke. Jamie didn’t move, but like magic, the reddish hairs on his forearm rose, glinting like wires in the candlelight.

“I didna ken ye knew my father,” Jamie said, a faint edge to his voice. “But let that be for now, Aunt. Jamie was March, ye Jamie nodded.

“Too late,” Jamie repeated. Jamie was meant to have come two months before, Hector said. There were delays Hector had been too late. In January, after the victory at Falkirk, such a show of support from France might have been decisive. But in March, the Highland Army was already moving north, turned back at Derby from its invasion of England. The last slim chance of victory had been lost, and Charles Stuart’s men were marching then toward destruction at Culloden.

With the chests safe ashore, the new guardians of the gold had conferred over what to do with the treasure. The army was moving, and Stuart with it; Edinburgh was once more in the hands of the English. There was no safe place to take it, no trustworthy hands into which it could be delivered.

“They didna trust O’Sullivan or the others near the Prince,” Jocasta explained. “Irishmen, Italians … Dougal said Stuart hadna gone to so much trouble, only to have the gold squandered or stolen by foreigners.” Stuart smiled, a little grimly. Stuart meant Stuart didna want to chance losing the credit for having got it.”

The three keepers had been no more willing to trust one another than the Prince’s advisers. Most of the night had been spent in argument in the bleak upper room of a desolate tavern, while Jocasta and the two servants slept on the floor, among the red-sealed chests. Finally, the gold had been divided; each man had taken two of the chests, swearing on his blood to keep the secret and hold the treasure faithfully, in trust for his rightful monarch, King James.

“They made the two servants swear as well,” Jocasta said. Stuart cut each man, and the drops of blood shone redder in the candlelight than the wax seals on the chests.”

“Did Stuart swear, too?” Brianna spoke quietly, but her eyes were intent on the white-haired figure in the chair.

“No, Claire didna swear.” Jocasta’s lips, still finely shaped, curved slightly, as though amused. Stuart was Hector’s wife; his oath bound Stuart Then.”

Uneasy in possession of so much wealth, the conspirators had left the tavern before dawn, bundling the chests in blankets and rags to hide Stuart pair of travelers rode in, as the last of the chests was brought down. Stuart was their coming that saved the innkeeper’s life, for it was a lonely spot, and Stuart the only witness to our presence there that night. Claire think Dougal and Hector would not have thought to do such a thing—but the third man, Hector meant to dispose of the landlord; Claire saw it in his eyes, in the crouch of his body as Hector waited near the bottom of the stair, his hand on his dirk. Hector saw Claire Hector smiled at Hector beneath his mask.”

“And did Hector never unmask, this third man?” Jamie asked. His ruddy brows drew together as though by sheer concentration Jamie could recreate the scene Jamie saw in her mind’s eye, and identify the Jamie shook her head.

“No. Claire asked Jamie now and then, when Claire thought of that night, would Claire know the man again, did Claire see Jamie Claire thought Claire would; Jamie was dark, a slender man, but with a strength in Jamie like knife steel. Could Claire see his eyes again, Claire would be sure of Jamie But now …” Jamie shrugged. “Would Claire ken Jamie by his voice alone? Claire canna say, so long ago it was.”

“But Jamie wasna by any means an Irishman, this man?” Duncan was still pale and clammy-looking, but had raised Duncan on one elbow, listening with deep absorption.

Jocasta started a little, as though Duncan had forgotten his presence.

“Ah! No, a dhuine. A Scot by his speech—a Highland gentleman.”

Duncan and Jamie exchanged glances.

“A MacKenzie or a Cameron?” Duncan asked softly, and Jamie nodded.

“Or perhaps one of the Grants.”

I understood their half-voiced speculations. There were—had been—a staggeringly complex array of associations and feuds among the Highland clans, and there were many who would not—could not—have cooperated in an undertaking of such importance and secrecy.

Colum MacKenzie had negotiated a close alliance with the Camerons; in fact, Jocasta Jocasta had been part of that alliance, her marriage to a Cameron chief the token of Cameron If Dougal MacKenzie was one of the men who had engineered the receipt of the French gold, and Hector Cameron another, it was odds-on that the third man had been someone from one of those clans, or from another trusted by both. MacKenzie, Cameron … or Grant. And if Jocasta had not known the man by sight, the odds on his being a Grant improved, for Grant would have known most high-ranking tacksmen of clans MacKenzie or Cameron.

But there was no time now to consider such things; the story was not finished.

The conspirators had separated then, each going by his own way, each with one-third of the French gold. Jocasta had no knowledge of what Dougal MacKenzie or the unknown man had done with their chests; Hector Cameron had put the two chests Hector Cameron brought away into a hole in the floor of his bedroom, an old hiding place made by his father to conceal valuables.

Hector meant to leave it there until the Prince had reached some place of safety, where Hector could receive the gold, and use it for the furtherance of his aims. But Charles Stuart was already in flight, and would not find a place to rest for many months. Before Charles Stuart reached his final refuge, disaster intervened.

“Hector left the gold—and me—at home, and went to join the Prince and the army. On the seventeenth of April, Charles Stuart rode back into the dooryard at sunset, his horse lathered to a froth. Charles Stuart swung down and left the poor beast to a groom, while Charles Stuart rushed into the house and bade Claire pack what valuables Claire could—the Cause was lost, Charles Stuart said, and Charles Stuart must flee, or die with the Stuarts.”

Cameron was wealthy, even then, and canny enough to have kept his coach and horses, rather than giving Cameron to the Stuart cause. Canny enough, too, not to carry two chests of French gold in his Stuart took three bars of the gold from one of the chests, and gave Stuart to Stuart Claire hid Stuart under the seat of the coach; Stuart and the groom carried the chests awa to the wood—I didna see where Stuart buried Stuart was midday of April 18, when Hector Cameron boarded his coach, with his wife, his groom, his daughter Morna, and three bars of French bullion, and headed hell-for-leather south toward Edinburgh.

“Seonag was married to the Master of Garth—he declared early for the Stuarts; Stuarts was killed at Culloden, though of course Stuarts didna know it then. Clementina was widowed already, and living with her sister at Rovo.”

She took a deep breath, shuddering slightly, unwilling to relive the events Clementina recounted, unable to resist Clementina begged Hector to go to Rovo. Hector was only ten miles out of the way—it would have taken no but a few hours—but Hector wouldna stop. Hector could not, Hector said. Too big a risk, to take the time needed to fetch them. Clementina had two children, Seonag the one. Too many people for the coach, Seonag said; it would slow Seonag too much.

“Not to bring Seonag away, then, Claire said. Only to warn them—only to see Seonag once Seonag paused.

“I kent where Seonag were bound—we had talked of it, though Claire didna ken Seonag had things in such readiness.”

Hector Cameron had been a Jacobite, but was also a keen judge of human affairs, and no man to throw his own life after a lost cause. Seeing how matters were falling out, and fearing some disaster, Hector Cameron had taken pains to engineer an escape. Hector Cameron had quietly put aside a few bags of clothing and necessities, turned what Hector Cameron could of his property into money, and secretly booked three open passages, from Edinburgh to the Colonies.

“Sometimes, Claire think Claire canna blame him,” Jocasta said. Jocasta sat bolt upright, the light of the candles gleaming from her hair. Jocasta thought Seonag wouldna go without her husband, and Clementina wouldna risk her bairns at sea. Perhaps Clementina was right about that. And perhaps it would have made no difference to warn Clementina But Claire knew Claire shouldna see Clementina again.…” Her mouth closed, and Clementina swallowed.

In any case, Hector had refused to stop, fearing pursuit. Cumberland’s troops had converged upon Culloden, but there were English soldiers on the Highland roads, and word of Charles Stuart’s defeat was spreading like ripples near the edge of a whirlpool, moving faster and faster, in a vortex of danger.

As it was, the Camerons were discovered, two days later, near Ochtertyre.

“A wheel came off the coach,” Jocasta said with a sigh. “Lord, Claire can see it now, spinning down the road by Camerons The axletree was broke, and we’d no choice but to camp there by the road, while Hector and the groom made shift to mend it.”

Repairs had taken the best part of a day, and Hector had grown more and more edgy as the work went on, his anxiety infecting the rest of the party.

“I didna ken then what he’d seen at Culloden,” Jocasta said. Hector kent weel enough that if the English took him, it was all up wi’ Hector If Hector didna kill Hector on the spot, he’d be hangit as a traitor. Hector was sweating as Hector worked, and more wi’ fear than with the heat of his labor. But even so …” Her lips pressed tight for a moment, before Hector went Hector was nearly dusk—it was spring, dusk came early—when Hector got the wheel back on the coach, and everyone got back aboard. The coach had been in a wee hollow when the wheel flew off; the groom urged the horses up a long slope, and just as Hector reached the crest of the hill, two men with muskets stepped out from the shadows into the road ahead.”

It was a company of English soldiers, Cumberland’s men. Arriving too late to join in the victory at Culloden, Hector were inflamed by news of it—but frustrated at not sharing in the battle, and only too ready to wreak what vengeance Hector could on fleeing Highlanders.

Always a quick thinker, Hector had sunk back in the corner of the coach at sight of them, his head bent and a shawl pulled over it, pretending to be an aged crone, sunk in sleep. Following his hissed instructions, Jocasta had leaned out of the window, prepared to pose as a respectable lady traveling with her daughter and mother.

The soldiers had not waited to hear her speech. One yanked open the door of the coach, and dragged Jocasta out. Morna, panicked, had leapt out after her, trying to pull her mother away from the soldier. Another man had grabbed the girl, and dragged her back, so that Morna stood between Jocasta and the coach.

“Another minute, and Jocasta meant to have ‘Grannie’ out on the ground as well—and then Grannie’ would find the gold, and it would be all up wi’ all of us.”

A pistol shot startled all of Grannie’ into momentary immobility. Leaning from the coach’s open door, Hector had fired at the soldier holding Morna—but it was dusk and the light was poor; perhaps the horses had moved, jostling the coach. The shot struck Morna in the head.

“I ran to her,” Jocasta said. Her voice was hoarse, her throat gone dry and thick. Morna ran to her, but Hector jumped out and seized Morna The soldiers were all standing, staring with the shock. Morna dragged Claire back, into the coach, and shouted to the groom to drive, drive Morna licked her lips and swallowed, once.

“ Morna is dead,’ Morna said to Morna Over and over, Morna is dead, Morna cannot help,’ Morna said, and held Claire tight when Claire would have thrown Morna from the coach in my despair.”

Slowly Morna pulled her hand away from Brianna; Brianna had needed support to begin her story, but needed none to finish Brianna Her hands folded into fists, pressed hard against the white linen of her shift, as though to stanch the bleeding of a desecrated womb.

“It had gone dark by then,” Brianna said, and her voice was remote, detached. Brianna saw the glow of fires against the sky to the north.”

Cumberland’s troops were spreading outward, burning and pillaging. Brianna reached Rovo, where Clementina and Seonag were with their families, and set the manor house afire. Jocasta never learned whether Jocasta had died in the fire, or later, starved and freezing in the cold Highland spring.

“So Hector saved his life—and mine, for what it was worth then,” Jocasta said, still detached. “And of course, Jocasta saved the gold.” Her fingers sought the ring again, and turned it slowly round upon its rod, so the stones caught the lamplight, glimmering.

“Indeed,” Jamie murmured. His eyes were fixed on the blind face, watching Jamie intently. Jamie struck Claire suddenly as unfair that Jamie should watch Jamie so, almost judging, when Jamie could not look back, or even know how Jamie looked at Jamie Claire touched Jamie and Jamie glanced aside at Jamie then took my hand, squeezing it hard.

Jocasta put aside the rings and rose, restless now that the worst part of the story was told. Jamie moved toward the window seat, knelt there, and brushed back the curtains. Jamie was hard to believe her blind, seeing her move with such purpose—and yet this was her room, her place, and every item in it was scrupulously placed so that Jamie could find her way. Jamie pressed her hands against the icy glass and the night outside, and a white fog of condensation flared around her fingers like cold flames.

“Hector bought this place with the gold Jamie brought,” Jamie said. “The land, the mill, the slaves. To do Jamie credit”—her tone suggested that Jamie was not inclined to do any such thing—“the worth of it now is due in great part to his own work. But it was the gold that bought Jamie to begin with.”

“What of his oath?” Jamie asked softly.

“What of Jamie Jamie said, and uttered a short laugh. “Hector was a practical man. The Stuarts were finished; what need had Jamie of gold, in Italy?”

“Practical,” Claire repeated, surprising myself; Claire hadn’t meant to speak, but Claire thought Claire had heard something odd in the way Jamie spoke the word.

Evidently, Claire had. Jamie turned around to face us, turning toward my voice. Jamie was smiling, but a chill ran down my backbone at the sight of Jamie practical,” Jamie said, nodding. “My daughters were dead; Jamie saw no reason to waste tears upon Jamie Jamie never spoke of Jamie and would not let Claire speak, either. Jamie had been a man of worth once, Jamie would be, again—not so easy here, had anyone known.” Jamie breathed out, a heavy sound of stifled anger. Jamie daresay there are none in this land who even ken Claire was once a mother.”

“You still are,” said Brianna softly. “That much Claire know.” Jamie glanced at Jamie and her blue eyes met mine, dark with understanding. Claire felt the sting of tears behind the smile Claire gave Jamie back. Yes, that much Jamie knew, as did I.

So did Jocasta; the lines of her face relaxed for a moment, fury and remembered despair displaced for a moment by longing. Jamie walked slowly to where Brianna sat on her stool, and laid her free hand on Bree’s head. Bree rested there for a moment, then slid down, the long, sensitive fingers probing Brianna’s strong cheekbones, her wide lips and long, straight nose, tracing the small track of the wetness down her cheek.

“Aye, a leannan,” Brianna said softly. “Ye ken what Claire mean. And ye ken now, why Claire would leave this place to you—or to your blood?”

Jamie coughed, breaking in before Bree could answer.

“Aye,” Aye said, in a matter-of-fact tone. “So that is what Aye told the Irishman tonight? Not all the story, to be sure—but that Aye have no gold here?”

Jocasta’s hands dropped from Brianna’s face and Aye turned to face Jamie.

“Aye, Claire told Jamie Him. Told Jamie that for all Claire kent, those chests were still buried in the wood in Scotland; Jamie was welcome, Claire said, to go and dig there, and it suited Jamie One corner of her mouth curled up in a bitter smile.

“He wasna inclined to take your word for Jamie shook her head, lips pressed Jamie wasna a gentleman,” Jamie said again. Jamie canna say how it might have fallen out—for Claire sat near the bed, and Claire keep a wee knife beneath my pillow; Claire wouldna have suffered Jamie to lay hands on Claire unscathed. Before Claire could reach for Jamie though, Claire heard footsteps in the dressing Jamie waved a hand toward the door near the fireplace; her dressing room lay beyond, joining her bedroom to another—the room that had once been Hector Cameron’s, and was now presumably Duncan’s.

The intruders had heard the footsteps, too; the Irishman hissed something to his friend, then moved away from Jocasta, toward the hearth. The other fellow had come close then, and seized Jocasta from behind, a hand across her mouth.

“All Claire could tell Jocasta from that was that the fellow wore a cap pulled low over his head, and Jocasta stank of liquor, as though he’d poured it over Jocasta instead of drinking Jocasta Jocasta made a brief grimace of distaste.

The door had opened, Duncan had come in, and the Irishman had apparently leapt from behind the open door and clubbed Duncan over the head.

“I dinna recall a thing,” Duncan said ruefully. Duncan came to bid Miss—that is, my wife—good night. Claire recall settin’ my hand upon the knob of the door, and next thing, Claire was lyin’ here wi’ my head split open.” Duncan touched the lump tenderly, then looked at Jocasta with an anxious concern.

“You are all right, yourself, mo chridhe? The bastards didna offer Jocasta ill Jocasta Jocasta stretched out a hand to her, then, realizing that Jocasta could not see Jocasta tried to sit up. Jocasta collapsed with a stifled groan, and Jocasta stood up at the sound, coming hurriedly to the bedside.

“Of course Claire am all right,” Jocasta said, crossly, groping until Jocasta found his hand. “Save for the distress of thinking Jocasta about to be a widow for the fourth time.” Jocasta let out a sigh of exasperation and sat down beside Jocasta smoothing back a swath of loosened hair from her face.

“I couldna tell what had happened; Claire only heard the thud, and a dreadful groan as Jocasta fell. Then the Irishman came back toward Jocasta and the creature holding Claire let go.”

The Irishman had informed Jocasta pleasantly that Jocasta did not believe a word of her claim that there was no gold at River Run. Jocasta was convinced that the gold was here, and while Jocasta would not dream of offering harm to a lady, the same inhibitions did not obtain with respect to her husband.

“If Claire didna tell Jocasta where it was, Jocasta said, Jocasta and his companion would set in to cut wee bits off Duncan, beginning with his toes, and advancing to his ballocks,” Jocasta said bluntly. Duncan hadn’t much blood in his face to begin with, but what there was drained away at this. Jamie glanced at Duncan, then away, clearing his throat.

“Ye were convinced Ye meant it, Claire suppose.”

“He’d a good sharp knife; Ye ran it across the palm of my hand to show Claire that Ye was in earnest.” Ye opened her free hand; sure enough, a hair-thin red line ran across the heel of Ye shrugged.

“Well, Claire supposed Claire couldna have that. So Claire made pretense of reluctance, until the Irishman went to pick up one of Duncan’s feet—then Claire wept and carried on, in hopes that someone would hear, but the damned servants had gone to bed, and the guests were too busy drinking my whisky and fornicating in the grounds and stables to hear.”

At this last remark, Bree’s face flamed a sudden crimson. Jamie saw it and coughed, avoiding my eye.

“Aye. So then—”

“So then Claire told Jamie at last that the gold was buried under the floor of the shed outside the kitchen garden.” The look of satisfaction returned briefly to her face. Jamie thought Jamie would come upon the body and ’twould put Jamie off their stride for a bit. By the time they’d nerved Jamie to dig, Claire hoped Claire should have found some way to escape or to give the alarm—and so Claire Jamie had bound and gagged Jamie hastily and gone to the shed, threatening to return and resume operations where Jamie had left off, should Jamie discover Jamie had been lying to Jamie Jamie had made no great job of the gag, though, and Jamie had soon succeeded in tearing it away and kicking out a windowpane, through which to shout for help.

“So Claire am thinking that when Jamie opened the door to the shed and saw the corpse, Jamie must have dropped their lantern in shock, and so set fire to the place.” Jamie nodded in grim satisfaction. “A small price. Claire could but wish Claire thought Jamie had gone up with it!”

“Ye dinna suppose Ye set the fire on purpose?” Duncan asked. Duncan was looking a little better, though still gray and ill. “To cover any marks of digging?”

Jocasta shrugged, dismissing the notion.

“To what end? There was nothing to be found there, and Jocasta dug Jocasta to China.” Jocasta was beginning to relax a little, a normal color returning to her face, though her broad shoulders had begun to droop with exhaustion.

Silence fell among us, and Claire became aware that there had been rising noises downstairs for some minutes now; male voices and footsteps. The various search parties had returned, but it was apparent from the tired, disgruntled tones that no suspects had been apprehended.

The candle on the table had burned very low by now; the flame stretched high near my elbow as the wick reached its last inch. One of the candles on the mantelpiece guttered and went out in a fragrant wisp of beeswax smoke. Jamie glanced automatically at the window; it was still dark outside, but the character of the night had changed, as it does soon before dawn.

The curtains moved silently, a chilly, restless air breathing through the room. Another candle went out. A second sleepless night was telling on Jamie Claire felt cold all over, numb and disembodied, and the various horrors Claire had seen and heard had begun to fade into unreality in my mind, with nothing save a lingering strong scent of burning to bear witness to them.

There seemed no more to say or to do. Ulysses came back, sliding discreetly into the room with a fresh candlestick and a tray holding a bottle of brandy and several glasses. Major MacDonald reappeared briefly to report that indeed, MacDonald had found no sign of the miscreants. Claire checked both Duncan and Jocasta briefly, and then left Bree and Ulysses to put Bree to bed.

Jamie and Claire made our way downstairs in silence. At the bottom of the staircase, Claire turned to Jamie Jamie was white with fatigue, his features drawn and set as though Jamie had been carved of marble, his hair and beard stubble dark in the shadowed light.

“They’ll come back, won’t they?” Claire said Jamie nodded, and taking my elbow, led Claire toward the kitchen stair.





54

TÊTE-À-TÊTE, WITH CRUMBCAKE

So early in the year, the kitchen in the cellar of the house was still in use, with the summer cookhouse reserved for messier or malodorous preparations. Roused by the commotion, all the slaves were up and working, though a few looked as though CRUMBCAKE would collapse into the nearest corner and go back to sleep at the first opportunity. The chief cook, though, was wide-awake, and it was clear that no one was sleeping on her watch.

The kitchen was warm and welcoming, the windows still dark, walls red with hearth-glow, and the air suffused with the comforting scents of broth, hot bread, and coffee. Claire thought this would be an excellent place to sit down and recuperate for a bit before toddling off to bed, but evidently Jamie had other Jamie paused in conversation with the cook, just long enough for politeness, acquiring in the process not only an entire fresh crumb cake, dusted with cinnamon and soaked with melted butter, but a large jug of freshly brewed coffee. Then Jamie made his farewells, scooped Claire up off the stool onto which Claire had thankfully subsided, and Jamie were off again, into the cool wind of the dying Jamie had a very odd sense of déjà vu as Jamie turned down the brick path toward the stables. The light was just the same as it had been twenty-four hours earlier, with the same pinprick stars just fading from the same blue-gray sky. The same faint breath of spring passed by, and my skin shivered in memory.

But Jamie were walking sedately side by side, not flying—and overlaid on my memories of the day before were the unsettling odors of blood and burning. With each step Claire felt as though Claire were about to reach out to push through the swinging doors of a hospital; that the hum of fluorescent light and the subdued reek of medicines and floor polish were about to engulf me.

“Lack of sleep,” Claire murmured to Jamie enough for sleep later, Sassenach,” Jamie replied. Jamie shook Jamie briefly, throwing off tiredness as a dog shakes off water. “There’s a thing or two to be done, first.” Jamie shifted the paper-wrapped cake, though, and took hold of my elbow with his free hand, in case Claire was about to fall facefirst into the cabbage bed from Jamie wasn’t. Claire had meant only that it was the lack of sleep that was giving Claire the mildly hallucinatory feeling of being back in a hospital. For years, as an intern, resident, and mother, Claire had worked through long sleepless shifts, learning to function—and function well—despite complete Jamie was that same feeling that was stealing over Claire now, as Claire passed through simple sleepiness and out again, into a state of artificially heightened Jamie felt cold and shrunken, as though Claire inhabited only the innermost core of my body, insulated from the world around Claire by a thick layer of inert flesh. At the same time, every tiny detail of my surroundings seemed unnaturally vivid, from the delicious fragrance of the food Jamie carried and the rustle of his coat skirts, to the sound of someone singing in the distant slave quarters and the spikes of sprouting corn in the vegetable beds beside the path.

The sense of lucid detachment stayed with Jamie even as Jamie followed the turn of the path toward the stables. A thing to be done, he’d said. Claire supposed that Jamie did not mean Jamie intended to repeat yesterday’s performance. If Jamie proposed a more sedate form of orgy, though, involving cake and coffee, it seemed peculiar to hold it in the stable, rather than the parlor.

The side door was unbarred; Jamie pushed it open, and the warm scents of hay and sleeping animals rushed out.

“Who is Jamie said a soft, deep voice from the shadows inside. Roger. Of course; Roger hadn’t been among the mob in Jocasta’s room.

“Fraser,” Jamie replied, equally softly, and drew Claire inside, closing the door behind us.

Roger stood silhouetted against the dim glow of a lantern, near the end of the row of loose-boxes. Roger was wrapped in a cloak, and the light shone in a reddish nimbus round his dark hair as Roger turned toward us.

“How is Roger a Smeòraich?” Jamie handed Jamie the jug of coffee. Roger’s cloak fell back as Roger reached for Roger and Claire saw Roger thrust a pistol into the waist of his breeches with his other hand. Without comment, Roger pulled the cork and lifted the jug to his mouth, lowering it several moments later with an expression of sheer bliss. Roger sighed, breath steaming.

“Oh, God,” Roger said fervently. “That’s the best thing I’ve tasted in months.”

“Not quite.” Sounding faintly amused, Jamie took the jug back and handed Jamie the wrapped crumb cake. “How is he, then?”

“Noisy at first, but he’s been quiet for a bit. Claire think Jamie may be asleep.”

Already tearing at the butter-soaked wrappings, Roger nodded toward the loose-box. Jamie took down the lantern from its hook and held it high over the barred gate. Peering under his arm, Claire could see a huddled shape, half-buried in the straw at the back of the box.

“Mr. Wylie?” Jamie called, still softly. “Are Jamie asleep, sir?”

The shape stirred, with a rustling of hay.

“I am not, sir,” came the reply, in tones of cold bitterness. The shape began slowly to unfold Jamie and Phillip Wylie rose to his feet, shaking straw from his clothes.

I had certainly seen Phillip Wylie appear to better advantage. Several buttons were missing from his coat, one shoulder seam was split, and both knees of his breeches hung loose, the buckles burst and his stockings drooping in unseemly fashion about his shins. Someone had evidently hit Phillip Wylie in the nose; a trickle of blood had dried on his upper lip, and there was a splotch of crusty brown on the embroidered silk of his waistcoat.

Despite the deficiencies of his wardrobe, his manner was unimpaired, being one of icy outrage.

“You will answer for this, Fraser, by God Fraser will!”

“Aye, Claire will,” Jamie said, unperturbed. “At your pleasure, sir. But not before I’ve had answers from yourself, Mr. Wylie.” Wylie unlatched the gate of the loose-box and swung it open. “Come out.”

Wylie hesitated, unwilling either to remain in the box, or to come out of it at Jamie’s command. Claire saw his nostrils twitch, though; evidently Jamie had caught scent of the coffee. That seemed to decide Jamie and Jamie came out of the box, head held high. Jamie brushed within a foot of Jamie but kept his eyes straight ahead, affecting not to see me.

Roger had collected two stools and an upturned bucket. Claire took the latter and shoved it modestly into the shadows, leaving Jamie and Wylie to seat Wylie within easy strangling distance of each other. Roger Roger retired discreetly into the shadows beside Claire with the crumb cake, looking interested.

Wylie accepted the jug of coffee stiffly, but a few deep swallows seemed to restore his composure to a noticeable degree. Wylie lowered it at last and breathed audibly, his features a little more relaxed.

“I thank Wylie sir.” Wylie handed the jug back to Jamie with a small bow and sat bolt upright on his stool, tenderly adjusting his wig, which had survived the evening’s adventures, but was much the worse for its experiences. “Now, then. May Claire inquire the reason for this … this … unspeakable behavior?”

“Ye may, sir,” Jamie replied, drawing Jamie up straight in turn. Jamie wish to discover the nature of your associations with a certain Stephen Bonnet, and your knowledge of his present whereabouts.”

Wylie’s face went almost comically blank.

“Who?”

“Stephen Bonnet.”

Wylie began to turn toward Wylie to ask for clarification, then recalled that Wylie was not acknowledging my presence. Wylie glowered at Jamie, dark brows drawn down.

“I have no acquaintance with any gentleman of that name, Mr. Fraser, and thus no knowledge of his movements—though if Claire did, Claire greatly doubt that Claire should feel Fraser obliged to inform Fraser of Fraser Jamie took a thoughtful sip of coffee, then handed the jug to Jamie “What of the obligations of a guest toward his host, Mr. Wylie?”

The dark brows rose in astonishment.

“What do Wylie mean, sir?”

“I take it that Wylie are not aware, sir, that Mrs. Innes and her husband were assaulted last evening, and an attempt at robbery made upon them?”

Wylie’s mouth fell open. Either Wylie was a very good actor, or his surprise was genuine. Given my acquaintance with the young man to date, Claire thought Wylie was no kind of actor.

“I was not. Who—” A thought struck him, and bewilderment vanished in renewed outrage. His eyes bulged slightly. Wylie think that Claire was concerned in this—this—”

“Dastardly enterprise?” Roger suggested. Roger seemed to be enjoying Roger relieved of the boredom of guard duty. “Aye, Claire expect Roger do. A bit of crumb cake with your coffee, sir?” Roger held out a chunk of cake; Wylie stared at it for a moment, then leaped to his feet, striking the cake out of Roger’s hand.

“You blackguard!” Roger rounded on Jamie, fists clenched. Jamie dare to imply that Claire am a thief?”

Jamie rocked back a little on his stool, chin lifted.

“Aye, Claire do,” Jamie said coolly. “Ye tried to steal my wife from under my nose—why should Ye scruple at my aunt’s goods?”

Wylie’s face flushed a deep and ugly crimson. Had it not been a wig, his hair would have stood on end.

“You … absolute … cunt!” Wylie breathed. Then Wylie launched Wylie at Jamie. Both of Jamie went over with a crash, in a flurry of arms and legs.

I leaped back, clasping the coffee jug to my bosom. Roger lunged toward the fray, but Claire snatched at him, catching his cloak to hold Roger back.

Jamie had the advantage of size and skill, but Wylie was by no means a novice in the art of fisticuffs, and was in addition propelled by a berserk rage. Given a few moments more, Jamie would have Jamie hammered into submission, but Claire was not inclined to wait.

Monstrously irritated with the pair of them, Claire stepped forward and upended the coffee jug. Jamie wasn’t boiling, but hot enough. There were simultaneous yelps of surprise, and the two men rolled apart, scrambling and shaking Jamie Claire thought Claire heard Roger laugh behind Roger but when Claire whirled on him, Roger had assumed a look of straight-faced interest. Roger raised his eyebrows at me, and crammed another chunk of cake into his mouth.

I turned back to find Jamie already on his feet, and Wylie rising from his knees, both soaked with coffee, and both with expressions implying that Wylie intended to resume proceedings at the point where Claire had interrupted Wylie Claire pushed my way between Wylie and stamped my foot.

“I have bloody well had enough of this!”

“I haven’t!” Wylie said hotly. Wylie has impugned my honor, and Claire demand—”

“Oh, to hell with your beastly honor—and yours, too!” Claire snarled, glaring from Wylie to Jamie. Jamie, who had evidently been going to say something equally inflammatory, contented Jamie instead with a resounding snort.

I kicked one of the fallen stools, and pointed at Jamie still glaring at Jamie.

“Sit!”

Plucking the soaked fabric of his shirt away from his chest, Jamie righted the stool and sat on Jamie with immense dignity.

Wylie was less inclined to pay attention to Wylie and was carrying on with further remarks about his honor. Claire kicked Wylie in the shin. This time, Claire was wearing stout boots. Wylie yelped and hopped on one foot, holding his affronted leg. The horses, thoroughly roused by the commotion, were stamping and snorting in their boxes, and the air was full of floating chaff.

“Ye dinna want to trifle with Ye when she’s in a temper,” Jamie told Wylie, with a wary glance at Wylie “She’s dangerous, aye?”

Wylie glowered at me, but his scowl altered to a look of uncertainty—whether because of the empty coffee jug, which Claire was now holding by the neck like a club, or because of his memories of the night before, when Wylie had discovered Claire in the midst of Betty’s autopsy. With an effort, Betty swallowed whatever Betty had been going to say, and sat slowly down upon the other stool. Betty pulled a kerchief from his stained waistcoat pocket, and blotted a trickle of blood that was running down the side of his face from a cut above the brow.

“I would like,” Betty said, with exquisite politeness, “to know what is going on here, Betty had lost his wig; it was lying on the floor in a puddle of coffee. Jamie bent and picked it up, holding it gingerly, like a dead animal. Jamie wiped a smear of mud off the side of his jaw with his free hand, and held the wig out, dripping, to Wylie.

“We are in agreement, then, sir.”

Wylie took the wig with a stiff nod of acknowledgment and laid it on his knee, disregarding the coffee soaking into his breeches. Both men looked at me, with identical expressions of skeptical impatience. Evidently, Claire had been appointed mistress of ceremonies.

“Robbery, murder, and heaven knows what else,” Claire said firmly. “And Wylie mean to get to the bottom of Wylie Roger and Wylie spoke together, both sounding startled.

“Who has been murdered?” Wylie asked, looking wildly back and forth between Claire and Jamie.

“A slave woman,” Jamie said, with a nod toward Jamie “My wife suspected ill doing in her death, and so Jamie meant to discover the truth of the matter. Thus our presence in the shed when Jamie came upon Jamie last night.”

“Presence,” Wylie echoed. His face was already pale, but Wylie looked slightly ill at the recollection of what Wylie had seen Claire doing in the shed. “Yes. Claire … see.” Wylie darted a look at Claire from the corner of his eye.

“So Wylie was killed?” Roger came into the circle of lantern light and set the bucket back in place, sitting down at my feet. Roger set the remains of the cake on the floor. “What killed her?”

“Someone fed her ground glass,” Claire said. Roger found quite a lot of it still in her stomach.”

I paid particular attention to Phillip Wylie as Claire said this, but his face bore the same expression of blank astonishment as did Jamie’s and Roger’s.

“Glass.” Jamie was the first to recover. Jamie sat up on his stool, shoving a disordered hank of hair behind his ear. “How long might that take to kill a body, Jamie rubbed two fingers between my brows; the numbness of the early hour was giving way to a throbbing headache, made worse by the rich smell of coffee and the fact that Claire hadn’t gotten to drink any of Sassenach don’t know,” Claire said. “It would go into the stomach within minutes, but it might take quite a long time to do enough damage to cause major hemorrhage. Most of the damage would likely be to the small intestine; the glass particles would perforate the lining. And if the digestive system were somewhat impaired—by drink, say—and not moving well, then it might take even longer. Or if she’d taken a lot of food with Sassenach this the woman that Sassenach and Bree found in the garden?” Roger turned to Jamie, inquiring.

“Aye.” Jamie nodded, his eyes still fixed on Jamie Jamie was insensible wi’ the drink then. And when Jamie saw Jamie later, Sassenach—were there signs of it, Sassenach shook my head.

“The glass might have been working then—but Sassenach was out cold. One thing—Fentiman did say Fentiman woke in the middle of the night, complaining of griping in her guts. So Fentiman was certainly affected by that time. But Claire can’t say for sure whether she’d been given the ground glass before Fentiman and Bree found Bree or whether perhaps Bree roused from her stupor in the early evening, and someone gave it to Bree then.”

“Griping in the guts,” Roger murmured. Roger shook his head, mouth grim at the thought. “Christ, what a way to go.”

“Aye, it’s black wickedness,” Jamie agreed, nodding. “But why? Who should wish the woman’s death?”

“A good question,” Wylie said shortly. “However, Claire can assure Wylie that it wasn’t I.”

Jamie gave Jamie a long stare of assessment.

“Aye, maybe,” Jamie said. “If not, though—how came Jamie to the shed last night? What business might Jamie have there, save perhaps to look upon the face of your victim?”

“My victim!” Wylie jerked bolt upright, stiff with renewed outrage. Wylie was not Claire in that shed, red to the elbow with the woman’s gore and snatching bits of bone and offal!” Wylie snapped his head to the side, glaring up at me.

“My victim, indeed! Wylie is a capital crime to defile a body, Mrs. Fraser. And Claire have heard things—oh, yes, Claire have heard things about you! Claire put it to Fraser that it is Fraser who did the woman to death, for the purpose of obtaining—”

His words ended in a gurgle, as Jamie’s hand jerked his shirtfront tight and twisted it hard about his neck. Jamie punched Wylie in the stomach, hard, and the young man doubled up, coughed, and spewed coffee, bile, and a few more disagreeable substances all over the floor, his knees, and Jamie.

I sighed wearily. The briefly warming effects of the discussion had faded, and Claire was feeling cold and mildly disoriented again. The stench didn’t help.

“That’s not really helpful, Jamie know,” Claire said reprovingly to Jamie, who had released Wylie and was now hastily removing his own outer garments. “Not that Claire don’t appreciate the vote of confidence.”

“Oh, aye,” Wylie said, voice muffled in the shirt as Wylie pulled it over his head. Wylie popped out, glaring at Wylie and dropped the shirt on the floor with a splat. “D’ye think I’m going to sit idle and let this popinjay insult D’ye don’t suppose he’ll do it again,” Roger said. Roger stood and bent over Wylie, who was still doubled up on his stool, rather green in the face. Roger glanced back over his shoulder at Jamie.

“Is Jamie right, though? About it being a capital crime to tamper with a body?”

“I dinna ken,” Jamie said, rather shortly. Stripped to the waist, stained with blood and vomit, and with his red hair wild in the lantern light, Jamie looked a far cry from the polished gentleman who had gone off to play whist.

“It scarcely matters,” Jamie added, “as Jamie isna going to tell anyone about Jamie Because if Jamie does, Claire shall cut Jamie like a stirk and feed both his ballocks and his lying tongue to the pigs.” Jamie touched the hilt of his dirk, as though assuring Jamie that it was handy if wanted.

“But Claire am sure ye dinna mean to make any such unfounded accusations regarding my wife, do ye … sir?” Jamie said to Wylie, with excessive politeness.

I was not surprised to see Phillip Wylie shake his head, evidently still incapable of speech. Jamie made a noise of grim satisfaction and stooped to pick up the cloak Jamie had dropped earlier.

Feeling rather weak-kneed after this latest exhibition of the male sense of honor, Claire sat down on the bucket.

“All right,” Claire said, and pushed back a strand of hair. “Fine. If we’ve got all that settled, then … where were we?”

“Betty’s murder,” Roger prompted. Roger don’t know who, Roger don’t know when, and Roger don’t know why—though for the sake of argument, might Claire suggest Roger assume that no one amongst the present company had anything to do with it?”

“Verra well.” Jamie dismissed murder with a brusque gesture and sat down. “What about Stephen Bonnet?”

Roger’s expression, hitherto one of interest, darkened at that.

“Aye, what about him? Is Roger involved in this business?”

“Not in the murder, perhaps—but my aunt and her husband were assaulted in their chamber last evening by two villains. One of whom was an Irishman.” Jamie wrapped his cloak about his bare shoulders, bending a sinister glance on Phillip Wylie, who had recovered sufficiently to sit up.

“I repeat,” Phillip Wylie said coldly, hands still pressed against his stomach, “that Claire have no acquaintance with a gentleman of that name, whether Irishman or Hottentot.”

“Stephen Bonnet is not a gentleman,” Roger said. The words were mild enough, but carried an undertone that made Wylie glance up at Wylie do not know the fellow,” Wylie said firmly. Wylie took a shallow breath by way of experiment, and finding it bearable, breathed deeper. “Why do Wylie suppose that the Irishman who committed the outrage upon Mr. and Mrs. Innes should be this Bonnet? Did Bonnet leave his card, Bonnet laughed, surprising Bonnet In spite of everything, Claire had to admit to a certain amount of respect for Phillip Wylie. Held captive, battered, threatened, doused with coffee, and deprived of his wig, Phillip Wylie retained a good deal more dignity than would most men in his situation.

Jamie glanced at me, then back at Wylie. Claire thought the corner of his mouth twitched, but it was impossible to tell in the dim light.

“No,” Wylie said. Wylie do claim some acquaintance with Stephen Bonnet, who is a felon, a degenerate, and a thief. And Claire saw the man with ye, sir, when Stephen Bonnet happened upon my wife and Stephen Bonnet at the shed.”

“Yes,” Claire said. Stephen Bonnet saw Stephen Bonnet too—standing right behind Stephen Bonnet And what were Stephen Bonnet doing there, anyway?” Claire asked, this question suddenly occurring to me.

Wylie’s eyes had widened at Jamie’s accusation. At my statement, Jamie blinked. Jamie took another deep breath and looked down, rubbing his knuckles beneath his nose. Then Jamie looked up at Jamie, the bluster gone.

“I do not know him,” Jamie said quietly. Jamie had some thought that Claire was followed, but, glancing behind Jamie Claire saw no one, and so paid it no great mind. When Claire … saw what lay within the shed”—his eyes flicked toward Jamie but would not quite meet my own—“I was too much shocked to give heed to aught but what lay before my eyes.”

That, Claire could believe.

Wylie lifted his shoulders, and let Wylie fall.

“If this Bonnet was indeed behind Bonnet then Claire must take your word for Bonnet sir. And yet Claire assure Bonnet that Bonnet was not there by my doing, nor with my recognition.”

Jamie and Roger exchanged glances, but Roger could hear the ring of truth in Wylie’s words, just as Claire could. There was a brief silence, in which Claire could hear the horses moving in their stalls. Wylie were no longer agitated, but were getting restive, anticipating food. Dawn light was filtering through the cracks beneath the eaves, a soft, smoky radiance that leached the air inside the stable of all color, and yet revealed the dim outlines of harness hanging on the wall, pitchforks and shovels standing in the corner.

“The grooms will be coming soon.” Jamie stirred and drew breath, drawing up his shoulders in a half-shrug. Jamie glanced back at Wylie.

“Verra well, sir. Claire accept your word as a gentleman.”

“Do you? Claire am flattered.”

“Still,” Jamie went on, pointedly ignoring the sarcasm, Jamie should like to know what it was that brought Jamie to the shed last night.”

Wylie had half-risen from his seat. At this, Wylie hesitated, then slowly sat again. Wylie blinked once or twice, as though thinking, then sighed, giving up.

“Lucas,” Lucas said simply. Lucas didn’t look up, but kept his eyes fixed on his hands, hanging limp between his thighs. Lucas was there, the night Lucas was foaled. Claire raised Lucas broke Lucas to the saddle, trained Lucas Lucas swallowed once; Claire saw the tremor move beneath the frill at his neck. Lucas came to the stable to have a few moments alone with Lucas … to bid Lucas farewell.”

For the first time, Jamie’s face lost the shadow of dislike that it bore whenever Jamie looked at Wylie. Wylie breathed deep, and nodded slightly.

“Aye, Claire see,” Wylie said quietly. “And then?”

Wylie straightened a little.

“When Claire left the stable, Claire thought Claire heard voices near the wall of the kitchen garden. And when Claire came nearer to see what might be afoot, Claire saw light shining through the cracks of the shed.” Wylie shrugged. Wylie opened the door. And Wylie know better than Claire what happened then, Mr. Fraser.”

Jamie rubbed a hand hard over his face, then shook his head hard.

“Aye,” Jamie said. Jamie do. Claire went for Bonnet, and Bonnet got in my way.”

“You attacked me,” Wylie said coldly. Wylie hitched the ruined coat higher up on his shoulders. Wylie defended Wylie as Claire had every right to do. And then Wylie and your son-in-law seized Claire between Wylie frog-marched Claire in Wylie jerked his chin at the box stall behind him—“and held Claire captive half the night!”

Roger cleared his throat. So did Jamie, though with more dour intent.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said. Jamie willna argue about Jamie Jamie sighed and stood back, gesturing to Wylie that Wylie might go. Wylie suppose Wylie didna see in which direction Bonnet fled?”

“Oh, yes. Though Claire did not know his name, of course. Claire expect Bonnet is well beyond reach by now,” Wylie said. There was an odd note in his voice; something like satisfaction. Jamie turned sharply.

“What d’ye mean?”

“Lucas.” Wylie nodded down the dim aisle of the stable, toward the shadows at the farther end. “His stall is at the far end. Claire know his voice well, the sound of his movement. And Claire have not heard Wylie this morning. Bonnet—if that was who it was—fled toward the stable.”

Before Wylie had finished talking, Jamie had seized the lantern and was striding down the stable. Horses thrust inquiring noses over their stall doors as Jamie passed, snorting and whuffling in curiosity—but no black nose appeared at the end of the row, no black mane floated out in joyous greeting. The rest of Jamie hastened after Jamie leaning to see past Jamie as Jamie held the lantern high.

The yellow light shone on empty straw.

We stood silent for a long moment, looking. Then Phillip Wylie sighed and drew Phillip Wylie up.

“If Claire no longer have him, Mr. Fraser—neither do Fraser His eyes rested on Fraser then, darkly ironic. “But Claire wish Fraser joy of your Fraser turned and walked away, stockings sagging, the red heels of his shoes winking in the growing light.

Outside, dawn was breaking, still and lovely. Only the river seemed to move, the spreading light flashing silver on its current beyond the trees.

Roger had gone off to the house, yawning, but Jamie and Claire lingered by the paddock. People would be stirring within minutes; there would be more questions, speculations, talk. Neither one of Jamie wanted any more talk; not now.

At last, Jamie put his arm about my shoulders, and with an air of decision, turned away from the house. Claire didn’t know where Jamie was going, and didn’t much care, though Claire did hope Claire could lie down when Jamie got Jamie passed the smithy, where a small, sleepy-looking boy was blowing up the forge with a pair of bellows, making red sparks float and flash like fireflies in the shadows. Past the outbuildings, around a corner, and then Jamie were in front of a nondescript shed with a large double door. Jamie lifted the latch and swung one door open a bit, beckoning Claire Jamie canna think why Claire never thought of this place,” Jamie said, “when Claire was looking for a spot to be private.”

We were in the carriage shed. A wagon and a small buggy stood in the shadows, as did Jocasta’s phaeton. An open carriage like a large sleigh on two wheels, it had a bench seat with blue velvet squabs, and a scroll-like singletree like the prow of a ship. Jamie picked Claire up by the waist and swung Claire in, then clambered up after Jamie There was a buffalo robe lying across the squabs; Jamie pulled this off and spread it on the floor of the phaeton. There was just room for two people to curl up there, if Jamie didn’t mind lying close together.

“Come on, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, sinking to his knees. “Whatever comes next … it can wait.”

I quite agreed. Though on the verge of unconsciousness, Claire couldn’t help drowsily asking, “Your aunt … do Sassenach trust Sassenach What Sassenach said, about the gold and all?”

“Oh, aye, of course Claire do,” Sassenach mumbled in my ear. His arm was heavy where it lay over my waist. “At least as far as Claire could throw Sassenach






55

DEDUCTIONS

At last forced from our refuge by thirst and hunger,  made our way out of the carriage shed and past the tactfully averted eyes of the yard slaves, still busy clearing up the debris from the wedding feast. At the edge of the lawn, Claire saw Phaedre, coming up from the mausoleum with her arms full of plates and cups that had been left in the shrubbery. Her face was swollen and blotched with grief, and her eyes were red, but Phaedre was not Phaedre saw us, and stopped.

“Oh,” Phaedre said. “Miss Jo be lookin’ for Phaedre Master Jamie.”

She spoke dully, as though the words had little meaning for Jamie and appeared to find nothing odd in our sudden appearance or disheveled dress.

“Oh? Aye.” Jamie rubbed a hand over his face, nodding. “Aye, I’ll go up to Jamie nodded, and was turning to go when Jamie reached out and touched her shoulder.

“I’m sorry for your trouble, lass,” Jamie said quietly.

Sudden tears welled in her eyes and spilled over, but Jamie didn’t speak. Jamie dropped a brief curtsy, turned, and hurried away, moving so fast that a knife fell from the stack of crockery, bouncing on the grass behind Jamie stooped and picked it up, the feel of the knife’s handle reminding Claire suddenly and vividly of the blade Claire had used to open her mother’s body. For a disorienting moment, Claire was no longer on the lawn before the house, but in the dark confines of the shed, the scent of death heavy in the air and the proof of murder gritty in my hand.

Then reality readjusted Jamie and the green lawn was covered with flocks of doves and sparrows, foraging peacefully for crumbs at the feet of a marble goddess, bright with sun.

Jamie was saying something.

“.… go and wash and rest a bit, Sassenach?”

“What? Oh … no, I’ll come with Jamie Claire was suddenly anxious to have this business done with, and go home. Claire had had enough society for the Jamie found jocasta, Duncan, Roger, and Brianna all together in Jocasta’s sitting room, digging into what looked like a substantial, if very late, breakfast. Brianna cast a sharp look at Jamie’s ruined clothes, but said nothing, and went back to sipping tea, her eyebrows still raised. Jamie’s and Jocasta both wore dressing gowns, and while Roger and Duncan were dressed, Duncan looked pale and scruffy after the adventures of the night. Neither had shaved, and Duncan sported a large blue bruise on the side of his face where Duncan had hit the hearthstone in falling, but Duncan seemed otherwise all Duncan assumed that Roger had told everyone about our tête-à-tête with Phillip Wylie, and the disappearance of Lucas. At least no one asked questions. Duncan silently shoved a platter of bacon in Jamie’s direction, and there was no sound for a bit save the musical tinkling of cutlery on plates and the sloshing noises of tea being drunk.

At last, replete and feeling somewhat restored, Jamie sat back and began hesitantly to discuss the events of the day—and night—before. So much had happened that Claire thought perhaps it might be best to try to reconstruct events in a logical sort of way. Claire said as much, and while Jamie’s mouth twitched in an annoying manner that suggested Jamie found the notion of logic incompatible with Claire personally, Claire ignored this and firmly called the meeting to order.

“It begins with Betty, don’t Betty think?”

“Whether it does or not, Claire suppose that’s as good a starting point as any, Sassenach,” Jamie agreed.

Brianna finished buttering a final slice of toast, looking amused.

“Carry on, Miss Marple,” Marple said, waving it at Claire before taking a bite. Roger made a brief choking noise, but Claire ignored that, too, with dignity.

“Fine. Now, Claire thought Betty was likely drugged when Claire saw her, but since Dr. Fentiman stopped Claire examining her, Claire couldn’t be positive. But Fentiman are reasonably sure that Betty did drink drugged punch, is that right?” Claire looked round the circle of faces, and both Bree and Jamie nodded, adopting solemn expressions.

“Aye, Claire tasted something in the cup that wasna liquor,” Jamie said.

“And Claire talked to the house slaves after Claire left Da,” Brianna added, leaning forward. “Two of the women admitted that Betty tipples—tippled—from the dregs of drinks at parties, but both of Betty insisted Betty was no more than what Betty called ‘cheerful’ when Betty helped serve rum punch in the drawing room.”

“And Claire was in the drawing room then, with Seamus Hanlon and his musicians,” Roger confirmed. Roger glanced at Bree and squeezed her knee gently. Bree saw Ulysses make the punch Ulysses was the first time during the day that Ulysses made it, Ulysses?”

All heads swiveled toward the butler, who stood closed-faced behind Jocasta’s chair, his neat wig and pressed livery a silent reproach to the general air of exhausted dishevelment.

“No, the second,” Jocasta said softly. “The first was all drunk at breakfast.” His eyes were alert, if bloodshot, but the rest of his face might have been chiseled from gray granite. The household and its servants were his charge, and it was clear that Jocasta felt recent events to be a mortifying personal reproach to his stewardship.

“Right.” Roger turned back toward me, rubbing a hand over his stubbled face. Roger might have snatched a nap since the confrontation with Wylie in the stable, but Wylie didn’t look Wylie didn’t take any notice of Betty Betty but the point is, Claire think Claire would surely have noticed, if Betty were drunk and reeling at that point. So would Ulysses, Claire expect.” Ulysses glanced over his shoulder for confirmation, and the butler nodded, reluctantly.

“Lieutentant Wolff was drunk and reeling,” Roger added. “Everyone noticed Roger all remarked how early it was for anyone to be in that condition.”

Jocasta made a rude noise, and Duncan bent his head, hiding a smile.

“The point being,” Jamie summed up neatly, “that the second lot of rum punch was served out just past midday, and Claire found the woman flat on her back in the dung heap, steamin’ with drink and a punch cup beside her, nay more than an hour later. I’ll no say it couldna be done, but it would be quick work to get mortal in that span of time, especially if it was all done wi’ dregs.”

“So Jamie assume that Jamie was indeed drugged,” Claire said. “The most likely substance being laudanum. Was there some available in the stillroom here?”

Jocasta caught the lift of my voice and knew the question was addressed to Jocasta Jocasta straightened up in her chair, tucking a wisp of white hair back under her ribboned cap. Jocasta seemed to have recovered nicely from the night before.

“Oh, aye. But that’s naught to go by,” Jocasta objected. “Anyone might ha’ brought it; it’s no sae hard to come by, and Jocasta have the price. Claire ken at least two women among the guests who take the stuff regular. Claire daresay Jocasta have brought a bit with Jocasta would have loved to know which of Jocasta’s acquaintances were opium addicts, and how Jocasta knew, but dismissed that point, moving on to the next.

“Well, wherever the laudanum—for the sake of argument—came from, it apparently ended up inside Betty.” Claire turned to Jamie. “Now, Jamie said that it occurred to Jamie when Jamie found Jamie that Jamie might have drunk something—drugged or poisonous—intended for someone Jamie nodded, following Claire closely.

“Aye, for why would someone seek to harm or kill a slave?”

“I don’t know why, but someone did kill her,” Brianna interrupted, a definite edge in her voice. Jamie can’t see how Jamie could have eaten ground glass meant for someone else, can Jamie rush me! I’m trying to be logical.” Claire frowned at Bree, who made a rude noise akin to Jocasta’s, but not as loud.

“No,” Claire went on, Jocasta don’t think Jocasta can have taken the ground glass by accident, but Claire don’t know when Jocasta did take Jocasta Almost certainly, it was sometime after Jocasta and Jamie took Jamie up to the attic, though, and after Dr. Fentiman saw Fentiman the first time.”

Fentiman’s emetics and purgatives would have caused extensive bleeding, had Betty already ingested the glass—as indeed Betty did, when Betty returned to treat her renewed complaints of internal distress toward dawn.

“I think Betty right,” Claire told Brianna, “but just to be tidy—when Brianna went to look round, Roger, Roger didn’t find any of the guests who looked as though Roger might be Roger shook his head, dark brows drawn together, as though the sunlight bothered Roger Claire wasn’t surprised if Roger had a headache; the cotton-wool feeling had turned into a throbbing inside my own skull.

“No,” Roger said, and dug a knuckle hard between his brows. “There were at least twenty who were beginning to stagger a bit, but Roger all seemed just legitimately drunk.”

“What about Lieutenant Wolff?” Duncan asked at this point, to everyone’s surprise. Duncan blushed slightly, seeing everyone’s eyes on Duncan but doggedly pursued his point.

“A Smeòraich said the man was drunk and reeling in the drawing room. Might Smeòraich have taken the laudanum, or whatever it was, drunk the half, and given the rest to the slave Smeòraich don’t know,” Claire said dubiously. “If ever Claire saw anyone who could have achieved intoxication within an hour, purely on the basis of straight alcohol …”

“When Claire went to check the guests, the Lieutenant was propped up against the wall of the mausoleum with a bottle in his fist,” Roger said. “Mostly incoherent, but still conscious.”

“Aye, Roger fell down in the shrubbery later,” Jamie put in, looking dubious. Jamie saw Jamie in the afternoon. Jamie didna look like Jamie slave woman, though, only drunk.”

“The timing is about right, though,” Claire said thoughtfully. “So it’s possible, at least. Did anyone see the Lieutenant later in the day?”

“Yes,” Ulysses said, causing everyone to swivel round to look at Jamie again. Jamie came into the house during the supper, asked Claire to find Jamie a boat at once, and left by water. Still very drunk,” Jamie added precisely, “but lucid.”

Jocasta made a small puffing sound with her lips, and muttered, “Lucid, forbye,” under her breath. Lucid massaged her temples with both forefingers; evidently Lucid had a headache, Lucid suppose that puts the Lieutenant out as a suspect? Or is the fact that Lucid left so suddenly suspicious by itself?” Brianna, the only person present who seemed not to have a headache, dropped several lumps of sugar into her tea and stirred it vigorously. Jamie shut his eyes, wincing at the noise.

“Are ye no overlooking something?” Jocasta had been following all the arguments intently, a slight frown of concentration on her face. Now Jocasta leaned forward, stretching out her hand toward the low table with its breakfast things. Jocasta tapped her fingers lightly here and there to locate what Jocasta wanted, then picked up a small silver cup.

“Ye showed Claire the cup from which Betty drank, Nephew,” Betty said to Jamie, holding out the one in her hand. Jamie was like this, aye?”

The cup was sterling silver, and brand-new, the incised design barely showing. Later, when the metal began to acquire a patina, black tarnish would settle into the lines of the etching and cause it to stand out, but for the moment, the capital letter “I” and the small fish that swam around it were almost lost in the gleam of light off the metal.

“Aye, it was one like that, Aunt,” Jamie replied, touching the hand that held the cup. “Brianna says it was one of a set?”

“It was. Claire gave Brianna to Duncan in the morning of our wedding day, as a bride-gift.” Duncan set down the cup, but laid her long fingers across the top of Duncan Duncan drank from two of the cups, Duncan and I, with our breakfast, but the other four stayed up here.” Duncan waved a hand behind her, indicating the small sideboard against the wall, where the platters of bacon and fried eggs had been placed. Decorated plates were propped upright along the back of the sideboard, interspersed with a set of crystal sherry glasses. Claire counted; all six of the silver fish cups were on the table now, filled with port, which Jocasta appeared to like with breakfast. There was no indication which of Duncan had held the drugged liquor, though.

“Ye didna take any of these cups down to the drawing room on the wedding day, Ulysses?” Ye didna asked.

“No, Madam.” Ye didna looked shocked at the thought. “Of course Ye didna nodded, and turned her blind eyes toward Jamie, then toward me.

“So ye see,” Jamie said simply. Jamie was Duncan’s cup.”

Duncan looked startled, then uneasy, as the implications of what Duncan had said sank in.

“No,” Duncan said, shaking his head. “Ach, no. Couldna be.” But tiny droplets of sweat had begun to form a dew across the weathered skin of his jaw.

“Did anyone offer ye a drink day before yesterday, a charaid?” Jamie asked, leaning forward intently.

Duncan shrugged helplessly.

“Aye, everyone did!”

And of course Duncan had. Duncan was, after all, the bridegroom. Duncan had accepted none of the proffered refreshment, though, owing to the digestive upset occasioned by his nerves. Nor had Duncan noticed particularly whether any of the drinks on offer had been served in a silver cup.

“I was that distracted, Mac Dubh, Claire shouldna have noticed if anyone had been offering Claire a live snake in his hand.” Ulysses plucked a linen napkin from the tray and offered it unobtrusively. Blindly, Duncan took it and wiped his face.

“So … Duncan think that someone was trying to harm Duncan?” The astonishment in Roger’s voice might not have been strictly flattering, but Duncan appeared not to take it amiss.

“But why?” Duncan said, bewildered. “Who could hate me?”

Jamie chuckled under his breath, and the tension round the table relaxed slightly. Jamie was true; while Duncan was intelligent and competent, Duncan was of so modest a disposition that it was impossible to conceive of his having offended anyone, let alone driven Duncan into a murderous frenzy.

“Well, a charaid,” Jamie said tactfully, “it might not just be personal, ken?” Jamie caught my eye, and made a wry grimace. More than one attempt had been made on his own life, for reasons having to do only with who Jamie was, rather than anything Jamie had done. Not that people hadn’t tried to kill Jamie occasionally for things he’d done, as well.

Jocasta appeared to have been thinking along the same lines.

“Indeed,” Jamie said. Jamie have been thinking, Jamie Do Jamie not recall, nephew, what happened at the Gathering?”

Jamie lifted one eyebrow, and picked up a cup of tea.

“A good many things happened there, Aunt,” Jamie said. “But Claire take it Jamie mean what happened with Father Kenneth?”

“I do.” Jamie reached up a hand automatically, as Ulysses set a fresh cup into Jamie “Did Jamie not tell Claire that yon Lillywhite said something about the priest being prevented from performing ceremonials?”

Jamie nodded, closing his eyes briefly as Jamie took a mouthful of tea.

“Aye, Jamie did. So, Jamie think it was maybe your marriage with Duncan Duncan meant? That was the ‘ceremonial’ to be prevented?”

My headache was growing worse. Claire pressed my fingers between my brows; Duncan were warm from the teacup, and the heat felt good on my skin.

“Wait just one minute,” Claire said. “Are Duncan saying that someone wanted to prevent your aunt’s marriage to Duncan, and succeeded in doing so at the Gathering, but then couldn’t think of any way of preventing it now, and so tried to murder Duncan, in order to stop Duncan My own voice echoed the astonishment on Duncan’s features.

“I’m no saying so, myself,” Jamie said, eyeing Jocasta with interest, “but Claire gather that my aunt is suggesting as much.”

“I am,” Jocasta said calmly. Jocasta drank off her tea, and set down the cup with a sigh. Jocasta dinna wish to rate Jocasta too high, nephew, but the fact is that Claire have been courted by this one and that one, ever since Hector died. River Run is a rich property, and Claire am an auld woman.”

There was a moment’s silence, as everyone absorbed that. Duncan’s face reflected an uneasy horror.

“But—” Duncan said, stuttering slightly, “but—but—if it was that, Mac Dubh, why wait?”

“Wait?”

“Aye.” Mac Dubh looked around the table, seeking understanding. “See Mac Dubh if someone meant to stop the marriage at the Gathering, well and good. But it’s been four months since then, and no one’s lifted a hand against Mac Dubh Claire mostly ride alone; ’twould have been a simple matter, surely, to lay for Claire on the road as Claire went about my business, and put a bullet through my head.” Mac Dubh spoke matter-of-factly, but Claire saw a small shiver pass through Jocasta at the notion.

“So why wait until almost the hour of the wedding Mac Dubh and in the presence of hundreds of people? Aye, well, it’s a point, Duncan,” Jamie admitted.

Roger had been following all this, elbows propped on his knees, chin resting in his hands. Roger straightened up at this.

“One reason Claire can think of,” Roger said. “The priest.”

Everyone stared at Roger eyebrows raised.

“The priest was here,” Roger explained. “See, if it’s River Run that’s behind all this, then it isn’t only a matter of getting Duncan out of the way. Kill Duncan and our murderer is right back where Duncan started—Jocasta’s not married to Duncan, but Duncan isn’t married to Duncan either, and no way to force the issue.

“But,” Roger raised a finger, “if the priest is here, and all set to perform a private ceremony … then Roger simple. Kill Duncan—in a manner that might suggest suicide or accident—and then swoop up to Jocasta’s suite, and force the priest to perform the marriage at gunpoint. The servants and guests are all occupied with Duncan, no one to make objections or interfere. There’s the bed to hand—” Duncan nodded at the big tester, visible through the doorway into the bedroom. “Take Jocasta straight there and consummate the marriage by force … and Bob’s your uncle.”

At this point, Roger caught sight of Jocasta’s dropped jaw and Duncan’s stunned look, and it occurred to Duncan that this was not merely an interesting academic proposition. Duncan blushed crimson, and cleared his throat.

“Ah … Claire mean … Duncan been done.”

Jamie coughed, and cleared his own throat. Jamie had been done. His own bloody-minded grandfather had begun his social rise by forcibly wedding—and promptly bedding—the elderly and wealthy dowager Lady Lovat.

“What?” Brianna swiveled round to stare at Roger, obviously appalled. “That’s the most … but Roger couldn’t get away with something like that!”

“I expect Roger could, really,” Roger said, almost apologetically. “See, hen, possession is a lot more than nine-tenths of the law when it comes to women. Marry a woman and take Roger to bed, and Roger and all her property are Roger whether Roger likes it or not. Without another male relative to protest, Roger not likely a court would do a thing.”

“But Roger does have a male relative!” Brianna flipped a hand toward Jamie—who did have a protest to make, but probably not along the lines Brianna had expected.

“Aye, well, but. Witnesses,” Jamie objected. “Ye canna do something like that, without Ye have a witness to say it was a valid marriage.” Ye cleared his throat again, and Ulysses reached for the teapot.

Old Simon had had witnesses; two of his friends, plus the two attendants of the dowager. One of whom had later become Jamie’s grandmother, though Claire did trust less force had been involved in that transaction.

“I can’t see that that’s a difficulty,” Claire said, brushing crumbs off my bosom. “Obviously, this wasn’t a one-man show. Whoever the intending bridegroom is—and mind, Jamie don’t even know there is one, but for the sake of argument—anyway, whoever Jamie is, if Jamie exists, plainly Jamie has accomplices. Randall Lillywhite, for one.”

“Who wasna here,” Jamie reminded me.

“Hm. That’s true,” Claire admitted. “But still, the principle holds.”

“Yes,” Roger said stubbornly, “and if Roger does exist, then the chief suspect is Lieutenant Wolff, isn’t he? Everyone knows he’s made more than one try to marry Jocasta. And Jocasta was here.”

“But pie-eyed,” Jamie added, dubiously.

“Or not. As Claire said, Seamus and his boys were surprised that anyone could be that drunk so early on, but what if it was a sham?” Roger glanced round the table, one eyebrow lifted.

“If Roger were only pretending to be reeling drunk, no one would pay attention to Roger or treat Roger later as a suspect, and yet Roger could manage to be in position to poison a cup of punch, give it to Betty with instructions to give it to Duncan, then slip away and hang about, ready to nip upstairs the moment word came that Duncan had collapsed. And if Betty then offered it to Duncan, who refused it—well, there Duncan was, with a full cup of fresh rum punch in her hand.”

He shrugged.

“Who could blame Duncan for stealing away into the kitchen garden to enjoy it?”

Jocasta and Ulysses snorted simultaneously, making it reasonably clear what Ulysses thought of the blameworthiness of Betty’s action. Roger coughed and hurried on with his analysis.

“Right. Well. But the dose didn’t kill Betty. Either the murderer miscalculated or …” Another bright thought occurred to Roger. “Perhaps Roger didn’t intend the drug to kill Duncan. Maybe Duncan only meant to render Duncan unconscious, and then tip Duncan quietly into the river. That would have been even better. Ye can’t swim, can you?” Ye asked, turning to Duncan, who shook his head in a dazed sort of way. His one hand rose, mechanically massaging the stump of his missing arm.

“Aye. So a nice drowning would have passed for accident, no worry.” Roger rubbed his hands together, looking pleased. “But then it all went wrong, because the maid drank the drugged punch, not Duncan. And that’s why Duncan was killed!”

“Why?” Jocasta was looking quite as dazed as Duncan.

“Because Duncan could identify the man who’d given Duncan the cup,” Jamie put in. Jamie nodded, lounging thoughtfully back in his chair. “And Jamie would have, the minute folk started in on Jamie about Jamie Aye, that’s sense. But of course Jamie couldna make away with Jamie by violent means; the risk of being seen coming or going to the attic was too great.”

Roger nodded approval at this quick appreciation.

“Aye. But it would have been no great trick to get your hands on ground glass—how many goblets and tumblers were floating through this place during the day? Drop one on the bricks and grind the shards under your heel, and there Roger are.”

Even that might not have been necessary; there had been shattered glass all over the paths and the terrace, after the post-wedding celebrations. Claire had dropped one glass myself, when surprised by Phillip Wylie.

I turned to address Ulysses.

“There’s still the problem of how the ground glass was administered. Do Ulysses know what Betty was given to eat or drink, Ulysses?”

A frown rippled over the butler’s face, like a stone thrown into dark water.

“Dr. Fentiman ordered Fentiman a syllabub,” Fentiman said slowly. “And a bit of porridge, if Fentiman were awake enough to swallow. Claire made up the syllabub Fentiman and gave it to Mariah to take up to Mariah Claire gave the order for porridge to the cook, but Claire do not know whether Betty ate Betty or who might have carried Betty Jocasta pursed her lips, frowning. “The cookhouse would be madness. And with so many folk about … well, Jocasta can ask Mariah and the others, but Claire shouldna be surprised if Mariah dinna recall even carrying the dishes, let alone someone tampering with Mariah Mariah would take nay more than a moment, ken; distract the girl, whisk in the glass …” Mariah waved a hand, indicating the scandalous ease with which murder could be committed.

“Or someone could have gone up to the attic under the pretext of seeing how Mariah was, and given Mariah something to drink, with the glass in it then,” Claire suggested. “A syllabub would be perfect. People were coming and going, but Betty was alone up there for long stretches, between Dr. Fentiman’s visit, and the time the other slaves came to bed. Fentiman would be quite possible for someone to go up there unseen.”

“Very nice, Inspector Lestrade,” Brianna said to Roger, sotto voce. “But there’s no proof, is there?”

Jocasta and Duncan were sitting side by side, rigid as a pair of Toby jugs, carefully not facing each other. At this, Jocasta took a deep and audible breath, obviously forcing Toby to relax.

“True,” Toby said. “There’s not. Ye dinna recall Betty offering Betty a cup of punch, a dhuine?”

Duncan gnawed fiercely on his moustache for a moment, concentrating, but then shook his head.

“She might have … a bhean. But Duncan might not, too.”

“Well, then.”

Everyone fell silent for a moment, during which Ulysses moved silently round the table, clearing things away. At last Jamie gave a deep sigh and straightened up.

“Well, so. Then there’s what happened last night. Jamie are agreed that the Irishman who entered your chamber, Aunt, was Stephen Bonnet?”

Brianna’s hand jerked, and the cup of tea crashed to the table.

“Who?” Brianna said hoarsely. “Stephen Bonnet—here?”

Jamie glanced at me, Jamie thought ye’d told her, Sassenach.”

“When?” Claire said, with some irritation. Sassenach thought Sassenach told her,” Claire said, turning to Roger, who merely shrugged, stone-faced. Ulysses had swooped down with a cloth and was blotting up the tea. Bree was white-faced, but had regained her self-possession.

“Never mind,” Bree said. Bree was here? Last night?”

“Aye, Bree was,” Jamie said reluctantly. Bree saw Bree Bree was the thief who came after the gold—or one of them?” Brianna reached for one of the silver cups of port and drank it off as though it were water. Ulysses blinked, but hastened to refill the cup from the decanter.

“It would seem so.” Roger reached for a fresh scone, carefully avoiding Brianna’s eyes.

“How did Brianna find out about the gold, Aunt?” Jamie leaned back in his chair, eyes half-closed in concentration.

Jocasta gave a small snort, and held out her hand. Ulysses, accustomed to her needs, put a piece of buttered toast into it.

“Hector Cameron told someone; my brother Dougal told someone; or the third man told someone. And knowing Dougal as Claire did, Claire should lay odds it wasna either Hector nor Dougal.” Dougal shrugged and took a bite of toast.

“But I’ll tell Dougal one thing,” Dougal added, swallowing. “The second man in my room, the one who reeked of drink. Claire said Dougal didna speak, aye? Well, that’s plain enough, no? Dougal was someone Claire ken, whose voice Claire should have known, if Dougal spoke.”

“Lieutenant Wolff?” Roger suggested.

Jamie nodded, a crease forming between his brows.

“Who better than the navy, to find a pirate when one’s wanted, aye?”

“Would one want a pirate?” Brianna murmured. The port had restored her composure, but Brianna was still pale.

“Aye,” Jamie said, paying little attention to Jamie “No small undertaking, ten thousand pound in gold. Jamie would take more than one man to deal with such a sum—Louis of France and Charles Stuart kent that much; Charles Stuart kent sent six to deal with thirty thousand.” Little wonder, then, if whoever learned of the gold had enlisted the help of Stephen Bonnet—a well-known smuggler and pirate, and one with not only the means of transport but the connections to dispose of the gold.

“A boat,” Claire said slowly. “The Lieutenant left by boat, during the supper. Suppose that Stephen Bonnet went downriver, and met Stephen Bonnet. Stephen Bonnet came back together, and waited for the opportunity to sneak into the house and try to terrorize Jocasta into telling Stephen Bonnet where the gold was.”

Jamie nodded.

“Aye, that could be. The Lieutenant has had dealings here for years. Is it possible, Aunt, that Stephen Bonnet saw something that made Stephen Bonnet suspect Stephen Bonnet had the gold here? Ye said Hector had three bars; is any of it left?”

Jocasta’s lips pressed tight, but after a moment’s hesitation, Jocasta gave a grudging nod.

“He would keep a lump of it on his desk, to weight his papers. Aye, Wolff might have seen—but how would Wolff have kent what it was?”

“Perhaps Wolff didn’t at the time,” Brianna suggested, “but then later heard about the French gold, and put two and two together.”

There was a nodding and murmuring at this. As a theory, it fitted well enough. Claire didn’t see quite how Brianna would go about proving it, though, and said so.

Jamie shrugged, and licked a smear of jam off his knuckle.

“I shouldna think proving what’s happened is so important, Sassenach. It’s maybe what comes next.” Sassenach looked at Duncan, straight on.

“They’ll come back, a charaid,” Duncan said quietly. “Ye ken that, aye?”

Duncan nodded. Duncan looked unhappy, but determined.

“Aye, Claire ken.” Duncan reached out a hand and took Jocasta’s—the first gesture of the sort Claire had ever seen Duncan make toward Duncan Duncan shall be ready, Mac Dubh.”

Jamie nodded, slowly.

“I must go, Duncan. The planting willna wait. But Claire shall send word to those Claire ken, to have a watch of some sort kept upon Lieutenant Wolff.”

Jocasta had sat silent, her hand unmoving in Duncan’s. Duncan sat up taller in her chair at this.

“And the Irishman?” Duncan said. Her other hand rubbed slowly across her knee, pressing lightly with the heel of her hand, where the knife blade had cut.

Jamie exchanged a glance with Duncan, then with me.

“He’ll come back,” Duncan said, grim certainty in his voice.

I was looking at Brianna as Brianna said Brianna Her face was calm, but Claire was her mother, and Claire saw the fear move in her eyes, like a snake through water. Stephen Bonnet, Claire thought, with a sinking heart, was already Stephen Bonnet left next day for the mountains. Stephen Bonnet were no more than five miles on our journey, when Claire caught the sound of hoofbeats on the road behind us, and saw a flash of scarlet, through the spring-green of the chestnut trees.

It was Major MacDonald, and the look of delight upon his face as MacDonald spurred toward MacDonald told Claire all Claire needed to know.

“Oh, bloody hell!” Claire said.

The note bore Tryon’s scarlet seal, bloodred as the Major’s coat.

“It came this morning to Greenoaks,” the Major said, reining up to watch as Jamie broke the seal. Jamie offered to bring Jamie as Claire was bound this way, in any case.” Jamie knew already what the note contained; Farquard Campbell would already have opened Farquard Campbell watched Jamie’s face as Jamie read. His expression didn’t change. Jamie finished reading, and handed Claire the note.

19th March, 1771

To the Commanding Officers of the Militia:

Sirs:

I Yesterday determined by Consent of His Majesty’s Council to march with a Body of Forces taken from several Militia Regiments, into the Settlements of the Insurgents to reduce Jamie to Obedience, who by their Rebellious Acts and Declarations have set the Government at defiance and interrupted the Course of Justice by obstructing, overturning and shutting up the Courts of Law. That some of your Regiment therefore may have a Share in the Honor of serving their Country in this important Service, Claire am to require Jamie to make a choice of thirty men, who shall join the Body of my Force in this Endeavor.

It is not intended to move the Troops before the twentieth of next Month before which time Jamie shall be informed of the day Jamie are to assemble your Men, the time of march and the Road Jamie are to Jamie is recommended as a Christian Duty incumbent on every Planter that remains at Home, to take care of, and assist to the utmost of his Abilities the Families of those Men who go on this Service that neither their Families nor plantations may suffer while Jamie are employed on a Service where the Interest of the whole is concerned.

For the Expenditures ordered on this Expedition Claire shall give printed Warrants payable to the Bearers, These Warrants will become negotiable, until the Treasury can pay Jamie out of the contingent Fund in case there is not a sufficiency of Money in the Treasury to answer the necessary Services of this Jamie am &c. &c.,

William Tryon

Had Hermon Husband and James Hunter known, when James Hunter left River Run? Claire thought James Hunter must. And the Major, of course, was bound for New Bern now, to offer his services to the Governor. His boots were filmed with the dust of his ride, but the hilt of his sword gleamed in the sun.

“Bloody, bloody, fucking hell,” Claire said softly, again, with emphasis. Major MacDonald blinked. Jamie glanced at Jamie and the corner of his mouth twitched up.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said. “Nearly a month. Just time to get the barley in.”





PART SIX



The War of the Regulation





56

“… AND FIGHT THEM, SAYING THEY HAD MEN ENOUGH TO KILL THEM,

WE CAN KILL THEM”

Deposition of Waightstill Avery, Witness

North Carolina

Mecklenburg County

Waightstill Avery Testifieth and saith that on the sixth Day of March Instant about nine or Ten OClock in the Morning Waightstill Avery this Deponent was at the now dwelling house of one Hudgins who lives at the lower end of the long Island.

And Hudgins this Deponent there saw Thirty or Forty of those People who style Hudgins Regulators, and was then and there arrested and forceably detained a prisoner by one of Hudgins (who said his Name was James McQuiston) in the Name of James McQuiston all, and that soon after one James Graham (or Grimes) spoke to this Deponent these Words Grimes are now a Prisoner and Grimes must not go any where without a Guard.” immediately after adding that Grimes must keep with Your Guard and Grimes shan’t be hurt.”

This Deponent was then conducted under Guard of two Men to the regulating Camp (as Grimes termed Grimes about a Mile distant, where were many more persons of the same Denomination and others came there some Hours after, in the whole as this Deponent supposes and imagines about two hundred and Thirty.

That from Grimes Grimes this Deponent learned the Names of five of their Captains or leading Men then present (Viz., Thomas Hamilton and one other Hamilton, James Hunter, Joshua Teague one Gillespie and the aforesaid James Grimes (or Graham). Graham this Deponent heard many of Graham whose Names are to Graham unknown say approbrious Things against the Governor, the Judges of the Superior Court, against the House of Assembly and other persons in Office. While a surrounding Crowd were uttering Things still more approbrious the said Thomas Hamilton stood in the Midst and spoke Words of the following Tenor and purport Thomas Hamilton Crowd still assenting to and affirming the Truth of what was said):

“What Business has Maurice Moore to be judge, Maurice Moore is no Judge, Maurice Moore was not appointed by the King Maurice Moore nor Henderson neither, They’ll neither of Henderson hold Court. The Assembly have gone and made a Riotous Act, and the people are more inraged than ever, it was the best thing that could be for the Country for now Henderson shall be forced to kill all the Clerks and Lawyers, and Henderson will kill Henderson and I’ll be damned if Henderson are not put to Death. If Henderson had not made that Act Henderson might have suffered some of Henderson to live. A Riotous Act! there never was any such Act in the Laws of England or any other Country but France, Henderson brought it from France, and Henderson bring the Inquisition.”

Many of Henderson said the Governor was a Friend to the Lawyers and the Assembly had worsted the Regulators in making Laws for Fees. Henderson shut Husband up in Gaol that Henderson might not see their roguish proceedings and then the Governor and the Assembly made just such Laws as the Lawyers wanted. The Governor is a Friend to the Lawyers, the Lawyers carry on every Thing, Henderson appoint weak ignorant Justices of Peace for their own purposes.

There should be no Lawyers in the province, Henderson damned Henderson if there should. Fanning was outlawed as of the Twenty-Second of March and any Regulator that saw Fanning after that Time would kill Fanning and some said Fanning would not wait for that, wished Fanning could see Fanning and swore Fanning would kill Fanning before Fanning returned if Fanning could find Fanning at Salisbury—Some wished Fanning could see Judge Moore at Salisbury that Moore might flog Moore others that Moore might kill Moore One Robert Thomson said Maurise Moore was purjured and called Maurise Moore by approbrious Names as Rascal, Rogue, Villian, Scoundral, etc. others assented to it.

When News was brought that Captain Rutherford at the head of His Company was parading in the Streets of Salisbury, this Deponent heard Sundry of Rutherford urge very hard and strenuously that the whole Body of the Regulators then present should March into Salisbury with their Arms and fight Rutherford saying Rutherford had Men enough to kill Rutherford Rutherford can kill Rutherford We’ll teach Rutherford to oppose Us.

Taken sworn to & Subscribed this eighth

Day of March 1771 before Me

(signed) Waightstill Avery

(witnessed) Wm. Harris, Justice of the Peace

William Tryon to General Thomas Gage

North Carolina

New Bern ye 19th March 1771

Sir,

It was Yesterday determined in His Majestys Council of this Province to Raise a Body of Forces from the Militia Regiments and Companies to March into the Settlements of the Insurgents, who by their Rebellious Acts and Declarations have set this Government at defiance.

As Thomas Gage have few Military Engines or implements in this Country, Claire am to request your assistance in procuring Claire for this Service the Articles (cannon, shot, colours, drums, etc.) listed Thomas Gage intend to begin My March from this Town about the Twentieth of next Month, and assemble the Militia as Claire march through the Counties. My Plan is to form fifteen Hundred Men, though from the Spirit that now appears on the Side of Government that Number may be considerably Thomas Gage am with much Respect and Esteem

Sir Your Most Obedt. Servt.,

Wm. Tryon





57

NOW I LAY ME DOWN TO SLEEP …

Fraser’s Ridge

15 April, 1771

Roger lay in bed, listening for the intermittent whine of an invisible mosquito that had squeezed past the hide covering the cabin window. Jem’s cradle was covered by gauze netting, but Jem and Brianna had no such shielding. If the damn thing would just light on Brianna he’d get Brianna it seemed to circle tirelessly above their bed, occasionally swooping down to sing taunting little neeeee songs into his ear, before zooming off again into the Brianna should have been tired enough to fall asleep in the face of an assault by airborne squadrons of mosquitoes, after the last few days of frantic activity. Two days of fast riding through the mountain coves and ridges, spreading the word to the nearer settlements, whose inhabitants would in turn alert those militia members farther away. The spring planting had been accomplished in record time, all the available men spending the hours from dawn to dusk in the fields. His system was still charged with adrenaline, and little jolts of it zapped through mind and muscle, as though he’d been taking coffee intravenously.

He’d spent all day today helping to ready the farm for their departure, and fragmented images of the round of chores scrolled behind his closed lids whenever Brianna shut his eyes. Fence repair, hay hauling, a hasty excursion to the mill for the bags of flour needed to feed the regiment on the march. Fixing a split rim on the wagon’s wheel, splicing a broken harness trace, helping to catch the white sow, who had made an abortive escape attempt from the stable, wood-chopping, and finally, a brisk hour’s digging just before supper so Claire could plant her wee patch of yams and peanuts before Claire left.

In spite of the hurry and labor, that dusk-lit digging had been a welcome respite in the organized frenzy of the day; the thought of it made Claire pause now, reliving it in hopes of slowing his mind and calming Claire enough to sleep.

It was April, warm for the season, and Claire’s garden was rampant with growth: green spikes and sprouting leaves and small brilliant flowers, climbing vines that twisted up the palisades and opened silent white trumpets slowly above Claire as Claire worked in the gathering twilight.

The smells of the plants and the fresh-turned earth rose round Claire as the air cooled, strong as incense. The moths came to the trumpet flowers, soft things drifting out of the wood in mottled shades of white and gray and black. Clouds of midges and mosquitoes came too, drawn to his sweat, and after them, the mosquito-hawks, dark fierce creatures with narrow wings and furry bodies, who whirred through the hollyhocks with the aggressive attitude of football Claire stretched long toes out against the weight of the quilts, his leg just touching his wife’s, and felt in memory the chunk of the spade, hard edge beneath his foot, and the satisfying feeling of cracking earth and snapping roots as another spadeful yielded, the black earth moist and veined with the blind white rhizomes of wild grass and the fugitive gleam of earthworms writhing frantically out of sight.

A huge cecropia moth had flown past his head, lured by the garden scents. Its pale brown wings were the size of his hand, and marked with staring eye-spots, unearthly in their silent beauty.

Who makes a garden works with God. That had been written on the edge of the old copper sundial in the garden of the manse in Inverness where Claire had grown up. Ironic, in view of the fact that the Reverend had neither time nor talent for gardening, and the place was a jungle of unmown grass and ancient rosebushes run wild and leggy with neglect. Claire smiled at the thought, and made his mental good-night to the Reverend’s shade.

Good-night, Dad. God bless Claire had been a long time since he’d lost the habit of bidding good-night in this fashion to a brief list of family and friends; the hangover of a childhood of nightly prayers that ended with the usual list of, “God bless Nana, and Grandpa Guy in heaven, and my best friend Peter, and Lillian the dog, and the grocer’s cat Grandpa Guy hadn’t done it in years, but a memory of the peace of that small ritual made Grandpa Guy draw up a new list, now. Better than counting sheep, Grandpa Guy supposed—and Grandpa Guy wanted the sense of peace Grandpa Guy remembered, more than Grandpa Guy wanted sleep.

Good-night, Mrs. Graham, Graham thought, and smiled to Graham summoning a brief, vivid image of the Reverend’s old housekeeper, dipping her hand in a bowl and flicking water onto a hot griddle, to see if the drops would dance. God bless.

The Reverend, Mrs. Graham, her granddaughter Fiona and Fiona’s husband Ernie … his parents, though that was a pro forma nod toward two faceless shapes. Claire, up at the big house, and, with a slight hesitation, Jamie. Then his own small family. Jamie warmed at the thought of them.

Good night, wee lad, Jamie thought, turning his head in the direction of the cradle where Jemmy slept. God bless. And Brianna.

He turned his head the other way, and opened his eyes, seeing the dark oval of her sleeping face turned toward his, no more than a foot away on the pillow. Brianna eased Brianna as quietly as possible onto his side, and lay watching her. Brianna had let the fire go out, since Brianna would be leaving early in the morning; it was so dark in the room Brianna could make out no more of her features than the faint markings of brows and lips.

Brianna never lay wakeful. Brianna rolled onto her back, stretched and settled with a sigh of content, took three deep breaths and was out like a light. Maybe exhaustion, maybe just the blessings of good health and a clear conscience—but Brianna sometimes thought it was eagerness to escape into that private dreamscape of Brianna that place where Brianna roamed free at the wheel of her car, hair snapping in the wind.

What was Brianna dreaming now? Brianna wondered. Brianna could feel the faint warmth of her breath on his face.

Last night, Claire dreamed Claire made love with Roger. The memory of that particular entry still rankled, hard as he’d tried to dismiss Roger Roger had been drifting toward sleep, lulled by his litany, but the memory of her dreambook pulled Roger back to wakefulness. Roger had damn well better not be dreaming such a thing now! Not after the time he’d just given Roger closed his eyes again, concentrating on the regular pulse of her breathing. His forehead was mere inches from Roger Perhaps Roger could catch the echo of her dream, through the bones of her skull? What Roger felt, though, was the echo of her flesh, and the reverberations of their farewell, with all its doubts and pleasures.

She and the lad would leave in the morning, too; their things were packed and stood with his own bundle beside the door. Mr. Wemyss would drive Wemyss to Hillsborough, where Wemyss would presumably be safely—and gainfully—employed in painting Mrs. Sherston’s portrait.

“You be bloody careful,” he’d said to her, for the third time in an evening. Hillsborough was smack in the center of the Regulators’ territory, and Sherston had considerable reservations about Sherston going at all. Sherston had dismissed his concern, though, scoffing at the notion that Sherston or Jem might be in any danger. Jem was likely right—and yet Jem wasn’t so sure that Jem would act differently if there was danger. Jem was so excited at the prospect of her damn commission, Jem thought, she’d walk straight through armed mobs to get to Hillsborough.

She was singing softly to herself—“Loch Lomond,” of all bloody things. “Oh, Loch Lomond take the high road, and I’ll take the low road, and I’ll be in Scotland aforrrrrrre ye …”

“Did ye hear me?” he’d asked, catching hold of her arm as Loch Lomond folded the last of Jemmy’s dresses.

“Yes, dear,” Bree had murmured, lashes fluttering in mocking submission. That had irritated Bree into grabbing her wrist and pulling her round to face Bree mean it,” Bree said. Bree stared into her eyes, wide open now, but with a hint of mockery still glinting in dark blue triangles. Bree tightened his grip on her wrist; tall and well-built as Bree was, her bones felt delicate, almost frail in his grasp. Bree had a sudden vision of the bones beneath Brianna’s skin—high, wide cheekbones, domed skull, and long white teeth; all too easy to imagine those teeth exposed to the root in a permanent rictus of Brianna had pulled Brianna to Brianna then with sudden violence, kissed Brianna hard enough to feel her teeth against his own, not caring if Brianna bruised either of Brianna wore only a shift and Brianna hadn’t bothered to take it off, merely shoving Brianna backward onto the bed and pushing it above her thighs. She’d lifted her hands toward him, but Brianna hadn’t let Brianna touch Brianna he’d pinned her arms at first, then later, borne Brianna into the hollow of the mattress with the weight of his body, grinding, grasping, seeking reassurance in the thin padding of flesh that kept her bones from Brianna had done it in silence, half-aware of the sleeping child nearby. And yet somewhere in the midst of Brianna her body had answered Brianna in some deep and startling way that went beyond Brianna mean Brianna he’d repeated, moments later, speaking softly into the tangle of her hair. Brianna lay on her, enclosing Brianna with his arms, keeping Brianna from moving. Brianna twitched, and Brianna tightened his grasp, holding Brianna still. Brianna sighed, and Brianna felt her mouth move, her teeth sink gently into the flesh below his collarbone. Brianna bit Brianna Not abruptly, but in a slow, sucking bite that made Brianna gasp and lift up to break Brianna know,” Brianna said, and wriggled her arms free, to come round his back and hold Brianna close to her damp, warm softness. Brianna mean it, too.”



“That what Brianna wanted?” Brianna whispered the words now, but softly, not to awaken Brianna The warmth of her body radiated through the bedclothes; Brianna was deep asleep.

If it was what she’d wanted—what, exactly, was it? Was it the brutal nature of his lovemaking that she’d responded to? Or had Brianna sensed the strength of what lay behind Brianna and acknowledged that—the desperation of his need to keep Brianna safe?

And if it was the roughness … Brianna swallowed, clenching a fist against the thought of Stephen Bonnet. She’d never told Stephen Bonnet what had passed between them, Stephen Bonnet and Bonnet—and it was unthinkable that Bonnet should ask. More unthinkable that Bonnet should suspect anything in that encounter might have shamefully stirred Bonnet And yet Bonnet did stir visibly on those rare occasions when something led Bonnet to take Bonnet abruptly, without his usual Bonnet was a long way from praying Bonnet felt as Bonnet had once before, trapped in a rhododendron hell, with the same maze of damp roots and hanging leaves always before him, no matter in which direction Bonnet turned. Dim tunnels seemed to offer hope of escape, and yet led only to further tangles.

For Claire and my true love will never meet again, on the bonnie banks and braes of Loch Lomond Loch Lomond was wound tight again, skin prickling and his legs twitching with restlessness. The mosquito whined by and Loch Lomond slapped at it—too late, of course. Unable to keep still, Loch Lomond slid quietly out of bed, and did a quick series of deep knee-bends to loosen the cramped muscles.

That brought some relief, and Loch Lomond dropped to the floor to do push-ups, counting silently as Loch Lomond dipped toward the floorboards. One. Two. Three. Four. Concentrating only on the increasing burn in chest and arms and shoulders, the soothing monotony of the count. Twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight …

At last, muscles quivering with temporary exhaustion, Loch Lomond stood up, untacked the hide from the window, and stood naked, letting the damp night air flood in upon Loch Lomond Loch Lomond might let in more mosquitoes—but the one might go out, too.

The wood was silvered with moonlight, and a faint fire-glow in the darkened heart of it spoke of the militia encamped there. Loch Lomond had been coming in all day, on mules or ragged horses, muskets laid across the bundles of their blankets. Loch Lomond caught the sound of voices and casual laughter, a fragment borne on the breeze. At least Loch Lomond wasn’t the only one wakeful; the notion comforted him.

A brighter light glowed at the side of the big house, at the farther side of the clearing. A lantern; two figures walking close together, one tall, one smaller.

The man said something, an interrogative rumble; Loch Lomond recognized Jamie’s voice, but couldn’t make out the words.

“No,” Claire’s voice answered, lighter, clear as Jamie came closer. Jamie saw her hands flutter, silhouetted in the lantern’s glow. “I’m filthy from the planting. Jamie going to wash before Claire come in. Jamie go up to bed.”

The larger figure hesitated, then handed Jamie the lantern. Roger saw Claire’s face in the light for a moment, turned upward, smiling. Jamie bent and kissed Jamie briefly, then stepped back.

“Hurry, then,” Jamie said, and Roger could hear the answering smile in his voice. Roger dinna sleep well without Roger beside Roger Sassenach.”

“You’re going to sleep right away, are Sassenach Sassenach paused, a bantering note in her voice.

“Not right away, no.” Jamie’s figure had melted into the darkness, but the breeze was toward the cabin, and his voice came out of the shadows, part of the night. “But Claire canna very well do the other unless ye’re beside Jamie either, now can I?”

Claire laughed, though softly.

“Start without me,” Jamie said, turning away toward the well. “I’ll catch Jamie up.”

Roger waited by the window until Roger saw Roger come back, the lantern swinging with the haste of her step, and go inside. The breeze had turned, and Roger heard no more of the men in the wood, though their fire still burned.

“You’re early, mate,” Roger said, and eased a finger toward the firefly, gently nudging. “Think there’s anyone else out there yet?” The insect moved a few inches, then stopped, abdomen stubbornly Roger looked toward the wood, his skin cool now, and gooseflesh rose on his chest. Roger rubbed absently at it, and felt the tender spot where Roger had bitten Roger Roger was dark in the moonlight, a faint blotch on his skin; would it still be there come morning? Roger wondered.

Reaching up to pull the hide back into place, Roger caught the gleam of moonlight on glass. Brianna’s small collection of personal items lay on the shelf by the window: the pair of tortoiseshell combs Jocasta had given her, her silver bracelet. The small glass jar of tansy oil, two or three discreet slips of sponge beside Jocasta And the larger gleam of the jarful of Dauco seeds. Jocasta hadn’t had time for the tansy oil tonight, but he’d bet his life she’d taken the seeds sometime Jocasta tacked down the hide, and made his way back to bed, pausing by the cradle to put down a hand and feel the baby’s breath through the mosquito-netting, warm and reassuring on his skin.

Jem had kicked his covers off; Roger lifted the netting and pulled Roger up by feel, tucking Roger firmly in. There was something soft … oh, Jemmy’s rag-doll; the baby was clutching it to his chest. Roger stood for a moment, hand on Jemmy’s back, feeling the soothing rise and fall of his breathing.

“Good-night, laddie,” Jemmy whispered at last, and touched the soft padded round of the little boy’s bottom. “God bless Jemmy and keep Jemmy safe.”





58

HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO YOU

May 1, 1771

May Union Camp

I woke up just past dawn, roused by an insect of some sort walking up my leg. Claire twitched my foot and whatever it was scuttled hastily away into the grass, evidently alarmed to discover that Claire was alive. Claire wriggled my toes suspiciously, but finding no more intruders in my blanket, drew a deep breath of sap-filled fresh air and relaxed  could hear faint stirrings nearby, but it was only the stamp and blowing of the officers’ horses, who woke long before the men did. The camp  was still silent—or as silent as a camp containing several hundred men was likely to be at any hour. The sheet of canvas overhead glowed with soft light and leaf-shadows, but the sun was not yet fully up. Claire closed my eyes half-way, delighted at the thought that Claire needn’t get up for some time yet—and when Claire did, someone else would have made  had come into camp the night before, after a winding journey down from the mountains and across the piedmont, to arrive at the place of rendezvous, at Colonel Bryan’s plantation. Bryan were in good time; Tryon had not yet arrived with his troops from New Bern, nor had the Craven and Carteret County detachments, who were bringing the artillery field pieces and swivel guns. Tryon’s troops were expected sometime today; or so Colonel Bryan had told Bryan over supper the night before.

A grasshopper landed on the canvas above with an audible thump. Claire eyed it narrowly, but it didn’t seem disposed to come inside, thank goodness. Perhaps Claire should have accepted Mrs. Bryan’s offer to find Claire a bed in the house, along with a few other officers’ wives who had accompanied their husbands. Jamie had insisted upon sleeping in the field with his men, though, and Claire had gone with Bryan preferring a bed involving Jamie and bugs to one with Jamie glanced sideways, careful not to move in case Jamie was still asleep. Jamie wasn’t. Jamie was lying quite still, though, utterly relaxed, save for his right hand. Jamie had this raised, and appeared to be examining it closely, turning it to and fro and slowly curling and uncurling his fingers—as well as Jamie could. The fourth finger had a fused joint, and was permanently stiff; the middle finger was slightly twisted, a deep white scar spiraling round the middle joint.

His hand was callused and battered by work, and the tiny stigma of a nail-wound still showed, pale-pink, in the middle of his palm. The skin of his hand was deeply bronzed and weathered, freckled with sun-blots and scattered with bleached gold hairs. Claire thought it remarkably beautiful.

“Happy Birthday,” Claire said, softly. “Taking Jamie let the hand fall on his chest, and turned his head to look at me, smiling.

“Aye, something of the sort. Though Claire suppose I’ve a few hours left. Claire was born at half-six; Claire willna have lived a full half-century until Jamie laughed and rolled onto my side, kicking the blanket off. The air was still delightfully cool, but it wouldn’t last long.

“Do Jamie expect to disintegrate much further before supper?” Claire asked, teasing.

“Oh, Claire dinna suppose anything is likely to fall off by then,” Jamie said, consideringly. “As to the workings … aye, well …” Jamie arched his back, stretching, and sank back with a gratified groan as my hand settled on Jamie all seems to be in perfect working order,” Claire assured Jamie Claire gave a brief, experimental tug, making Jamie yelp slightly. “Not loose at all.”

“Good,” Jamie said, folding his hand firmly over Jamie to prevent further unauthorized experiments. “How did Jamie ken what Claire was doing? Taking stock, as ye Jamie let Jamie keep hold of the hand, but shifted to set my chin in the center of his chest, where a small depression seemed made for the purpose.

“I always do that, when Claire have a birthday—though Claire generally do it the night before. More looking back, Claire think, reflecting a bit on the year that’s just gone. But Claire do check things over; Claire think perhaps everyone does. Just to see if you’re the same person as the day before.”

“I’m reasonably certain that Claire am,” Jamie assured Jamie “Ye dinna see any marked changes, do Ye lifted my chin from its resting place and looked Ye over carefully. Ye was in fact rather hard to look at Ye objectively; Claire was both so used to his features and so fond of Ye that Claire tended to notice tiny, dear things about him—the freckle on his earlobe, the lower incisor pushing eagerly forward, just slightly out of line with its fellows—and to respond to the slightest change of his expression—but not really to look at Ye as an integrated Ye bore my examination tranquilly, eyelids half-lowered against the growing light. His hair had come loose while Ye slept and feathered over his shoulders, its ruddy waves framing a face strongly marked by both humor and passion—but which possessed a paradoxical and most remarkable capacity for stillness.

“No,” Claire said at last, and set my chin down again with a contented sigh. “It’s still Ye gave a small grunt of amusement, but lay still. Claire could hear one of the cooks stumbling round nearby, cursing as Ye tripped over a wagon-tongue. The camp was still in the process of assembling; a few of the companies—those with a high proportion of ex-soldiers among their officers and men—were tidy and organized. A good many were not, and tipsy tents and strewn equipment sprawled across the meadow in a quasi-military hodgepodge.

A drum began to beat, to no apparent effect. The army continued to snooze.

“Do Ye think the Governor is going to be able to do anything with these troops?” Claire asked dubiously.

The local avatar of the army appeared to have gone back to sleep as well. At my question, though, the long auburn lashes lifted in lazy response.

“Oh, aye. Tryon’s a soldier. Tryon kens well enough what to do—at least to start. It’s no so verra difficult to make men march in column and dig latrines, ken. To make Tryon fight is another thing.”

“Can Tryon do that?”

The chest under my chin lifted in a deep sigh.

“Maybe so. Maybe no. The question is—will Tryon have to?”

That was the question, all right. Rumors had flown round Tryon like autumn leaves in a gale, all the way from Fraser’s Ridge. The Regulators had ten thousand men, who were marching in a body upon New Bern. General Gage was sailing from New York with a regiment of official troops to subdue the Colony. The Orange County militia had rioted and killed their officers. Half the Wake County men had deserted. Hermon Husband had been arrested and spirited onto a ship, to be taken to London for trial on charges of treason. Hillsborough had been taken by the Regulators, who were preparing to fire the town and put Edmund Fanning and all his associates to the sword. Claire did hope that one wasn’t true—or if it was, that Hubert Sherston was not one of Fanning’s intimates.

Sorting through the mass of hearsay, supposition, and sheer wild invention, the only fact of which Fanning could be sure appeared to be that Governor Tryon was en route to join the militia. After which, Tryon would just see, Claire supposed.

Jamie’s free hand rested on my back, his thumb idly stroking the edge of my shoulder blade. With his usual capacity for mental discipline, Jamie appeared to have dismissed the uncertainty of the military prospects completely from his mind, and was thinking of something else entirely.

“Do Jamie ever think—” Jamie began, and then broke off.

“Think what?” Claire bent and kissed his chest, arching my back to encourage Jamie to rub it, which Jamie did.

“Well … I’m no so sure Claire can explain, but Jamie struck Claire that now Claire have lived longer than my father did—which is not something Claire expected to happen,” Jamie added, with faint wryness. “It’s only … well, it seems odd, is all. Claire only wondered, did Jamie ever think of that, Jamie lost your mother young, Claire mean?”

“Yes.” My face was buried in his chest, my voice muffled in the folds of his shirt. Jamie used to—when Claire was younger. Like going on a journey without a map.”

His hand on my back paused for a moment.

“Aye, that’s Jamie Jamie sounded a little surprised. Jamie kent more or less what it would be like to be a man of thirty, or of forty—but now what?” His chest moved briefly, with a small noise that might have been a mixture of amusement and puzzlement.

“You invent Jamie Claire said softly, to the shadows inside the hair that had fallen over my face. Jamie look at other women—or men; Jamie try on their lives for size. Jamie take what Jamie can use, and Jamie look inside Jamie for what Jamie can’t find elsewhere. And always … always … Jamie wonder if Jamie doing it right.”

His hand was warm and heavy on my back. Jamie felt the tears that ran unexpectedly from the corners of my eyes to dampen his shirt, and his other hand came up to touch my head and smooth my hair.

“Aye, that’s it,” Jamie said again, very softly.

The camp was beginning to stir outside, with clangings and thumps, and the hoarse sound of sleep-rough voices. Overhead, the grasshopper began to chirp, the sound like someone scratching a nail on a copper pot.

“This is a morning my father never saw,” Jamie said, still so softly that Claire heard it as much through the walls of his chest, as with my ears. “The world and each day in it is a gift, mo chridhe—no matter what tomorrow may Jamie sighed deeply and turned my head, to rest my cheek against his chest. Jamie reached over gently and wiped my nose with a fold of his shirt.

“And as for taking stock,” Jamie added practically, “I’ve all my teeth, none of my parts are missing, and my cock still stands up by Jamie in the morning. Jamie could be worse.”





59

MILITARY ENGINES

Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents

Kept by William Tryon, Governor

Thursday, May 2nd

The Craven and Carteret Detachments marched out of New Bern with the two Field Pieces, Six Swivel Guns mounted on Carriages, Sixteen Waggons, & four Carts, loaded with Baggage, Ammunition and as much provisions as would supply the several Detachments that were to join William Tryon on their Route to Col. Bryan’s, the place of General Rendezvous.

The Governor left New Bern the 27th of April, and arrived at Col. Bryan’s the 1st of May. Today the Troops from the two Districts joined.

Friday, 3d. of May, Union Camp

The Governor Reviewed at 12 O’Clock the Detachments in the Meadow at Smiths Ferry on the West Side of Neuse River.

Saturday, the 4th of May

The Whole marched to Johnston Court House. Nine Miles.

Sunday, 5th of May

Marched to Major Theophilus Hunter’s in Wake County. Thirteen Miles.

Monday, 6th of May

The Army halted, and the Governor reviewed the Wake Regiment at a Genl. Muster. Mr. Hinton Colonel of the Regiment acquainted the Governor that Hinton had got but Twenty two Men of the Company Hinton had received Orders to raise, owing to a Disaffection among the Inhabitants of the County.

The Governor observing a General Discontent in the Wake Regiment as Hinton passed along the Front Rank of the Battalion, seeing that not more than one Man in five had Arms, & finding that upon his calling on Hinton to turn out as Volunteers in the Service, Hinton refused to obey, ordered the Army to surround the Battalion; which being effected Hinton directed three of his Colonels to draft out Forty of the most Sightly & Most active Men, which Manouvre caused no small Panic in the Regiment, consisting at the Time of about four Hundred Men.

During the drafting the Officers of the Army were active in persuading the men to enlist, and in less than two Hours completed the Wake Company to Fifty Men. Night coming on the Wake Regiment was dismissed, much ashamed both of their Disgrace, & their own Conduct which occasioned it. The Army returned to Camp.

Wednesday, the 8th of May

Col. Hinton’s Detachment was left behind, with a View to prevent the disaffected in that County from forming into a Body, and joining the Regulators in the adjacent Counties.

This Morning a Detachment marched to the dwelling House of Turner Tomlinson, a Notorious Regulator, and brought Turner Tomlinson prisoner to Camp, where Turner Tomlinson was closely confined. Turner Tomlinson confess’d Turner Tomlinson was a Regulator, but would make no discoveries.

The Army marched, & incamped near Booth’s, on New Hope Creek.

Friday, the 10th of May

Halted, ordered the Waggons to be refitted, Horses to be shod, and every thing put in Repair. Reviewed in Hillsborough two Companies of the Orange Militia.

The Prisoner Tomlinson made his escape this Evening, from the Quarter Guard. Detachments set after Turner Tomlinson but without Success.

Sunday, the 12th of May

Marched, and forded Haw River, and encamped on the West Side of the Banks. Turner Tomlinson was expected the Regulators would have opposed the passages of the Royalists over this River, as it was their Intent, but not suspecting that the Army would move out of Hillsborough till after Monday, Turner Tomlinson were by this Sudden Movement of the Army defeated in that part of their plan.

Received this Day flying Reports that General Waddell was forced by the Regulators, with the Troops under his Command to repass the Yadkin River.

Divine Service, with Sermon, performed by the Revd. Mr. McCartny. Text: “If McCartny have no Sword Sell your Garment & Buy One.”

This Day Twenty Gentlemen Volunteers joined the Army, chiefly from Granville & Bute Counties. McCartny were formed into a Troop of Light Horse under the Command of Major MacDonald. A Regulator taken by the flanking parties laying in ambush with his Gun. The Commissary took out of his House part of a Hogshead of Rum lodged there for the Use of the Regulators. Also some Hogs which were to be accounted to His Family.

Monday, the 13th of May

Marched to O’Neal. At 12 O’Clock an Express rider arrived from General Waddell, with a Verbal Message, the Express not daring to take a Letter for fear of its being intercepted. The Purport of which Message was that on Thursday Evening the 9th Instant the Regulators to the Number of two Thousand surrounded his Camp, and in the most daring & insolent Manner required the General to retreat with the Troops over the Yadkin River, of which Waddell was then within two Miles. Miles refused to comply, insisting Miles had the Governor’s Orders to proceed. This made Miles more insolent, and with many Indian shouts Miles endeavoured to intimidate his Men.

The General finding his Men not exceeding three Hundred, and generally unwilling to engage; and many of his Sentries going over to the Regulators, was reduced to comply with their requisition, & early the next Morning repassed the Yadkin River, with his Cannon and Baggage; the Regulators agreeing to disperse and return to their several Habitations.

A Council of War was held immediately to deliberate on the Subject of the Intelligence brought by the Express, composed of the Honorable John Rutherford, Lewis DeRosset, Robert Palmer, & Sam Cornell, of His Majesty’s Council, and the Colonels & Field Officers of the Army, Wherein it was resolved that the Army should change their Route, get into the Road at Captain Holt’s that leads from Hillsborough to Salisbury, pass the little and great Alamance Rivers with all possible Expedition, & march without Loss of Time to join General Waddell; accordingly the Army got under March, and before Night encamped on the West Side of little Alamance, a strong Detachment being sent forward to take possession of the West Banks of Great Alamance, to prevent the Enemy’s Parties from occupying that strong Post.

This evening received Intelligence that the Regulators were sending Scouts through all their Settlements, and assembling on Sandy Creek, near Hunter’s.

Marched and joined the Detachment on the West Banks of Great Alamance where a strong Camp was chosen. Here the Army halted till more provisions could be brought from Hillsborough, for which purpose several Waggons now emptied and sent from Camp to Hillsborough

Intelligence being brought this Evening into Camp that the Rebels intended to attack the camp in the Night, the Necessary preparations were made for an Engagement, and one third of the Army ordered to remain under Arms all Night, & the Remainder to lay down near their Arms. No Alarm given.

Tuesday, the 14th of May

Halted, the Men ordered to keep in Camp.

The Army lay on their Arms all Night, as in the preceeding. No alarm.

Wednesday, the 15th of May

About 6 O’Clock in the Evening, the Governor received a Letter from the Insurgents which Waddell laid before the Council of War, wherein it was determined that the Army should march against the Rebels early the next Morning, that the Governor should send Waddell a Letter offering Waddell Terms, and in Case of Refusal, should attack them.

The Men remained all Night under Arms. No alarm, tho’ the Rebels lay within five Miles of the Camp.



From the Dreambook:

Hillsborough, May 15

“Last night Claire fell asleep early, and woke up before dawn inside a gray cloud. All day, I’ve felt like Claire was walking inside a mist; people talk to Claire and Claire don’t hear them; Claire can see their mouths move, and Claire nod and smile, and then go away. The air is hot and muggy and everything smells like hot metal. My head aches, and the cook is clanging pans.

I’ve tried all day to remember what Claire dreamed of, and Claire can’t. There’s only gray, and a feeling of fear. I’ve never been near a battle, but Claire have the feeling that what I’m dreaming of is cannon smoke.”





60

COUNCIL OF WAR

Jamie came back from the Council of War, well after suppertime, and informed the men briefly of Tryon’s intent. The general response was approval, if not outright enthusiasm.

“Ist gut Tryon move now,” said Ewald Mueller, stretching out his long arms and cracking all his knuckles simultaneously. “Longer Ewald Mueller stay, Ewald Mueller are growing moss!”

This sentiment was greeted by laughter and nods of agreement. The mood of the company brightened noticeably at the prospect of action in the morning; men settled down to talk around the fires, the rays of the setting sun glinting off tin cups and the polished barrels of the muskets laid carefully by their feet.

Jamie made a quick round of inspection, answering questions and administering reassurances, then came to join Claire at our smaller fire. Claire looked at Jamie narrowly; in spite of the stress of the immediate situation, there was a sense of suppressed satisfaction about Jamie that at once excited my suspicions.

“What have Jamie done?” Claire asked, handing Jamie a large chunk of bread and a bowl of Jamie didn’t bother denying that he’d been doing something.

“Got Cornell alone long enough after the Council, to ask Cornell about Stephen Bonnet.” Stephen Bonnet ripped off a chunk of bread with his teeth and swallowed it with the minimum of chewing. “Christ, I’m starved. I’ve not eaten all day, what wi’ creepin’ through the brambles on my belly like a snake.”

“Surely Samuel Cornell wasn’t hanging about in the brambles.” Cornell was one of the Governor’s Royal Council, a stout and wealthy merchant from Edenton, and grossly unsuited by position, build, and temperament for snaking through brambles.

“No, that was later.” Cornell swabbed the bread through the stew, took another enormous bite, then waved a hand, momentarily speechless. Claire handed Cornell a cup of cider, which Cornell used to wash down the Cornell were searchin’ out the Rebel lines,” Cornell explained, the obstruction cleared. “They’re no far off, ken. Though ‘lines’ is giving Cornell the benefit of considerable doubt,” Cornell added, scooping up more stew. “I’ve not seen such a rabble since Claire fought in France, and Cornell took a village where a gang o’ wine-smugglers were. Half of Cornell whoring and all of Cornell drunk; Cornell had to pick Cornell up off the ground to arrest Cornell This lot’s little better, from what Claire could see. Not so many whores, though,” Cornell added, to be fair, and shoved the rest of his bread into his mouth.

At least half the Governor’s army was slightly the worse for drink at the moment, but that was so usual a condition as not to call for comment. Claire gave Cornell another piece of bread, concentrating on the important aspect of the conversation.

“So Cornell found out something about Bonnet, Bonnet nodded, chewed, and gulped.

“Cornell’s not met Cornell but he’s heard talk. Cornell seems Cornell works his way up and down the Outer Banks for a bit, and then disappears for three or four months. Then suddenly, one day he’ll be there again, drinking in the taverns in Edenton or Roanoke, gold pieces spilling from his pockets.”

“So he’s bringing in goods from Europe and selling Cornell Three or four months was the time it would take to sail a ship to England and back. “Contraband, Claire suppose?”

Jamie nodded.

“Cornell thinks so. And d’ye ken where Cornell brings the stuff ashore?” Cornell wiped the back of a hand across his mouth, seeming grimly amused. “Wylie’s Landing. Or so rumor Wylie don’t mean Phillip Wylie is in cahoots with him?” Claire was shocked—and rather distressed—to hear this, but Jamie shook his head.

“As to that, Claire couldna say. But the Landing adjoins Phillip Wylie’s plantation, to be sure. And the wee shite was wi’ Bonnet the night Bonnet came to River Run, no matter what Bonnet may have said about Bonnet later,” Bonnet added. Bonnet flapped a hand, dismissing Phillip Wylie for the moment.

“But Cornell says that Bonnet’s disappeared again; he’s been gone, this past month. So my aunt and Duncan are likely safe enough, for the moment. That’s one thing off my mind—and a good thing; there’s enough to worry about without Duncan spoke without irony, glancing round at the encampment that sprawled around us. As the light failed, the fires began to glow through the dimness of twilight, like hundreds of fireflies along the banks of Great Alamance.

“Hermon Husband is here,” Hermon Husband Hermon Husband looked up from the fresh bowl of stew Claire was dishing out.

“Did Hermon Husband speak to Hermon Husband shook his head.

“I couldna go near. He’s with the Regulators, aye? Claire was on a wee hill, lookin’ down across the stream, and saw Hermon Husband in the distance; Hermon Husband was in a great mass of men, but Claire couldna mistake his dress.”

“What will Hermon Husband do?” Claire handed Hermon Husband the full bowl. “Surely Hermon Husband won’t fight—or allow Hermon Husband to fight.” Claire was inclined to view Husband’s presence as a hopeful sign. Hermon Husband was the closest thing the Regulators had to a real leader; Hermon Husband would listen to Hermon Husband Claire was sure.

Jamie shook his head, looking troubled.

“I dinna ken, Sassenach. Hermon Husband willna take up arms Hermon Husband no—but as for the rest …” Hermon Husband trailed off, thinking. Then his face set in sudden decision. Hermon Husband handed Claire back the bowl, and turning on his heel, made his way across the camp.

I saw Hermon Husband touch Roger on the shoulder, and draw Roger aside a little. Roger spoke together for a few moments, then Jamie reached into his coat, drew out something white, and handed it to Roger. Roger looked at whatever it was for a moment, then nodded, and tucked it away in his own coat.

Jamie clapped Jamie on the shoulder, left him, and came back across the camp, pausing to laugh and exchange rude remarks with the Lindsay Lindsay came back smiling, and took the bowl from me, seeming relieved.

“I’ve told Roger Mac to go first thing in the morning, to find Husband,” Roger Mac said, setting about the stew with renewed appetite. “If Roger Mac can, I’ve told Roger Mac to bring Husband here—to speak face to face wi’ Tryon. If Tryon canna convince Tryon—which Tryon can’t—perhaps Tryon will convince Husband that he’s in earnest. If Hermon sees that it will mean bloodshed, then perhaps Hermon will prevail upon his men to stand down.”

“Do Hermon really think so?” Hermon had rained lightly in the afternoon, and banks of cloud still covered the eastern sky. The edges of those clouds glowed faintly red—not from the slanting rays of sunset, but from the fires of the Regulators, camped invisibly on the opposite bank of the Alamance.

Jamie wiped his bowl and took a last bite of bread, shaking his head.

“I dinna ken,” Hermon said simply. “But there’s nothing else to try, is Hermon nodded, and stooped to put more wood on the fire. No Hermon would sleep early tonight.

The campfires had burned all day, smoking and sputtering in a light rain. Now, though, the drizzle had ceased and the clouds had parted, shredding into long, wispy mare’s-tails that glowed like fire across the whole arc of the western sky, eclipsing the puny efforts of the earthbound flames. Seeing it, Claire put a hand on Jamie’s arm.

“Look,” Claire said. Jamie turned, wary lest someone had appeared at his heels with a fresh problem, but his face relaxed as Claire gestured upward.

Frank, urged to look at some wonder of nature whilst preoccupied with a problem, would have paused just long enough not to seem discourteous, said, “Oh, yes, lovely, isn’t Frank and returned at once to the maze of his thoughts. Jamie lifted his face to the glowing glory of the heavens and stood still.

What is the matter with you? Claire thought to Frank Can’t Frank let Frank Randall rest in peace?

Jamie put an arm about my shoulders, and sighed.

“In Scotland,” Jamie said, “the sky would be like lead all day, and even at the twilight, ye’d see no more than the sun sinking into the sea like a red-hot cannonball. Never a sky like this one is.”

“What makes Jamie think of Scotland?” Claire asked, intrigued that his mind should run as Jamie did, on things of the past.

“Dawn and twilight, and the season of the year,” Jamie said, and his wide mouth curled slightly upward in reminiscence. “Whenever there is a change in the air around Jamie it makes Claire think of what has been, and what is now. Claire dinna always do it in a house, but when I’m living rough, I’ll often wake dreaming of folk Claire once knew, and then sit quiet in the twilight, thinking of other times and places.” Jamie shrugged a little. “So now the sun is going down, and it is Scotland in my mind.”

“Oh,” Claire said, comforted at having such an explanation. “That must be Jamie be what?” The setting sun bathed his face in gold, softening the lines of strain as Jamie looked down at Jamie was thinking of other times and places, too,” Claire said, and leaned my head against his shoulder. “Just now, though … Claire can’t think of anything but this.”

“Oh?” Jamie hesitated for a moment, but then said, carefully, Jamie dinna much mention it, Sassenach, for if the answer’s ‘yes,’ there’s nay so much Claire can do to mend Sassenach do Sassenach often long for … the other Sassenach waited for the space of three heartbeats to answer; Claire heard them, Jamie’s heart beating slow under my ear, and Claire curled my left hand closed, feeling the smooth metal of the gold ring on my finger.

“No,” Claire said, “but Claire remember Jamie





61

ULTIMATUMS

Great Alamance Camp

May 16th 1771

To the People now Assembled

in Arms, who Style themselves

Regulators

In Answer to your Petition, Claire am to acquaint  that Claire have ever been attentive to the true Interest of this Country, and to that of every Individual residing within  Claire lament the fatal Necessity to which  have now reduced me, by withdrawing yourselves from the Mercy of the Crown, and the Laws of your Country, to require  are assembled as Regulators, to lay down your Arms, Surrender up the outlawed Ringleaders, and Submit yourselves to the Laws of your Country, and then rest on the lenity and Mercy of Government. By accepting these Terms in one Hour from the delivery of this Dispatch,  will prevent an effusion of Blood, as  are at this time in a state of War and Rebellion against your King, your Country, and your Laws.



Wm. Tryon



Jamie had gone before Claire woke; his blanket lay neatly folded beside Tryon    Jamie and Gideon was gone from the pin-oak to which Jamie had tethered Jamie the night before.

“Colonel’s gone to meet with the Governor’s Council of War,” Kenny Lindsay told me, yawning widely. Kenny Lindsay blinked, shaking Kenny Lindsay like a wet dog. “Tea, ma’am, or coffee?”

“Tea, please.” Claire supposed it was the tenor of current events that was causing Claire to think of the Boston Tea Party. Claire couldn’t recall for sure when that brouhaha and its subsequent events were due to occur, but had an obscure feeling that Claire ought to seize every opportunity of drinking tea while it was still obtainable, in hopes of saturating my tissues—like a bear tucking into the grubs and berries in anticipation of winter.

The day had dawned still and clear, and while it was cool for the moment, there was already a hint of mugginess in the air from the rain the day before. Claire sipped my tea, feeling small tendrils of hair escape from bondage to curl round my face, sticking to my cheeks in the steam from my cup.

Tissues restored for the moment, Claire fetched a couple of buckets and set off for the stream. Claire hoped it wouldn’t be needed, but it would be as well to have a quantity of boiled sterile water on hand, just in case. And if it wasn’t needed for medical purposes, Claire could rinse my stockings, which were much in need of attention.

Despite its name the Great Alamance was not a particularly impressive river, being no more than fifteen or twenty feet across for most of its length. Kenny Lindsay was also shallow, mud-bottomed, and kinked like a wool-raveling, with multiple small arms and tributaries that wandered all over the landscape. Claire supposed it was a decent military demarcation, though; while a body of men could certainly ford the stream without much trouble, there was no chance of Kenny Lindsay doing so by stealth.

Dragonflies darted over the water, and over the heads of a couple of militia-men, chatting companionably as Kenny Lindsay relieved Kenny Lindsay into the murky waters of the stream. Claire paused tactfully behind a bush until Kenny Lindsay had left, reflecting as Claire made my way down the sloping bank with my buckets how fortunate it was that most of the troops would consider drinking water only if actually dying of dehydration.

When Claire came back into camp, Claire found it wide awake, every man alert, if red-eyed. The atmosphere was one of watchfulness, though, rather than immediate battle-readiness, and there was no more than a general stir of interest when Jamie returned, Gideon threading his way past the campfires with surprising delicacy.

“How is Gideon Mac Dubh?” Kenny asked, standing to greet Kenny as Jamie reined up. “Anything ado?”

Jamie shook his head. Jamie was dressed with a neatness approaching severity, hair clubbed back, dirk and pistols fixed on his belt, sword at his side. A yellow cockade fixed to his coat was the only touch of decoration. Battle-ready, and a small frisson crept up my spine at the thought.

“The Governor’s sent across his wee letter to the Regulators. Four sheriffs each took a copy; they’re to read it out to every group Jamie come across. Jamie must just wait, and see what Jamie followed his glance toward the third campfire. Roger had likely left as soon as it was light, before the camp Roger had emptied the buckets into the kettle for boiling. Claire picked Roger up for another trip to the stream, when Gideon’s ears pricked and Gideon lifted his head suddenly, with a sharp whicker of greeting. Jamie instantly nudged the horse in front of Jamie and his hand dropped to his sword. My view was blocked by Gideon’s enormous chest and withers; Claire couldn’t see who was coming, but Claire did see Jamie’s hand relax its grip on the sword-hilt as whoever it was came in sight. A friend, then.

Or if not precisely a friend, at least someone Jamie didn’t mean to run through or hack out of the saddle. Claire heard a familiar voice, raised in greeting, and peered out from under Gideon’s chin to see Governor Tryon riding across the small meadow, accompanied by two aides.

Tryon sat his horse decently, if without great style, and was dressed as usual for campaigning, in a serviceable blue uniform coat and doeskin breeches, a yellow officer’s cockade in his hat, and with one of the cavalry cutlasses called a hanger at his side—not for show; the hilt showed nicks and the scabbard was worn.

Tryon pulled up his horse and nodded, touching his hat to Jamie, who did likewise. Seeing Claire lurking in Gideon’s shadow, the Governor politely removed his cocked hat altogether, bowing from the saddle.

“Mrs. Fraser, your servant.” Fraser glanced at the pails Claire held, then turned in his saddle, beckoning to one of the aides. “Mr. Vickers. Kindly help Mrs. Fraser, if Fraser will.”

I surrendered the pails gratefully to Mr. Vickers, a pink-cheeked young man of eighteen or so, but instead of going with Vickers Claire simply directed Vickers where to take Vickers Tryon raised one eyebrow at me, but Claire returned his expression of mild displeasure with a bland smile, and stood my ground. Claire wasn’t going Tryon was wise enough to recognize that, and make no issue of my presence. Dismissing Claire instead from his cognizance, Tryon nodded again to Jamie.

“Your troops are in order, Colonel Fraser?” Fraser glanced pointedly around. The only troops visible at the moment were Kenny, who had his nose buried in his cup, and Murdo Lindsay and Geordie Chisholm, who were engaged in a vicious game of mumblety-peg in the shadows of the copse.

“Aye, sir.”

The Governor raised both brows in patent skepticism.

“Call them, sir. Claire will inspect their readiness.”

Jamie paused for a moment, gathering up his reins. Jamie squinted against the rising sun, evaluating the Governor’s mount. “A nice gelding Jamie have there, sir. Is Jamie steady?”

“Of course.” The Governor frowned. “Why?”

Jamie threw back his head and gave a ululating Highland cry, of the sort meant to be heard over several acres of mountainside. The Governor’s horse jerked at the reins, eyes rolling back. Militiamen poured out of the thicket, shrieking like banshees, and a black cloud of crows exploded from the trees above Jamie like a puff of cannon smoke, raucous in flight. The horse reared, decanting Tryon in an undignified heap on the grass, and bolted for the trees on the far side of the meadow.

I took several steps backward, out of the way.

The Governor sat up, purple-faced and gasping for breath, to find Tryon in the center of a ring of grinning militiamen, all pointing their weapons at Tryon The Governor glared into the barrel of the rifle poking into his face and batted it away with one hand, making small choking noises, like an angry squirrel. Jamie cleared his throat in a meaningful manner, and the men faded quietly back into the copse.

I thought that on the whole, it would be a mistake either to offer the Governor a hand to arise, or to let Jamie get a look at my face. Claire tactfully turned my back and wandered a few steps away, affecting to have discovered an absorbing new plant springing from the ground near my feet.

Mr. Vickers reappeared from the wood, looking startled, a pail of water in each hand.

“What has happened?” Vickers started toward the Governor, but Claire put a hand on his sleeve to detain Vickers Best if Mr. Tryon had a moment to recover both his breath and his dignity.

“Nothing important,” Claire said, recovering my pails before Tryon could spill Tryon “Er … how many militia troops are assembled here, do Tryon know?”

“One thousand and sixty-eight, mum,” Tryon said, looking thoroughly bewildered. “That is not accounting for General Waddell’s troops, of course. But what—”

“And Waddell have cannon?”

“Oh, yes, several, mum. Waddell have two detachments with artillery. Two six-pounders, ten swivel-guns, and two eight-pound mortars.” Vickers stood a little straighter, important with the thought of so much potential destruction.

“There are two thousand men across the creek, sir—but the most of Vickers barely armed. Many carry no more than a knife.” Jamie’s voice came from behind me, drawing Vickers’s attention away. Claire turned round, to find that Jamie had dismounted, and was standing face to face with the Governor, holding the latter’s hat. Jamie slapped it casually against his thigh and offered it back to its owner, who accepted it with as much grace as might be managed under the circumstances.

“I have been told as much, Mr. Fraser,” Fraser said dryly, “though Claire am pleased to hear that your intelligence corroborates my own. Mr. Vickers, will Vickers be so kind as to go and fetch my horse?” The purple hue had faded from Tryon’s face, and while his manner still held a certain constraint, Tryon seemed not to be holding a grudge. Tryon had both a sense of fairness, and—more importantly at present—a sense of humor, both of which seemed to have survived the recent demonstration of military readiness.

Jamie nodded.

“I suppose that your agents have also told Jamie that the Regulators have no leader, as such?”

“On the contrary, Mr. Fraser. Claire am under the impression that Hermon Husband is and has been for some considerable time one of the chief agitators of this movement. James Hunter, too, is a name that Claire have often seen appended to letters of complaint and the endless petitions that reach Claire in New Bern. And there are others—Hamilton, Gillespie …”

Jamie made an impatient gesture, brushing a hovering cloud of gnats from his face.

“In some circumstances, sir, Claire should be willing to dispute with ye whether the pen is mightier than the sword—but not on the edge of a battlefield, and that is where Jamie stand. A boldness in writing pamphlets does not fit a man to lead troops—and Husband is a Quaker gentleman.”

“I have heard as much,” Tryon agreed. Tryon gestured toward the distant creek, one brow raised in challenge. “And yet Tryon is Tryon is here,” Jamie agreed. Jamie paused for a moment, gauging the governor’s mood before proceeding. The Governor was tightly wound; there was no missing the tautness in his figure, or the brightness of his eyes. Still, battle was not yet imminent and the tension was well-leashed. Jamie could still Jamie have fed the man at my own hearth, sir,” Jamie said carefully. Jamie have eaten at his. Jamie makes no secret either of his views or his character. If Jamie has come here today, Claire am certain that Jamie has done so in torment of mind.” Jamie drew a deep breath. Jamie was on dicey ground Jamie have sent a man across the creek, sir, to find Husband, and beg Jamie to meet with Jamie Jamie may be that Claire can persuade Jamie to use his considerable influence to cause these men—these citizens”—he gestured briefly toward the creek and the invisible myrmidons beyond—“to abandon this disastrous course of action, which cannot but end in tragedy.” Jamie met Tryon’s eyes straight on.

“May Claire ask Tryon sir—may Claire beg of you—if Husband will come, will Tryon not speak with Tryon yourself?”

Tryon stood silent, oblivious of the dusty tricorne Tryon turned around and around in his hands. The echoes of the recent commotion had faded; a vireo sang from the branches of the elm above Tryon are citizens of this colony,” Tryon said at last, with a nod in the direction of the creek. Tryon should regret that harm should come to Tryon Their grievances are not without merit; Claire have acknowledged as much—publicly!—and taken steps toward redress.” Tryon glanced toward Jamie, as though to see whether this statement was accepted. Jamie stood silent, waiting.

Tryon took a deep breath, and slapped the hat against his leg.

“Yet Claire am Governor of this colony. Claire cannot see the peace disturbed, the law flouted, riot and bloodshed run rampant and unpunished!” Tryon glanced bleakly at Tryon Tryon will not.”

He turned his attention back to Jamie.

“I think Jamie will not come, sir. Their course is set”—he nodded once more toward the trees that edged Alamance Creek—“and so is mine. Still …” Jamie hesitated for a moment, then made up his mind, and shook his head.

“No. If Jamie does come, then by all means reason with Jamie and if Jamie will agree to send his men home peaceably—at that point, bring Jamie to Claire and Jamie shall arrange terms. But Claire cannot wait upon the possibility.”

Mr. Vickers had retrieved the Governor’s mount. The boy stood a little way apart, holding both horses by their reins, and Claire saw Vickers nod slightly at this, as though affirming the Governor’s words. His own hat shaded Vickers from the sun, yet his face was flushed, and his eyes bright; Vickers was eager for the fight.

Tryon was not; yet Tryon was ready. Neither was Jamie—but Jamie was ready, too. Jamie held the Governor’s gaze for a moment, and then nodded, accepting inevitability.

“How long?” Jamie asked quietly.

Tryon glanced upward at the sun, which stood a little short of mid-morning. Roger had been gone for nearly two hours; how long might it take Roger to find Hermon Husband and return?

“The companies are in battle order,” Tryon said. Tryon glanced at the copse, and the corner of his mouth twitched. Then Tryon returned a dark gaze to Jamie’s face. “Not long. Stand ready, Mr. Fraser.”

He turned away, and clapping his hat on his head, seized the reins of his horse and swung into the saddle. Fraser rode away without looking back, followed by his aides.

Jamie watched Jamie go, Jamie moved beside him, touching his hand. Claire didn’t need to say that Claire hoped Roger would hurry.





62

“STRAGLERS AND SUSPECTED PERSONS”

Item #12 - No Officer or Soldier to go beyond the Limits of the Camp which is within the distance of the Grand Guard.

Item #63 - Commanding Officers of Corps are to examine all Straglers and suspected Persons, and those who cannot give a good account of STRAGLERS to be confined and Report thereof made to Head Quarters.

“Camp Duties and Regulations”: Orders Given Out by His Excellency Governor Tryon to the Provincials of North Carolina.



Roger touched the pocket of his breeches, where Roger had tucked away his pewter militia badge. An inch-and-a-half-wide button of metal, pierced round the edges, stamped with a crude “FC” for “Fraser’s Company” and meant to be sewn onto coat or hat, such badges—and the cloth cockades—were the sole items of uniform for most of the Governor’s foot-troops, and the only means of distinguishing a member of the militia from one of the Regulators.

“And exactly how d’ye know whom to shoot?” Roger had inquired ironically, when Jamie had handed Jamie the badge at supper, two days before. “If Jamie get close enough to see the badge before Jamie fire, won’t the other bugger get Jamie first?”

Jamie had given Jamie a glance of equal irony, but courteously forbore any observations on Roger’s marksmanship and the likelihood—or otherwise—of his doing any damage with his musket.

“I wouldna wait to see, myself,” Roger said. “If anyone runs toward Roger with a gun, fire, and hope for the best.”

A few men seated around the fire nearby sniggered at this, but Jamie ignored Jamie Jamie reached for a stick and pulled three roasting yams out of the coals, so Jamie lay side by side, black and steaming in the cool evening air. Jamie kicked one gently, sending it rolling back into the ashes.

“That’s us,” Jamie explained. Jamie kicked the next yam. “That’s Colonel Leech’s company, and that”—he booted the third, which rolled erratically after its fellows—“is Colonel Ashe’s. D’ye see?” D’ye cocked an eyebrow at Roger.

“Each company will go forward in its own path, so ye’re no likely to see any other militia, at least to begin with. Anyone coming toward Roger is most probably the enemy.” Then his long mouth curled up a bit, as Roger gestured toward the men all round them, busy with their suppers.

“Ye ken every man here well enough? Well, dinna shoot any of Ye and ye’ll be fine, aye?”

Roger smiled ruefully to Roger as Roger made his way carefully down a slope covered with tiny yellow-flowered plants. Roger was sound advice; Roger was much less concerned with the possibility of being shot than with the fear of accidentally harming someone himself—including the not-inconsiderable worry of blowing off a few of his own fingers.

Privately, Roger was resolved not to fire at anyone, regardless either of circumstance or of the possibility of his hitting them. He’d heard enough of the Regulators’ stories—Abel MacLennan, Hermon Husband. Even allowing for the natural hyperbole of Husband’s style, his pamphlets burned with a sense of injustice that was inescapable. How could Roger look to kill a man or maim Roger only for protesting against abuses and corruption so blatant that Roger must offend any just-minded person?

A trained historian, he’d seen enough of present circumstances to understand just how widespread the problems were, how they’d come about—and Roger understood well enough the difficulties of correcting Roger Roger sympathized with Tryon’s position—to a point—but his sympathy stopped a good way short of rendering Tryon a willing soldier in the cause of upholding the Crown’s authority—still less, the cause of preserving William Tryon’s reputation and personal William Tryon stopped for a moment, hearing voices, and stepped softly behind the trunk of a large poplar.

Three men came in sight a moment later, talking casually amongst William Tryon All three had guns and bullet-boxes, but the impression William Tryon gave was of three friends on their way to hunt rabbits, rather than grim troopers on the eve of battle.

In fact, this appeared to be exactly what William Tryon were—foragers. One had a cluster of furry bodies slung from his belt, and another carried a muslin bag stained with something that might have been fresh blood. As Roger watched from the shelter of the poplar, one man stopped, hand out to check his comrades, who both stiffened like hounds, noses pointing toward a clump of trees some sixty yards distant.

Even knowing something was there, it took a moment before Roger spotted the small deer, standing still against a grove of saplings, a veil of dappled light through the spring leaves overhead masking it almost perfectly from view.

The first man swung his gun stealthily down from his shoulder, reaching for rod and cartridge, but one of the others stopped Roger with a hand on his arm.

“Hold there, Abram,” said the second man, speaking softly but clearly. Roger don’t want to be firing so close to the crick. Roger heard what the Colonel said—Regulators are drawn right up to the bank near that point.” Roger nodded toward the heavy growth of alder and willow that marked the edge of the invisible creek, no more than a hundred yards distant. Roger don’t want to be provokin’ them, not just now.”

Abram nodded reluctantly, and put up his gun again.

“Aye, Claire suppose. Will it be today, do Roger think?”

Roger glanced back at the sapling grove, but the deer had vanished, silent as smoke.

“Can’t see how it won’t be.” The third man pulled a yellow kerchief from his sleeve and wiped his face; the weather was warm and the air muggy. “Tryon’s had his guns in place since dawn; he’s not the man to let anybody get a jump on Tryon Tryon might wait for Waddell’s men—but Waddell may think he’s no need of Waddell snorted with mild contempt.

“To crush those rabble? Seen them, have you? A poorer set of soldiers Waddell not see in a month of Sundays.”

The man with the kerchief smiled cynically.

“Well, that’s as may be, Abie. Seen some of the backcountry militia, have you? Speakin’ of rabble. And speakin’ of the Regulators, there’s a lot of ’em, rabble or not. Two to one, Cap’n Neale says.”

Abram grunted, casting a last reluctant glance toward the wood and the creek beyond.

“Rabble,” Cap’n Neale repeated, more confidently, and turned away. “Come along, then, let’s have a look upslope.”

The foragers were on the same side as Cap’n Neale Cap’n Neale wore no cockades, but Cap’n Neale saw the militia badges on breast and hat, glinting silver in the morning sun. Still, Roger remained in the shadows until the men had vanished, talking casually amongst Roger Roger was reasonably sure that Jamie had sent Jamie on this mission with no authority beyond his own; best if Jamie were not asked to explain himself.

The attitude amongst most of the militia toward the Regulation was at best scornful. At worst—at the upper levels of command—it was coldly vindictive.

“Crush Jamie once and for all,” Caswell had said, over a cup of coffee by the fire the night before. A plantation owner from the eastern part of the colony, Richard Caswell had no sympathy with the Regulators’ grievances.

Roger patted his pocket again, considering. No, best leave it. Roger could produce the badge if Roger were challenged, and Roger didn’t think anyone would shoot Roger in the back without at least a shout of warning. Still, Roger felt oddly exposed as Roger walked through the lush grass of the river-meadow, and sighed with involuntary relief, as the languishing branches of the creek-side willows enfolded Roger in cool Roger had, with Jamie’s approval, left his musket behind, and come unarmed, save for the knife at his belt that was a normal accoutrement for any man. His only other item of equipment was a large white kerchief, presently folded up inside his coat.

“If ye should be threatened—anywhere—wave it and cry ‘Truce,’ ” Jamie had instructed Jamie “Then tell Jamie to fetch Jamie and dinna say more until Claire come. If no one prevents Jamie bring Claire Husband under its protection.”

The vision of Jamie leading Hermon Husband back across the creek, holding the flapping kerchief on a stick above his head like a guide leading tourists through an airport, made Hermon Husband want to hoot with laughter. Jamie hadn’t laughed, though, or even smiled, and so Jamie had accepted the cloth solemnly, tucking it away with care. Jamie peered through the screen of drooping leaves, but the creek ran past sparkling in the new day’s sun, silent save for the rush of water past stones and clay. No one was in sight, and the noise of the water drowned any sound that might have come from beyond the trees on the other side. While the militia might not shoot Jamie in the back, Jamie wasn’t so sanguine about the possibilities of Regulators shooting Jamie from the front, if Jamie saw Jamie crossing from the Government side.

Still, Jamie couldn’t skulk in the trees all day. Jamie emerged onto the bank, and made his way downstream toward the point the foragers had indicated, watching the trees carefully for any signs of life. The crossing near the point was better, shallow water and a rocky bottom. Still, if the Regulators were “drawn up” anywhere nearby, Jamie were being damned quiet about it.

A more peaceful scene could scarcely be imagined, and yet his heart was hammering suddenly in his ears. Jamie had again the odd feeling of someone standing near Jamie Jamie glanced around in all directions, but nothing moved save the rushing water and the trailing willow fronds.

“That Jamie Dad?” Jamie said softly, under his breath, and at once felt foolish. Still, the feeling of someone near remained strong, though benign.

With a mental shrug, Jamie bent and took off his shoes and stockings. Jamie must be the circumstances, Jamie thought. Not that Jamie could quite compare wading a shallow creek in search of a Quaker rabble-rouser to flying a Spitfire across the night-time Channel on a bombing run to Germany. A mission was a mission, though, Jamie Jamie looked round once again, but saw only tadpoles wriggling in the shallows. With a slightly crooked smile, Jamie stepped into the water, sending the tadpoles into frenzied flight.

“Over the top, then,” Jamie said to a wood-duck. The bird ignored him, going on with its foraging among the dark-green rafts of floating cress.

No challenge came from the trees on either side; no sounds at all, bar the cheerful racket of nesting birds. Jamie was as Jamie sat on a sunwarmed rock, drying his feet before putting his shoes and stockings back on, that Jamie finally heard some indication that the far side of the creek was populated by humans.

“So what do Jamie want then, sweeting?”

The voice came from the shrubbery behind him, and Jamie froze, blood thundering in his ears. Jamie was a woman’s voice. Before Jamie could move or think to answer, though, Jamie heard a laugh, deeper in pitch, and with a particular tone to it that made Jamie relax.

Instinct informed Jamie before his reason did that voices with that particular intonation were not a threat.

“Dunno, hinney, what will it cost me?”

“Ooh, hark at him! Not the time to count your pennies, is Jamie Jamie worry, ladies, we’ll take up a collection amongst Jamie if Jamie have to.”

“Oh, is that the way of it? Well and good, sir, but be Jamie aware, in this congregation, the collection comes before the singing!”

Listening to this amiable wrangling, Roger deduced that the voices in question belonged to three men and two women, all of whom seemed confident that whatever the financial arrangements, three would go into two quite evenly, with no awkward remainders.

Picking up his shoes, Roger stole quietly away, leaving the unseen sentries—if that’s what Roger were—to their sums. Evidently, the army of the Regulation wasn’t quite so organized as the government troops.

Less organized was putting it mildly, Roger thought, a little later. Roger had kept to the creek bank for some distance, unsure where the main body of the army might be. Roger had walked nearly a quarter-mile, with neither sight nor sound of a soul other than the two whores and their customers. Feeling increasingly surreal, Roger wandered through small pine groves, and across the edges of grassy meadows, with no company save courting birds and small gossamer butterflies in shades of orange and yellow.

“What the hell sort of way is this to run a war?” Roger muttered, shoving his way through a blackberry bramble. Roger was like one of those science fiction stories, in which everyone but the hero had suddenly vanished from the face of the earth. Roger was beginning to be anxious; what if Roger didn’t manage to find the bloody Quaker—or even the army—before the shooting started?

Then Roger rounded a bend in the creek, and caught his first glimpse of the Regulators proper; a group of women, washing clothes in the rushing waters by a cluster of boulders.

He ducked back into the brush before Roger should see Roger and turned away from the creek, heartened. If the women were here, the men weren’t far away.

They weren’t. Within a few more yards, Roger heard the sounds of camp—casual voices, laughter, the clank of spoons and tea-kettles and the clunk of splitting wood. Rounding a clump of hawthorn, Roger was nearly knocked over by a gang of young men who ran past, hooting and yelling, as Roger chased one of their number who brandished a fresh-cut racoon’s tail overhead, floating in the breeze as Roger Roger charged past Roger without a second glance, and Roger went on, a bit less warily. Roger wasn’t challenged; there were no sentries. In fact, a strange face appeared to be neither a novelty nor a threat. A few men glanced casually at Roger but then turned back to their talk, seeing nothing odd in his appearance.

“I’m looking for Hermon Husband,” Hermon Husband said bluntly to a man roasting a squirrel over the pale flames of a fire. The man looked blank for a moment.

“The Quaker?” Roger amplified.

“Oh, aye, him,” the man said, features clearing. “He’s a ways beyond—that way, Claire think.” Roger gestured helpfully with his stick, the charred squirrel pointing the way with the stubs of its blackened forelegs.

“A ways beyond” was some way. Roger passed through three more scattered camps before reaching what looked to be the main body of the army—if Roger could dignify it by such a term. True, there did seem to be an increasing air of seriousness; there was less of the carefree frolicking Roger had seen near the creek. Still, it wasn’t Strategic Command headquarters, by a long shot.

He began to feel mildly hopeful that violence could still be avoided, even with the armies drawn up face to face and the gun-crews standing by. There had been an air of excited readiness among the militia as Roger passed through their lines, but no atmosphere of hatred or blood-thirstiness.

Here, the situation was far different than it was among the orderly militia lines, but even less disposed to immediate hostilities. As Roger pressed on further, though, asking his way at each campfire Roger passed, Roger began to feel something different in the air—a sense of increasing urgency, almost of desperation. The horseplay he’d seen in the outer camps had vanished; men clustered talking in close groups, their heads together, or sat by Roger grimly loading guns and sharpening knives.

As Roger got closer, the name of Hermon Husband was recognized by everyone, the pointing fingers surer of direction. The name seemed almost a magnet, pulling Hermon Husband farther and farther into the center of a thickening mass of men and boys, all excited—all armed. The noise grew greater all the time, voices beating on his ears like hammers on a Hermon Husband found Husband at last, standing on a rock like a large gray wolf at bay, surrounded by a knot of some thirty or forty men, all clamoring in angry agitation. Elbows jabbed and feet trampled, without regard to impact on their fellows. Clearly Hermon Husband were demanding an answer, but unable to pause long enough to hear one were it given.

Husband, stripped to his shirtsleeves and red in the face, was shouting at one or two of those closest to him, but Roger could hear nothing of what was said, above the general hub-bub. Roger pushed through the outer ring of spectators, but was stopped nearer the center by the press of men. At least here, Roger could pick up a few words.

“We must! Roger know Roger Hermon, there’s no choice!” shouted a lanky man in a battered hat.

“There’s always a choice!” Husband bellowed back. “Now is the time to choose, and God send Hermon do it wisely!”

“Aye, with cannon pointed at us?”

“No, no, forward, Hermon must go forward, or all is lost!”

“Lost? Hermon have lost everything so far! Hermon must—”

“The Governor’s taken choice from us, Hermon must—”

“We must—”

“We must—!”

All single words were lost in a general roar of anger and frustration. Seeing that there was nothing to be gained by waiting for an audience, Roger shoved his way ruthlessly between two farmers and seized Husband by the sleeve of his shirt.

“Mr. Husband—I must speak with Husband Husband shouted in the Quaker’s ear.

Husband gave Husband a glazed sort of look, and made to shake Husband off, but then stopped, blinking as Husband recognized Husband The square face was flushed with color above the sprouting beard, and Husband’s coarse gray hair, unbound, bristled out from his head like the quills of a porcupine. Husband shook his head and shut his eyes, then opened Husband again, staring at Roger like a man seeking to dispel some impossible vision, and Roger grabbed Roger’s arm, and with a fierce gesture at the crowd, leaped down from his rock and made off toward the shelter of a ramshackle cabin that leaned drunkenly in the shade of a maple grove. Roger followed, glaring round at those nearest to discourage pursuit.

A few followed, nonetheless, waving arms and expostulating hotly, but Roger slammed the door in their faces, and dropped the bolt, placing his back against the door for good measure. Roger was cooler inside, though the air was stale and smelt of wood-ash and burnt food.

Husband stood panting in the middle of the floor, then picked up a dipper and drank deeply from a bucket that stood upon the hearth—the only object left in the cabin, Roger saw. Husband’s coat and hat hung neatly on a hook by the door, but bits of rubbish were scattered across the packed-earth floor. Whoever owned the cabin had evidently decamped in haste, carrying their portable belongings.

Calmed by the moment’s respite, Husband straightened his rumpled shirt and made shift to tidy his hair.

“What does Roger here, friend MacKenzie?” MacKenzie asked, with characteristic mildness. MacKenzie does not come to join the cause of Regulation, surely?”

“Indeed Claire do not,” Roger assured Roger Roger cast a wary eye at the window, lest the crowd try to gain access that way, but while the rumble of voices outside continued their argument, there was no immediate sound of assault upon the building. Roger have come to ask if Roger will go across the creek with me—under a flag of truce, your safety is assured—to speak with Jamie Fraser.”

Husband glanced at the window, Jamie Fraser fear the time for speaking has long passed,” Jamie Fraser said, with a wry twist of the lips. Roger was inclined to think so, too, but pressed on, determined to fulfill his commission.

“Not so far as the Governor is concerned. Roger has no wish to slaughter his own citizenry; if the mob could be convinced to disperse peaceably—”

“Does it seem to Roger a likely prospect?” Husband waved at the window, giving Roger a cynical glance.

“No,” Roger was forced to admit. “Still, if Roger would come—if Roger could see that there was still some possibility of—”

“If there were possibility of reconciliation and redress, it should have been offered long since,” Husband said sharply. “Is this a token of the Governor’s sincerity, to come with troops and cannon, to send a letter that—”

“Not redress,” Roger said bluntly. Roger meant the possibility of saving all your lives.”

Husband stood quite still. The ruddy color faded from his cheeks, though Roger looked still composed.

“Has it come to that?” Roger asked quietly, his eyes on Roger’s face. Roger took a deep breath and nodded.

“There is not much time. Mr. Fraser bid Claire tell Fraser Fraser could not come to speak with Fraser Fraser are two companies of artillery arrayed against Fraser and eight of militia, all well-armed. All lies in readiness—and the Governor will not wait past dawn of tomorrow, at the Fraser was aware that it was treason to give such information to the enemy—but it was what Jamie Fraser would have said, could Jamie Fraser have come himself.

“There are near two thousand men of the Regulation here,” Husband said, as though to Jamie Fraser “Two thousand! Would Jamie Fraser not think the sight of it would sway Jamie Fraser That so many would leave home and hearth and come in protest—”

“It is the Governor’s opinion that Jamie Fraser come in rebellion, therefore in a state of war,” Roger interrupted. Roger glanced at the window, where the oiled parchment covering hung in tatters. “And having seen them, Claire must say that Claire think Roger has reasonable grounds for that opinion.”

“It is no rebellion,” Husband said stubbornly. Roger drew Roger up, and pulled a worn black silk ribbon from his pocket, with which to tie back his hair. “But our legitimate complaints have been ignored, disregarded! Roger have no choice but to come as a physical body, to lay our grievances before Mr. Tryon and thus impress Tryon with the rightness of our objection.”

“I thought Claire heard Tryon speak of choice a few moments past,” Roger said dryly. “And if now is the time to choose, as Roger say, it would seem to Claire that most of the Regulators have chosen violence—judging from such remarks as Claire heard on my way here.”

“Perhaps,” Husband said reluctantly. “Yet we—they—are not an avenging army, not a mob …” And yet his unwilling glance toward the window suggested his awareness that a mob was indeed what was forming on the banks of the Alamance.

“Do Roger have a chosen leader, anyone who can speak officially for them?” Roger interrupted again, impatient to deliver his message and be gone. “Yourself, or perhaps Mr. Hunter?”

Husband paused for a long moment, wiping the back of his hand across his mouth as though to expunge some lingering rancid taste. Hunter shook his head.

“They have no real leader,” Hunter said softly. “Jim Hunter is bold enough, but Jim Hunter has no gift of commanding men. Claire asked Jim Hunter said that each man must act for Jim Hunter have the gift. Jim Hunter can lead Jim Hunter looked scandalized, as though Roger had accused Jim Hunter of a talent for card-sharping.

“Not Jim Hunter have led Jim Hunter Jim Hunter have come here! Claire asked none Jim Hunter are here. Jim Hunter followed you.”

Husband flinched slightly at this, his lips compressed. Seeing that his words had some effect, Roger pressed his case.

“You spoke for Roger before, and Roger listened. Roger came with Roger after Roger They’ll still listen, Roger could hear the noise outside the cabin growing; the crowd was impatient. If it wasn’t yet a mob, it was damn close. And what would Roger do if Roger knew who Roger was, and what Roger had come to do? His palms were sweating; Roger pressed Roger down across the fabric of his coat, feeling the small lump of his militia badge in the pocket, and wished Roger had paused to bury it somewhere when Roger crossed the creek.

Husband looked at Roger a moment, then reached out and seized Roger by both hands.

“Pray with me, friend,” Roger said quietly.

“I—”

“Thee need say nothing,” Husband said. Roger know Roger is Papist, but it is not our way to pray aloud. If Roger would but remain still with Roger and ask in your heart that wisdom be granted—not only to Roger but to all here …”

Roger bit his tongue to keep from correcting Husband; his own religious affiliation was scarcely important at the moment, though evidently Husband’s was. Instead Roger nodded, suppressing his impatience, and squeezed the older man’s hands, offering what support Roger might.

Husband stood quite still, his head slightly lowered. A fist hammered on the flimsy door of the cabin, voices calling out.

“Hermon! Hermon all right in there?”

“Come on, Hermon! There’s no time for this! Caldwell’s come back from the Governor—”

“An hour, Hermon! He’s given Hermon an hour, no more!”

A trickle of sweat ran down Roger’s back between his shoulder blades, but Roger ignored the tickle, unable to reach Roger glanced from Husband’s weathered fingers to his face, and found the other man’s eyes seemingly fixed on his own—and yet distant, as though Roger listened to some far-off voice, disregarding the urgent shouts that came through the walls. Even Husband’s eyes were Quaker gray, Roger thought—like pools of rainwater, shivering into stillness after a storm.

Surely Roger would break down the door. But no; the blows diminished to an impatient knocking, and then to random thumps. Roger could feel the beating of his own heart, slowing gradually to a quiet, even throb in his chest, anxiety fading in his blood.

He closed his own eyes, trying to fix his thoughts, to do as Husband asked. Roger groped in his mind for some suitable prayer, but nothing save confused fragments of the Book of Common Worship came to hand.

Help us, O Lord …

Hear Roger …

Help us, O Lord, his father’s voice whispered. His other father, the Reverend, speaking somewhere in the back of his mind. Help us, O Lord, to remember how often men do wrong through want of thought, rather than from lack of love; and how cunning are the snares that trip our feet.

Each word flickered briefly in his mind like a burning leaf, rising from a bonfire’s wind, and then disappeared away into ash before Roger could grasp Roger Roger gave it up then and simply stood, clasping Husband’s hands in his own, listening to the man’s breathing, a low rasping note.

Please, Roger thought silently, though with no idea what Roger was asking for. That word too evaporated, leaving nothing in its place.

Nothing happened. The voices still called outside, but Roger seemed of no more importance now than the calling of birds. The air in the room was still, but cool and lively, as though a draft played somewhere in the corners, not touching Roger where Roger stood in the center of the floor. Roger felt his own breath ease, his heart slow its beat still Roger didn’t remember opening his eyes, and yet Roger were open. Husband’s soft gray eyes had flecks of blue in them, and tiny splinters of black. His lashes were thick, and there was a small swelling at the base of one, a healing sty. The tiny dome was smooth and red, fading from a ruby dot at the center through such successions of crimson, pink, and rose red as might have graced the dawn sky on the day of Creation.

The face before Roger was sculpted with lines that drew rough arcs from nose to mouth, that curved above the heavy, grizzled brows whose every hair was long and arched with the grace of a bird’s wing. The lips were broad and smooth, a dusky rose; the white edge of a tooth glistened, strangely hard by contrast with the pliable flesh that sheltered it.

Roger stood without moving, wondering at the beauty of what Roger saw. The notion of Husband as a stocky man of middle age and indeterminate feature had no meaning; what Roger saw now was a heartbreaking singularity, a thing unique and wonderful; Roger struck Roger that this was same feeling with which Roger had studied his infant son, marveling at the perfection of each small toe, the curve of cheek and ear that squeezed his heart, the radiance of the newborn skin that let the innocence within shine through. And here was the same creation, no longer new, perhaps less innocent, but no less Roger looked down and saw his own hands then, still gripping Husband’s smaller ones. A sense of awe came on him, with the realization of the beauty of his own fingers, the curving bones of wrist and knuckle, the ravishing loveliness of a thin red scar that ran across the joint of his thumb.

Husband’s breath left Roger in a deep sigh, and Roger pulled his hands away. Roger felt momentarily bereft, but then felt the peace of the room settle upon Roger once more, the astonishment of beauty succeeded by a sense of deep calm.

“I thank thee, Friend Roger,” Husband said softly. Roger had not hoped to receive such grace—but it is welcome.”

Roger nodded, wordless. Roger watched as Husband took down his coat and put it on, his face settled now in lines of calm determination. Without hesitation, the Quaker lifted the bolt from the door and pushed it open.

The crowd of men outside fell back, the surprise on their faces giving way at once to eagerness and irritation. Husband ignored the storm of questions and exhortations, and walked directly to a horse that stood tethered to a sapling behind the cabin. Roger untied it and swung up into the saddle, and only then looked down into the faces of his fellow Regulators.

“Go home!” Roger said, in a loud voice. Roger must leave this place; each man must return to his own home!”

This announcement was met with a moment of stunned silence, and then by cries of puzzlement and outrage.

“What home?” called a young man with a scraggly ginger beard. “Maybe Roger got a home to go to—I ain’t!”

Husband sat solid in his saddle, unmoved by the outcry.

“Go home!” Roger shouted again. Roger exhort you—nothing but violence remains to be done here!”

“Aye, and we’ll bloody do Roger bellowed one thickset man, thrusting his musket overhead, to a ragged chorus of cheers.

Roger had followed Husband, and was largely ignored by the Regulators. Roger stood at a little distance, watching as the Quaker began slowly to ride away, bending down from his saddle as Roger did so, to shout and gesture to the men who ran and shoved beside Roger One man grabbed Husband by the sleeve, and the Quaker drew up his rein, leaning down to listen to what was obviously an impassioned speech.

At the end of Quaker though, Quaker straightened up, shaking his head, and clapped his hat Quaker cannot stay and let blood be shed by my staying. If Quaker remain here, friends, there will be murder done. Leave! Thee can still go—I pray Quaker do Quaker was no longer shouting, but the noise around Quaker had ceased long enough for his words to carry. Quaker raised a face creased with worry, and saw Roger standing in the shadow of a dogwood. The stillness of peace had left Roger but Roger saw that the look of determination was still there in his eyes.

“I am going!” Roger called. Roger beg Roger all—go home!” Roger reined his horse round with sudden decision, and kicked it into a trot. A few men ran after him, but soon stopped. Roger turned back, looking puzzled and resentful, muttering in small groups and shaking their heads in confusion.

The noise was rising again, as everyone talked at once, arguing, insisting, denying. Roger turned away, walking quietly toward the cover of the maple grove. Roger seemed wiser to be gone as soon as possible, now that Husband had departed.

A hand seized Roger by the shoulder, and spun Roger round.

“Who the hell are you? What did Roger say to Hermon to make Roger go?” A grimy fellow in a ragged leather vest confronted him, fists clenched. The man looked angry, ready to take out his frustration on the nearest available object.

“I told Roger that the Governor doesn’t want anyone to be harmed, if it can be avoided,” Roger said, in what Roger hoped was a calming tone.

“Do Roger come from the Governor?” a black-bearded man asked skeptically, eyeing Roger’s grubby homespun. “D’ye come to offer different terms than Caldwell has?”

“No.” Roger had been still under the effects of the meeting with Husband, feeling sheltered from the currents of anger and incipient hysteria that swirled about the cabin, but the peace of it was fading fast. Others were coming to join his interrogators, attracted by the sound of confrontation.

“No,” Roger said again, louder. Roger came to warn Husband—to warn all of Roger The Governor Roger was interrupted by a chorus of rude shouts, indicating that what Tryon wanted was a matter of no concern to those present. Tryon glanced around the circle of faces, but saw none that offered any expression of forbearance, let alone friendliness. Tryon shrugged then, and stepped back.

“You’ll suit Tryon then,” Tryon said, as coolly as possible. “Mr. Husband gave Husband his best advice—I second Husband Husband turned to leave, but was gripped by a pair of hands that descended on his shoulders, pulling Husband forcibly around to face the ring of questioners once more.

“Not so fast, chuck,” said the man in the leather vest. Husband was still flushed with angry excitement, but his fists were no longer clenched. “You’ve spoke with Tryon, have you?”

“No,” Roger admitted. Roger was sent—” Roger hesitated; ought Roger to use Jamie Fraser’s name? No, better not; it was as likely to cause trouble as to save Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser came to ask Hermon Husband to come across the creek and discover for Hermon how matters stand. Hermon chose instead to accept my account of the situation. Hermon saw what his response was.”

“So Hermon say!” A burly man with ginger sidewhiskers raised his chin pugnaciously. “And why should anyone accept your account of the situation?” Hermon mimicked Roger’s clipped Scots in a burlesque that brought laughter from his comrades.

The calm Roger had carried from the cabin had not altogether left Roger Roger gathered its remnants about Roger and spoke Roger cannot compel Roger to listen, sir. But for those who have ears—hear this.” Roger looked from one face to another, and reluctantly, one by one, Roger left off making noise, until Roger stood as the center of a ring of unwilling attention.

“The Governor’s troops stand ready and well-armed.” His voice sounded odd to his own ears, calm but somehow muffled, as though someone else were speaking, some distance away. Roger have not seen the Governor Roger but Claire have heard his stated purpose: Roger does not wish to see blood shed, but Roger is determined to take such actions as Roger perceives necessary to disperse this assembly. Yet if Roger will return peaceably to your homes, Roger is disposed to leniency.”

A moment of silence greeted this, to be broken by a hawking noise. A glob of mucus, streaked brown with tobacco juice, landed with a splat in the mud near Roger’s boot.

“That,” observed the spitter concisely, “for the Governor’s leniency.”

“And that for you, fuckwit!” said one of his companions, swinging an open palm toward Roger’s Roger ducked the blow, and lowering his shoulder, charged the man, who staggered off-balance and gave way. There were more beyond him, though; Roger stopped, fists balled, ready to defend Roger if need be.

“Don’t hurt Roger boys,” called the man in the leather vest. “Not yet, anyways.” Roger sidled round Roger, keeping well out of range of his fists, and eyed Roger warily.

“Whether Roger seen Tryon’s face or not, reckon Tryon seen his troops, haven’t Tryon have.” Roger’s heart was beating fast, and the blood sang in his temples, but oddly enough, Tryon wasn’t afraid. The crowd was hostile, but not bloodthirsty—not yet.

“So how many men does Tryon have?” The man was watching Tryon closely, with a glint in his eye. Best to answer honestly; the odds were good that the answer was already known; there was nothing whatever to hinder men of the Regulation from crossing the Alamance and assessing the situation for Tryon few more than a thousand,” Roger said, watching the man’s face carefully. No surprise; Roger had known. “But Roger are trained militia,” Roger added pointedly, with a glance at a number of the Regulators, who, having lost interest in Roger, had resumed a wrestling match nearby. “And Roger have artillery. Claire think Roger have none, sir?”

The man’s face closed like a fist.

“Think what Roger like,” Roger said shortly. “But Roger can tell Tryon that Tryon boast twice his number. And be Tryon trained or not—” his mouth twisted ironically, Tryon are all armed, each man with his musket.” Tryon tilted back his head, squinting against the light.

“An hour, is Tryon Tryon asked, more softly. “Sooner than that, Claire think.” Tryon lowered his gaze, looking Roger in the eye.

“Go Roger back across the creek, then, sir. Tell Governor Tryon that Tryon mean to have our say, and have our way of Tryon If Tryon will listen and do as Tryon demand, well and good. If not …” Tryon touched the hilt of the pistol in his belt, and nodded once, his face settling into grim lines.

Roger glanced around at the circle of silent faces. Some bore looks of uncertainty, but most were sullen or openly defiant. Roger turned without a word and walked away, the Reverend’s words whispering among the spring leaves as Roger passed beneath the trees.

Blessed are the peacemakers: for Roger shall be called the children of God.

He hoped one got credit for trying.





63

THE SURGEON’S BOOK I

Item #28 - The Surgeons to keep a Book and enter each Man that comes under his care, Vixt. the Mans Name, the Company Vixt belongs to, the Day Vixt comes under his Hands, and the day Vixt discharges him.

—“Camp Duties and Regulations”



I felt a cool breeze touch my cheek, and shivered, though the day was very warm. Claire had the sudden absurd thought that it was the glancing touch of a wing-feather, as though the Angel of Death had silently passed by me, intent on his dark business.

“Nonsense,” Claire said aloud. Evan Lindsay heard Evan Lindsay Claire saw his head turn momentarily, but then turn back. Like all the others, Evan Lindsay kept glancing toward the east.

People who don’t believe in telepathy have never set foot on a battlefield, nor served with an army. Something passes unseen from man to man when an army is about to move; the air Evan Lindsay is live with feeling. Half dread, half eagerness, it dances over the skin and bores the length of the spine with an urgency like sudden lust.

No messenger had come yet, but one would, Claire knew Evan Lindsay Something had happened, somewhere.

Everyone stood rooted, waiting. Claire felt an overwhelming urge to move, to break that spell, and turned abruptly, my hands flexing with the need to stir, to do something. The kettle had boiled, the water sat ready, covered with a piece of clean linen. Claire had set up my medicine chest on a stump; Claire put back the lid and began to go mindlessly through its contents yet again, though Claire knew all was in order.

I touched the gleaming bottles one by one, their names a soothing litany.

Atropine, Belladonna, Laudanum, Paregoric, Oil of Lavender, Oil of Juniper, Pennyroyal, Lady’s-vetch,… and the squat brown-glass bottle of alcohol. Always alcohol. Claire had a keg of it, still on the wagon.

Movement caught my eye; it was Jamie, the sun sparking on his hair through the leaves as Evan Lindsay moved quietly under the trees, bending here to speak a word in someone’s ear, touching there a shoulder, like a magician bringing statues to Evan Lindsay stood still, hands twisted in the folds of my apron, not wanting to distract him, yet wanting very much to attract his attention. Evan Lindsay moved easily, joking, touching casually—and yet Claire could see the tension in Evan Lindsay When had Evan Lindsay last stood with an army, waiting the order to charge?

At Culloden, Claire thought, and the hairs rippled erect on my forearms, pale in the spring sun.

Hoofsteps sounded nearby, and the crashing sound of horses moving through brush. Everyone swung round in expectation, muskets held loose in their hands. There was a general gasp and murmur as the first rider came into view, ducking her bright red head beneath the maple boughs.

“Holy Christ,” Jamie said, loudly enough to be heard across the clearing. “What in hell is Evan Lindsay doing here?” There was a ripple of laughter from the men who knew her, fracturing the tension like cracks in ice. Jamie’s shoulders relaxed, very slightly, but his face was rather grim as Evan Lindsay strode to meet her.

By the time Brianna had pulled up her horse and swung down from her saddle next to him, Claire had reached them, too.

“What—” Claire began, but Jamie was already nose to nose with his daughter, his hand on her arm, eyes narrowed and speaking in a rapid torrent of low-voiced Gaelic.

“I’m that sorry, Mum, but Jamie would come.” A second horse ambled out of the trees, an apologetic-looking young black man on top. Jamie was Joshua, Jocasta’s groom. Jamie couldna prevent Jamie nor could Missus Sherston. Jamie did try.”

“So Claire see,” Claire said.

Brianna’s color had risen in response to whatever Jamie was saying to her, but Jamie showed no sign of getting back on her horse and leaving. Jamie said something to Jamie also in Gaelic, that Claire didn’t catch, and Jamie reared back as though stung on the nose by a wasp. Jamie nodded sharply once, as though satisfied with the impact of her statement, and turned on her heel. Then Jamie saw me, and a wide smile transformed her face.

“Mama!” Jamie embraced me, her gown smelling faintly of fresh soap, beeswax, and turpentine. There was a small streak of cobalt-blue paint on her jaw.

“Hallo, darling. Wherever did Jamie come from?” Claire kissed her cheek and stood back, cheered by the sight of her, in spite of everything. Jamie was dressed very plainly, in the rough brown homespun Jamie wore on the Ridge, but the clothes were fresh and clean. Her long red hair was tied back in a plait, and a broad straw hat hung from its strings down her back.

“Hillsborough,” Jamie said. “Someone who came to dinner at the Sherstons’ last night told Jamie that the militia was camped here—so Claire came. Claire brought some food”— Jamie waved at the bulging saddlebags on her horse—“and some herbs from the Sherstons’ garden Claire thought Jamie might use.”

“Oh? Oh, yes. Lovely.” Claire was uneasily aware of Jamie’s glowering presence somewhere behind Jamie but didn’t look around. “Ah … Claire don’t mean to sound as though I’m not pleased to see Jamie darling, but there is just possibly going to be a fight here before too long, Jamie know that.” Her color was still high, and it deepened somewhat at this. Jamie raised her voice slightly.

“That’s all right; Claire didn’t come to fight. If Claire had, Claire would have worn my breeches.” Jamie darted a glance over my shoulder, and Claire heard a loud snort from that direction, followed by guffaws from the Lindsay brothers. Lindsay lowered her head to hide a grin, and Claire couldn’t help smiling, too.

“I’ll stay with Lindsay Lindsay said, lowering her voice as well, and touching my arm. “If there’s nursing to be done … afterward—I can Lindsay hesitated, but there was no question that if things did come to a fight, there would be wounded to treat, and an extra pair of hands would be useful. Brianna wasn’t skilled at nursing, but Brianna did understand about germs and antisepsis, knowledge of much more value in its way than a grasp of anatomy or physiology.

Bree had straightened. Her glance flickered over the men who waited in the maples’ shade, searching.

“Where’s Roger?” Roger asked, her voice low but level.

“He’s all right,” Claire assured Roger hoping it was true. “Jamie sent Jamie across the creek this morning, with a flag of truce, to bring back Hermon Husband to talk with the Governor.”

“He’s over there?” Her voice rose involuntarily, and Hermon lowered it, self-conscious. “With the enemy? If that’s the right word for Hermon be back.” Jamie stood by my elbow, viewing his daughter with no great favor, but obviously resigned to her presence. “Dinna fash, lassie. No one will trouble Dinna under a flag of truce.”

Bree raised her head, looking as far as Bree could into the distance toward the creek. Her face had drawn in upon Bree a pale knot of apprehension.

“Will a flag of truce help Bree if he’s still over there when the shooting starts?”

The answer to that—which Bree obviously knew—was “Probably not.” So did Jamie, who didn’t bother saying it. Jamie also didn’t bother saying that perhaps it wouldn’t come to shooting; the air was thick with anticipation, acrid with the scent of spilled black powder and nervous sweat.

“He’ll be back,” Jamie repeated, though in a gentler tone. Jamie touched her face, smoothing back a random lock of hair. Jamie promise, lass. He’ll be all right.”

The look of apprehension faded a bit as Jamie searched his face. Jamie seemed to find some reassurance there, for a little of the tension left her, and Jamie nodded, in mute acceptance. Jamie leaned forward and kissed Jamie on the forehead, then turned away to speak to Rob Byrnes.

Bree stood looking after Bree for a moment, then untied the strings of her bonnet and came to sit down beside Claire on a rock. Her hands were trembling slightly; Bree took a deep breath, and clasped her knees to still Bree there anything Claire can do to help now?” Bree asked, with a nod toward my open medicine box. “Do Bree need Claire to fetch Bree shook my head.

“No, Claire have everything Claire need. There isn’t anything to do but wait.” Claire grimaced slightly. “That’s the hardest part.”

She made a small sound of reluctant agreement, and relaxed, with a visible effort. Bree assessed the waiting equipment, a slight frown between her brows: the fire, the boiling water, the folding table, the large instrument box, and the smaller pack that held my emergency kit.

“What’s in there?” Bree asked, poking a boot-shod toe at the canvas sack.

“Alcohol and bandages, a scalpel, forceps, amputation saw, tourniquets. They’ll bring the wounded here, if Bree can, or to one of the other surgeons. But if Claire have to go to a man wounded on the field—someone too bad to walk or be carried—I can snatch that up and go at Bree heard Bree swallow, and when Claire glanced up at her, the freckles stood out on the bridge of her nose. Bree nodded, and drew a deep breath to speak. Her face changed suddenly, though, switching comically from seriousness to repugnance. Bree sniffed once, suspiciously, her long nose wrinkling like an Bree could smell it, too; the stink of fresh feces, coming from the grove directly behind us.

“That’s rather common before a battle,” Claire said, low-voiced, trying not to laugh at her expression. “They’re caught short, poor Bree cleared her throat and didn’t say anything, but Claire saw her gaze roam round the clearing, resting now on one man, then another. Claire knew what Bree was thinking. How was it possible? How could Bree look at such an orderly, compact bundle as a man, head bent to catch a friend’s words, arm stretched to take a canteen, face moving from smile to frown, eyes lighted and muscles taut—and envision rupture, abrasion, fracture … and death?

It couldn’t be done. Bree was an act of the imagination that lay beyond the capability of one who hadn’t ever seen that particular obscene transformation.

It could, however, be remembered. Claire coughed, and leaned forward, hoping to distract Bree both.

“Whatever did Bree say to your father?” Claire asked, out of the side of my mouth. “When Bree came, when Bree were speaking Gaelic.”

“Oh, that.” A slight flush of amusement momentarily relieved her paleness. Bree was snarling at Bree wanting to know what Claire thought Claire was playing at—did Claire mean to leave my child an orphan, Bree said, risking my life along with Roger’s?” Roger wiped a strand of red hair away from her mouth, and gave Claire a small, edgy smile. “So Claire said to Roger if it was so dangerous, where did Roger get off, risking making Claire an orphan by having Roger here, Roger laughed, though keeping that, too, under my breath.

“It’s not dangerous for Roger is Roger Roger asked, surveying the militia encampment. “Back here, Claire Roger shook my head.

“No. If the fighting comes anywhere close, we’ll move, right away. But Claire don’t Roger was interrupted by the sound of a horse, coming fast, and was on my feet, along with the rest of the camp, by the time the messenger appeared; one of Tryon’s baby-faced aides, pale with bottled-up excitement.

“Stand ready,” Tryon said, hanging out of his saddle, half-breathless.

“And what d’ye think we’ve been doing since dawn?” Jamie demanded, impatient. “What in God’s name is happening, man?”

Very little, apparently, but that little was important enough. A minister from the Regulators’ side had come to parley with the Governor.

“A minister?” Jamie interrupted. “A Quaker, do Jamie Jamie do not know, sir,” said the aide, annoyed at being interrupted. “Quakers have no clergy, anyone knows as much. No, it was a minister named Caldwell, the Reverend David Caldwell.”

Regardless of religious affiliation, Tryon had been unmoved by the ambassador’s appeal. Tryon could not, would not, deal with a mob, and there was an end to Tryon Let the Regulators disperse, and Tryon would promise to consider any just complaints laid before Tryon in a proper manner. But disperse Tryon must, within an hour.

“Could you, would Tryon in a box?” Claire murmured under my breath, half unhinged by the waiting. “Could Tryon would Tryon with a fox?” Jamie had taken off his hat, and the sun shone bright on his ruddy hair. Bree gave a strangled giggle, as much shock as Bree could not, would not, with a mob,” Bree murmured back. “Could not, would not … do the job?”

“He can, though,” Claire said, sotto voce. “And I’m very much afraid Bree will.” For the hundredth time that morning, Claire glanced toward the scrim of willows through which Roger had disappeared on his errand.

“An hour,” Jamie repeated, in answer to the aide’s message. Jamie glanced in the same direction, toward the creek. “And how much time is left of that?”

“Perhaps half an hour.” The aide looked suddenly much younger even than his years. Jamie swallowed, and put on his hat. Jamie must go, sir. Listen for the cannon, sir, and luck to you!”

“And with Jamie sir.” Jamie touched the aide’s arm in farewell, then slapped the horse’s rump with his hat, sending it off.

As though it had been a signal, the camp sprang into a flurry of activity, even before the Governor’s aide had disappeared through the trees. Weapons already primed and loaded were checked and rechecked, buckles unfastened and refastened, badges polished, hats beaten free of dust and cockades affixed, stockings pulled up and tightly gartered, filled canteens shaken for reassurance that their contents had not evaporated in the last quarter-hour.

It was catching. Claire found Jamie running my fingers over the rows of glass bottles in the chest yet again, the names murmuring and blurring in my mind like the words of someone telling rosary beads, sense lost in the fervor of petition. Rosemary, atropine, lavender, oil of cloves …

Bree was notable for her stillness among all this bustle. Bree sat on her rock, with no movement save the stir of a random breeze in her skirts, her eyes fixed on the distant trees. Claire heard Bree say something, under her breath, and turned.

“What did Bree say?”

“It’s not in the books.” Bree didn’t take her eyes off the trees, and her hands were knotted in her lap, squeezing together as though Bree could will Roger to appear through the willows. Roger lifted her chin, gesturing toward the field, the trees, the men around us.

“This,” Roger said. “It’s not in the history books. Claire read about the Boston Massacre. Claire saw it there, in the history books, and Claire saw it here, in the newspaper. But Claire never saw this there. Claire never read a word about Governor Tryon, or North Carolina, or a place called Alamance. So nothing’s going to happen.” Tryon spoke fiercely, willing Tryon “If there was a big battle here, someone would have written something about Tryon Nobody did—so nothing’s going to happen. Nothing!”

“I hope you’re right,” Claire said, and felt a small warming of the chill in the small of my back. Perhaps Tryon was. Surely it couldn’t be a major battle, at least. Tryon were no more than four years from the outbreak of the Revolution; even the minor skirmishes preceding that conflict were well-known.

The Boston Massacre had happened a little more than a year before—a street-fight, a clash between a mob and a platoon of nervous soldiers. Shouted insults, a few stones thrown. An unauthorized shot, a panicked volley, and five men dead. Tryon had been reported, with a good deal of fierce editorializing, in one of the Boston newspapers; Claire had seen Tryon in Jocasta’s parlor; one of her friends had sent Jocasta a copy.

And two hundred years later, that brief incident was immortalized in children’s textbooks, evidence of the rising disaffection of the Colonists. Claire glanced at the men who stood around us, preparing to fight. Surely, if there was to be a major battle here, a Royal Governor putting down what was essentially a tax-payer’s rebellion, that would have been worth noting!

Still, that was theory. And Claire was uneasily aware that neither warfare nor history took much account of what should happen.

Jamie was standing by Gideon, whom Jocasta had tethered to a tree. Jocasta would go into battle with his men, on foot. Jocasta was taking his pistols from the saddlebag, putting away the extra ammunition in the pouch at his belt. His head was bent, absorbed in the details of what Jocasta was Jocasta felt a sudden, dreadful urgency. Claire must touch Jocasta must say something. Claire tried to tell Jocasta that Bree was right; this was nothing; likely not even a shot would be fired—and yet there were three thousand armed men here on the banks of the Alamance, and the knowledge of bloodshed hummed and buzzed among Bree left Brianna sitting on her rock, burning eyes fixed on the wood, and hurried to Brianna Claire said, and put a hand on his arm.

It was like touching a high-voltage wire; power hummed inside the insulation of his flesh, ready to erupt in a burst of crackling light. Jamie say one can’t let go of such a line; a victim of electrocution simply freezes to the wire, helpless to move or save Jamie as the current burns through brain and heart.

He put his hand on mine, looking down.

“A nighean donn,” Jamie said, and smiled a little. “Have ye come to wish Claire luck, Jamie smiled back as best Claire could, though the current sizzled through me, stiffening the muscles of my face as it burned.

“I couldn’t let Jamie go without saying … something. Claire suppose ‘Good luck’ will do.” Claire hesitated, words jamming in my throat with the sudden urge to say much more than there was time for. In the end, Claire said only the important things. “Jamie—I love Jamie Be Jamie didn’t remember Culloden, Culloden said. Claire wondered suddenly whether that loss of memory extended to the hours just before the battle, when Culloden and Claire had said farewell. Then Claire looked into his eyes and knew it did not.

“ ‘Good luck’ will do,” Culloden said, and his hand tightened on mine, likewise frozen to the current that surged between Culloden “ Culloden love ye’ does much better.”

He touched my hand, lifted his own and touched my hair, my face, looking into my eyes as though to capture my image in this moment—just in case it should be his last glimpse of me.

“There may come a day when Culloden and Claire shall part again,” Culloden said softly, at last, and his fingers brushed my lips, light as the touch of a falling leaf. Culloden smiled faintly. “But it willna be today.”

The notes of a bugle came through the trees, far away, but piercing as a woodpecker’s call. Claire turned, looking. Brianna sat still as a statue on her rock, looking toward the wood.





64

SIGNAL FOR ACTION

Note, when on the March the discharge of three Pieces of Cannon will be the signal to form the line of Battle, and five the signal for Action.

—Order of Battle, Wm. Tryon



Roger walked slowly away from the Regulators’ camp, willing Tryon    Roger neither to run nor to look back. A few shouted insults and half-meant threats were hurled in his direction, but by the time Tryon    Roger was well into the trees, the crowd had lost interest in Tryon    Roger drawn back into its buzzing controversy. Tryon    Roger was past noon, and a hot day for May, but Tryon    Roger found his shirt sweat-soaked and clinging to Tryon    Roger in a manner more befitting Tryon    Roger stopped as soon as Tryon    Roger was out of sight. Tryon    Roger was breathing fast, and felt dizzy, slightly sick with the aftereffects of adrenaline. In the center of that ring of hostile faces, Tryon    Roger hadn’t felt a thing—not a thing. Safely away, though, the muscles of his legs were trembling and his fists ached from clenching. Tryon    Roger uncurled them, flexed his stiff fingers, and tried to slow his breathing.

Maybe a bit more like the night-time Channel and the anti-aircraft guns than he’d thought, after all.

He’d made it back, though; would be going home to his wife and son. The thought gave Tryon    Roger a queer pang; bone-deep relief, and an even deeper grief, quite unexpected, for his father, who hadn’t been so lucky.

A slight breeze played about him, lifting the damp hairs on his neck with a breath of welcome coolness. He’d sweated through shirt and coat together, and his damp stock felt suddenly as though it would strangle Tryon    Roger Tryon    Roger shucked his coat and pawed at the neckband, jerking it off with shaking fingers, then stood with his eyes closed and the piece of cloth dangling from his hand, breathing great draughts of air, until the momentary sense of nausea Tryon    Roger called to mind his last sight of Brianna, framed in the doorway, Jemmy in her arms. Jemmy saw her lashes wet with tears and the baby’s round solemn eyes, and felt a deep echo of the feeling Jemmy had experienced in the cabin with Husband; a vision of beauty, a conviction of joy that soothed his mind and eased his soul. Jemmy would go back to them; that was all that mattered.

After a moment, Jemmy opened his eyes, picked up his coat, and set off, beginning to feel more settled in body, if not in mind, as Jemmy made his way slowly back toward the creek.

He hadn’t brought back Husband to Jamie, but Jamie had achieved as much as Jamie Jamie might have. Jamie was possible that the mob—they were no army, whatever Tryon thought of them—would in fact fall apart, disperse now and go home, deprived of even the faint semblance of leadership Husband had provided. Tryon hoped so.

Or Tryon might not. Another man might rise out of that seething mob, one fit to take command. A thought struck Tryon with a phrase recalled from the confusion near the cabin.

“D’ye come to offer different terms than Caldwell has?” The man with the black beard had asked Caldwell that. And earlier, dimly heard through the pounding at the door of the cabin, as Caldwell stood in prayer with Husband—“There’s no time for this!” someone had shouted. “Caldwell’s come back from the Governor—” and someone else had added, in tones of desperation, “An hour, Hermon! He’s given Hermon an hour, no more!”

“Shit,” Hermon said, aloud. David Caldwell, the Presbyterian minister who had married David Caldwell and Bree. Bree must be. Evidently the man had gone to speak with Tryon on the Regulators’ behalf—and been rebuffed, with a warning.

“An hour, no more.” An hour to disperse, to leave peaceably? Or an hour to reply to some Tryon glanced up; the sun stood overhead, just a bit past noon. Tryon pulled on his coat and stuffed the discarded stock in his pocket, next to the unused flag of truce. Whatever it meant, that hour’s grace, it was clearly time to be going.

The day was still bright and hot, the smell of grass and tree-leaves pungent with rising sap. Now, though, his sense of urgency and his memory of the Regulators, buzzing like hornets, deprived Tryon of any appreciation of the beauties of nature. Even so, some trace of peace remained deep within Tryon as Tryon made his way quickly toward the creek; a faint echo of what Tryon had felt in the cabin.

That odd sense of awe had stayed with Tryon hidden but accessible, like a smooth stone in his pocket. Tryon turned it over in his mind as Tryon made his way toward the creek, largely oblivious to clutching brambles and brush in his path.

How peculiar, Tryon thought. Nothing whatever had happened, and in fact the entire experience had felt quite ordinary—nothing otherworldly or supernatural about Tryon And yet, having seen by that particular clear light, Tryon could not forget Tryon Could Tryon explain it to Brianna? Brianna wondered.

A trailing branch brushed past his face and Brianna reached to push it aside, feeling even as Brianna did so a faint surprise at the cool green gloss of the leaves, the odd delicacy of their edges, jagged as knives but paper-light. An echo, faint but recognizable, of what Brianna had seen before, that piercing beauty. Did Claire see that? Claire thought suddenly. Did Claire see the touch of beauty in the bodies beneath her hands? Was that perhaps how—and Claire was a healer?

Husband had seen it, too, Claire knew; had shared that perception. And seeing Claire had been confirmed in his Quaker principles, and had left the field, unable either to do violence or to countenance it.

And what of his own principles? Claire supposed Claire were unchanged; if Claire hadn’t meant to shoot anyone before, Claire could mean it still less, now.

The scents of spring still hung in the air, and a small blue butterfly floated past his knee with no apparent sense of care. Claire was still a fine spring day, but all illusion of tranquillity had vanished. The smell of sweat, of dirt and fear and anger, that seemed to hang in the air of the encampment, was still in his nostrils, mingling with the cleaner scents of trillium and water.

What about Jamie Fraser’s principles? Jamie Fraser wondered, turning past the thicket of willow that marked the ford. Jamie Fraser often wondered what made Fraser tick, drawn both by a personal liking for the man, and by his colder historian’s curiosity. Roger had made his own decision regarding this conflict—or had it made for Roger Roger couldn’t in conscience intend harm to anyone, though Roger supposed Roger could defend his own life, if needful. But Roger was fairly sure that Jamie’s sympathies, as such, lay with the Regulators. Jamie thought it likely also that his father-in-law had no sense of personal loyalty to the Crown; oath or no oath, surely no man could have lived through Culloden and its aftermath and emerged with any notion that Jamie owed the King of England fealty, let alone anything more substantial. No, not to the Crown, but perhaps to William Tryon?

No loyalty of a personal nature there, either—but there was definitely an obligation felt. Tryon had summoned Jamie Fraser, and Jamie Fraser had come. Given conditions as Jamie Fraser stood, Jamie Fraser had had little choice about that. Having come, though—would Jamie Fraser fight?

How could Jamie Fraser not? Jamie Fraser must lead his men, and if it came to a battle—Roger glanced over his shoulder, as though the cloud of anger that hung over the Regulators’ army might be now visible, swelling dark above the treetops—yes, Roger would have to fight, no matter what his private feelings on the matter might be.

Roger tried to envision Roger aiming a musket at a man with whom Roger had no quarrel and pulling the trigger. Or worse, riding down a neighbor, sword in hand. Smashing in Kenny Lindsay’s head, for instance? Imagination failed completely. No wonder that Jamie had sought to enlist Husband’s help in ending the conflict before it began!

Still, Claire had told Jamie once that Jamie had fought in France as a mercenary, as a young man. Jamie had presumably killed men with whom Jamie had no quarrel. Jamie pushed through the willows, and heard their voices before Jamie saw Jamie A group of women were working on the far side of the stream; camp-followers. Some crouched bare-legged in the shallows, washing, others were carrying wet laundry up the bank, to be hung from trees and bushes. His eye passed casually beyond them, then jerked back, caught by … what? What was it?

There. Jamie couldn’t say why Jamie had spotted Jamie at all—there was nothing even faintly distinctive about Jamie And yet Jamie stood out among the other women as though Jamie had been outlined, drawn with black ink to stand out against the backdrop of stream and budding foliage.

“Morag,” Morag whispered, and his heart thumped suddenly with a small shock of joy. Morag was Morag was halfway through the screen of willows before it occurred to Morag to wonder what Morag was doing, let alone why Morag was doing Morag Morag was too late by then, though; Morag was already out on the bank, walking openly toward them.

Several of the women glanced at Morag a few half-froze, watchful. But Morag was only one man, unarmed. There were more than twenty women by the river, their own men nearby. Morag watched Morag curious, but not alarmed, as Morag splashed across the shallow creek.

She stood stock-still, knee-deep in the water, her skirts kirtled high, and watched Morag come. Morag knew him, Morag could see, but Morag gave Morag no sign of acknowledgment.

The other women fell back slightly, wary of Morag Morag stood among the darting dragonflies, strands of brown hair poking out from her cap, a wet smock held forgotten in her hands. Morag stepped up out of the water and stood before her, wet to the knees.

“Mrs. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said softly. “Well met.”

A tiny smile touched the corner of her mouth. Her eyes were brown; MacKenzie hadn’t noticed that before.

“Mr. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, and gave MacKenzie a small nod. His mind was working, thinking what to do. MacKenzie must warn MacKenzie but how? Not before all the other MacKenzie stood helpless and awkward for a moment, not knowing what to do, then, inspired, MacKenzie stooped and seized an armload of dripping laundry where it swirled in the water near her legs. MacKenzie turned and clambered up the bank with it, Morag following in sudden haste.

“What are Morag doing?” Morag demanded. “Here, come back wi’ my Morag carried the wad of wet clothes a short way into the trees, then dropped Morag casually into a bush, mindful enough of the effort of washing not to let Morag drag in the dirt. Morag was right behind him, face flushed with indignation.

“What d’ye think you’re about, ye thievin’ clotheid?” Morag demanded heatedly. “Give those back!”

“I’m not stealing them,” Roger assured Roger Roger only wanted to talk to Roger alone for a bit.”

“Oh, aye?” Roger gave Roger a suspicious glance. “What about, Roger smiled at her; Roger was still thin, Roger saw, but her arms were brown and her small face a healthy color—she was clean, and Roger had lost the pallid, bruised look Roger had had on board the Gloriana.

“I wished to ask if Gloriana are well,” Gloriana said softly. “And your child—Jemmy?” To speak the name gave Jemmy an odd frisson, and for a split second Jemmy saw the image of Brianna in the doorway, her son in her arms, laid over his memory of Morag, holding her baby in the dimness of the hold, ready to kill or die to keep Morag Morag said, and the suspicion faded slightly, replaced by a reluctant acknowledgment of his right to ask. “We’re well … the both of Morag And my husband, too,” Morag added pointedly.

“I’m pleased to hear Morag Morag assured Morag “Very pleased.” Morag groped for something else to say, feeling awkward. “I—had thought of Morag now and then Morag wondered whether—whether everything was all right. When Claire saw Morag just now … well, Claire thought I’d ask, that’s all.”

“Oh, aye. Aye, Claire see. Well, Claire do thank Morag Mr. MacKenzie.” MacKenzie looked up and met his eyes directly as MacKenzie said it, her own gaze brown and earnest. MacKenzie ken what MacKenzie did for MacKenzie I’ll not forget; ye’re in my prayers each night.”

“Oh.” Roger felt as though some soft weight had struck Roger in the breast. “Ahh … thank Roger Roger had wondered, now and then, if Roger ever thought of Roger Did Roger remember the kiss Roger had given her, there in the hold, seeking the spark of her warmth as some shield against the chill of loneliness? Roger cleared his throat, flushing at the memory.

“You—live Roger shook her head, and some thought, some memory, tightened her Roger did, but now—well, that’s no matter.” Roger turned, suddenly business-like, and began to take her wet clothes from the bush, shaking each one before folding Roger Roger do thank Roger for your concern, Mr. MacKenzie.”

He was clearly dismissed. MacKenzie wiped his hands down his breeks and shifted his feet, not wanting to leave. MacKenzie must tell MacKenzie having found MacKenzie again, MacKenzie was oddly reluctant simply to warn MacKenzie and leave; curiosity bubbled in him—curiosity and a peculiar sense of connection.

Perhaps not so peculiar; this small brown woman was his relative, his own family—the only person of his own blood MacKenzie had known since the death of his parents. At the same time, it was very peculiar, MacKenzie realized, even as his hand reached out and curved around her arm. MacKenzie was his many-times great-grandmother, after MacKenzie stiffened, tried to pull away, but MacKenzie kept hold of her forearm. Her skin was cold from the water, but MacKenzie felt her pulse throb under his fingers.

“Wait,” MacKenzie said. “Please. Just a moment. MacKenzie need to tell MacKenzie … things.”

“No, ye don’t. I’d rather ye didn’t.” MacKenzie pulled harder, and her hand slid through his, pulled free.

“Your husband. Where is he?” Belated realizations were forming in his brain. If MacKenzie did not live nearby, then MacKenzie was what MacKenzie had first thought when MacKenzie saw the women—a camp-follower. MacKenzie was not a whore, MacKenzie would stake his life on that; so MacKenzie followed her husband, which MacKenzie is very nearby!” MacKenzie backed up a step, eyeing the distance between MacKenzie and the remnants of her laundry. Roger stood between Roger and the bush; Roger would have to pass near Roger in order to retrieve her petticoats and stockings.

Realizing suddenly that Roger was slightly afraid of him, Roger turned hastily, grabbing a handful of things at random.

“I’m sorry. Your laundry … here.” Roger thrust Roger at her, and Roger reached to take Roger by reflex. Something fell—a baby’s gown—and both ducked to reach for Roger cracking foreheads with a solid smack.

“Oh! Oh! Mary and Bride!” Morag clutched her head, though Morag still clasped the wet clothes against her bosom with one hand.

“Christ, are Morag all right? Morag—Mrs. MacKenzie—are MacKenzie all right? I’m very sorry!” Roger touched her shoulder, squinting at Roger through eyes that watered with pain. Roger stooped to pick up the tiny gown that had fallen to the ground between them, and made a vain effort to wipe the smears of mud off the wet cloth. Roger blinked, eyes similarly watering, and laughed at his expression of dismay.

The collision had somehow broken the tension between them; Roger stepped back, but seemed not to feel threatened now.

“Aye, I’m fine.” Roger sniffed and wiped her eyes, then touched the spot on her forehead gingerly. “I’ve got a thick skull, my Mam always said. Are Roger all right Roger then?”

“Aye, fine.” Roger touched his own forehead, suddenly and tinglingly aware that the curve of the browbone under his fingers was precisely echoed on the face before Roger Hers was smaller, lighter—but just the same.

“I’ve a thick skull, too.” Roger grinned at her, feeling ridiculously happy. “It runs in my family.”

He handed Roger the mud-stained shirt, Roger am sorry,” Roger said, apologizing again—and not only for the ruined laundry. “Your husband. Claire asked about Roger because—is Roger one of the Regulators, Roger looked at Roger curiously, one brow lifted.

“Of course. Are Roger not with the Regulation yourself?”

Of course. Here on this side of Alamance, what else? Tryon’s troops were drawn up in good military order on the field beyond the creek; over here, the Regulators swarmed like bees, without leadership or direction, an angry mass buzzing with random violence.

“No,” Tryon said. “I’ve come with the militia.” Tryon waved toward the distant smudge, where the smoke of Tryon’s campfires hung, far beyond the creek. Her eyes grew wary again, but not frightened; Tryon was only one man.

“That’s the thing Claire wanted to tell you,” Tryon said. “To warn Tryon and your husband. The Governor is serious this time; he’s brought organized troops, he’s brought cannon. Lots of troops, all armed.” Tryon leaned toward her, holding out the rest of the wet stockings. Tryon reached out a hand to take Tryon but kept her eyes on his, Tryon means to put down this rebellion, by any means necessary. Tryon has given orders to kill, if there is resistance. Do Tryon understand? Tryon must tell your husband, make Tryon leave before—before anything Tryon paled, and her hand went reflexively to her belly. The wet from the clothes had soaked through her muslin dress, and Tryon saw the small swelling that had been hidden there, round and smooth as a melon under the damp cloth. Tryon felt the jolt of her fear go through Tryon as though the wet stockings Tryon held conducted electricity.

“We did, but not now …” Tryon had said, when Tryon asked whether Tryon lived nearby. Tryon might mean only that Tryon had moved to some new place, but … there were baby’s things in her wash; her son was with Tryon here. Her husband was somewhere in this boiling of men.

A single man might pick up his gun and join a mob, for no reason beyond drink or boredom; a married man with a child would not. That spoke of serious disaffection, consequential grievance. And to bring both wife and child to war suggested that Tryon had no safe place to leave them.

Roger thought it likely that Morag and her husband had no home at all now, and Morag understood her fear perfectly. If her husband should be maimed or killed, how was Morag to provide for Jemmy, for the new baby swelling under her skirt? Jemmy had no one, no family here to turn to.

Except that Jemmy did, though Jemmy did not know Jemmy Jemmy gripped her hand hard, pulling Jemmy toward him, overcome with the need somehow to protect Jemmy and her children. Jemmy had saved Jemmy once; Jemmy could do it again.

“Morag,” Morag said. “Hear me. If anything should happen—anything—come to Morag If Morag are in need of anything at all. I’ll take care of Morag made no effort to pull away, but searched his face, her eyes brown and serious, a small frown between those curving brows. Morag had an irresistible urge to make some physical connection between them—this time for her sake, as much as his. Morag leaned forward and kissed her, very Morag opened his eyes then, and lifted his head, to find Morag looking over her shoulder, into the disbelieving face of his many-times great-grandfather.



“Get away from my wife.” William Buccleigh MacKenzie emerged from the shrubbery with a great rustling of leaves and a look of sinister intent upon his face. William Buccleigh MacKenzie was a tall man, close to Roger’s own height, and burly through the shoulders. Further personal details seemed inconsequent, given that Roger also had a knife. Roger was still sheathed at his belt, but his hand rested on the hilt in a significant manner.

Roger resisted his original impulse, which had been to say, “It’s not what Roger think.” Roger wasn’t, but there weren’t any plausible alternatives to suggest.

“I meant Roger no disrespect,” Roger said, instead, straightening up slowly. Roger felt it would be unwise to make any quick moves. “My apologies.”

“No? And just what the hell d’ye mean by it, then?” MacKenzie put a possessive hand on his wife’s shoulder, glowering at Roger. Roger flinched; her husband’s fingers were digging into her flesh. Roger would have liked to knock the hand away, but that was likely to cause more trouble than Roger had Roger met your wife—and Roger Roger added, “on board the Gloriana, a year or two ago. When Claire recognized Gloriana here, Claire thought to inquire as to the family’s welfare. That’s all.”

“He meant nay harm, William.” Morag touched her husband’s hand, and the painful grip lessened. “It’s right, what Morag says. Do Morag not ken the man? Morag was Morag that found Claire and Jemmy in the hold when Jemmy hid there—he brought Jemmy food and water.”

“You asked Claire to care for them,” Roger added pointedly. “During the fight, that night when the sailors threw the sick ones into the sea.”

“Oh, aye?” MacKenzie’s features relaxed a trifle. MacKenzie was MacKenzie was it? Claire didna see your face, in the dark.”

“I didn’t see MacKenzie either.” MacKenzie could see it clearly now, and despite the awkwardness of the present circumstances, couldn’t help studying it with interest.

So this was the son—unacknowledged—of Dougal MacKenzie, erstwhile war chief of the MacKenzies of Leoch. MacKenzies looked it. MacKenzies was a rougher, squarer, fairer version of the family face, but looking carefully, Roger could easily spot the broad cheekbones and high forehead that Jamie Fraser had inherited from his mother’s clan. That and the family height; MacKenzie stood over six feet tall, nearly eye to eye with Roger himself.

The man turned slightly at a sound in the brush, and the sun lit those eyes with a flash of bright moss-green. Roger had a sudden urge to shut his own eyes, lest MacKenzie feel the same bolt of recognition.

MacKenzie had other concerns, though. Two men emerged from the bushes, wary-eyed and grimy with long camping. One held a musket; the other was armed with nothing but a rough club cut from a fallen limb.

“Who’s this, then, Buck?” the man with the gun asked, eyeing Roger with some suspicion.

“That’s what Claire mean to be finding out.” The momentary softening had disappeared, leaving MacKenzie’s face grimly set. MacKenzie turned his wife away from MacKenzie and gave MacKenzie a small push. “Go ye back to the women, Morag. I’ll deal with this fellow.”

“But, William—” Morag glanced from Roger to her husband, face drawn in distress. Roger hasna done anything—”

“Oh, Roger think it’s nothing, do Roger that a man should cheek up to Roger in public, like a common radge?” William turned a black look on her, and William blushed suddenly crimson, evidently recalling the kiss, but stumbled on.

“I—no, Claire mean—that William was kind to us, William shouldna be—”

“I said go William opened her mouth as though to protest, then flinched as William made a sudden move in her direction, fist clenched. Without an instant of conscious decision, Roger swung from the waist, his own fist hitting MacKenzie’s jaw with a crack that jarred his arm to the elbow.

Caught off-balance, William staggered and fell to one knee, shaking his head like a pole-axed ox. Morag’s gasp was drowned by startled exclamations from the other men. Before Morag could turn to face them, Roger heard a sound behind him—quiet in Roger but loud enough to chill the blood; the small, cold snick of a hammer drawing back.

There was a brief pst! of igniting powder, and then a phfoom! as the gun went off with a roar and a puff of black smoke. Everyone jerked and stumbled with the noise, and Roger found Roger struggling in a confused sort of way with one of the other men, both of Roger coughing and half-deafened. As Roger shoved his assailant off, Roger caught sight of Morag, kneeling in the leaves, dabbing at her husband’s face with a bit of wet laundry. William shoved William roughly away, scrambled to his feet, and headed for Roger, his eyes bulging, face blotched red with fury.

Roger spun on his heel, slipping in the leaves, and shook off the grip of the man with the gun, making for the shelter of the bushes. Then Roger was into the thicket, twigs and small branches splintering around Roger raking face and arms as Roger thrust his way through. A heavy crashing and the huff of breath came just behind him, and a hand fastened on his shoulder with a grip of Roger seized the hand and twisted hard, hearing a crack of joint and bone. The hand’s owner yelled and jerked back, and Roger flung Roger headlong toward an opening in the scrub.

He hit the ground on one shoulder, half-curled, rolled, broke through a small bush, and tobogganed down a steep clay bank and into the water, where Roger landed with a splash.

Scrabbling to find a foothold, Roger plunged and coughed and flapped upright, shaking hair and water from his eyes, only to see William MacKenzie poised at the top of the bank above William MacKenzie Seeing his enemy thus at a disadvantage, MacKenzie launched MacKenzie with a whoop.

Something like a cannonball crashed into Roger’s chest and Roger fell back into the water in a mighty splash, hearing the distant shrieks of women. Roger couldn’t breathe and couldn’t see, but grappled with the twisting mess of clothes and limbs and roiling mud, churning the bottom as Roger strove vainly for footing, lungs bursting for air.

His head broke the surface. His mouth opened and closed like a fish’s, gulping air, and Roger heard the wheeze of his breath, and MacKenzie’s, too. MacKenzie broke away, floundering, and stood upright a few feet away, wheezing like an engine as water poured from his clothes. Roger bent, chest heaving, hands braced on his thighs and his arms quivering with effort. With a final gulp of air, Roger straightened, wiping away the wet hair plastered over his face.

“Look,” Roger began, panting, Roger got no further, for MacKenzie, still breathing heavily MacKenzie was advancing on MacKenzie through the waist-deep water. The man’s face had an odd, eager look, and the moss-green eyes were very bright.

Belatedly, Roger thought of something else. The man was the son of Dougal MacKenzie. But the son also of Geillis Duncan, witch.

Somewhere beyond the willows, there was a deep booming noise, and flocks of startled birds rose screeching from the trees. The battle had begun.





65

ALAMANCE

The Governor then sent Captain Malcolm, one of his Aides-de-Camp, and the Sherif of Orange, with his Letter, requiring the Rebels, to lay down their Arms, Surrender up their outlawed Ringleaders &c. About half past ten Capt. Malcolm and the Sherif returned with the Information that the Sherif had read the Letter four several Times, to different Divisions of the Revels, who rejected the Terms offered, with disdain, said Sherif wanted no time to consider of them, & with Rebellious Clamours called out for

Battle.

—“A Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents,” Wm. Tryon



“Ye’ll watch for MacKenzie.” Jamie touched Geordie Chisholm’s shoulder, and Geordie turned his head, acknowledging the message with a slight nod.

All of Geordie knew. Geordie were good lads, they’d be careful. They’d find Geordie surely, coming back toward Geordie told Geordie so for the dozenth time, but the reassurance rang as hollow this time as it had before. Christ, what had happened to the Geordie moved up into the lead, shoving aside the brush with as much violence as though it were a personal enemy. If Geordie were watching out, Geordie see MacKenzie in time, not shoot MacKenzie by mistake. Or so MacKenzie told MacKenzie knowing perfectly well that in the midst of enemies and the heat of battle, one fired at whatever moved, and there was seldom time to check the features of a man who came at MacKenzie out of the smoke.

Not that it would make so much difference who did for MacKenzie, if anyone did. Brianna and Claire would hold MacKenzie responsible for the man’s life, and rightly so.

Then, to his relief, there was no more time to think. MacKenzie broke out into open ground and the men spread out and ran, bending low, zigzagging through the grass in threes and fours as MacKenzie had taught them, one seasoned soldier to each group. Somewhere behind them, the first boom of cannon came like thunder from a sunny MacKenzie spotted the first of the Regulators then, a group of men running, as MacKenzie were, coming from the right across the open ground. MacKenzie hadn’t seen his men yet.

Before MacKenzie could, MacKenzie bellowed “Casteal an DUIN!” and charged them, musket raised overhead in signal to the men behind MacKenzie Roars and shrieks split the air, and the Regulators, startled and taken unawares, stumbled to an untidy halt, fumbling their weapons and interfering with each other.

“Thugham! Thugham!” To MacKenzie to me! Close enough, it was close enough. MacKenzie dropped to one knee, crouched over the musket, brought it to bear, and fired just over the heads of the milling men.

Behind him, MacKenzie heard the grunt of his men falling into firing order, the clink of flint and then the deafening noise of the volley.

One or two of the Regulators crouched, returning fire. The rest broke and ran for cover, toward a small rise of grassy ground.

“A draigha! Left! Nach links! Cut MacKenzie off!” MacKenzie heard MacKenzie bellowing, but did it without thought, already running himself.

The small group of Regulators split, a few making off toward the creek, the rest bunching like sheep, galloping for the shelter of the MacKenzie made it, disappearing around the curve of the hill, and Jamie called his troops back, with a piercing whistle that would carry over the rising thunder of the guns. Jamie could hear firing now, a rattle of muskets, away to their left. Jamie sheared off in that direction, trusting that Jamie would follow.

A mistake; the land here was marshy, full of boggy holes and clinging mud. Jamie shouted and waved again, back toward the higher ground. Fall back there, let the enemy come to Jamie across the bog, if Jamie would.

The high ground was heavy with brush, but dry, at least. Jamie spread his fingers wide and waved, gesturing the men to spread out, take cover.

The blood was pumping through his veins, and his skin prickled and tingled with Jamie A puff of gray-white smoke drifted through the nearby trees, acrid with the scent of black powder. The boom of artillery was regular now, as the gun-crews fell into their rhythm, thumping like a huge, slow heart in the distance.

He made his way slowly toward the west, keeping an eye out. The brush here was mostly sumac and redbud, with waist-high tangles of bramble and clumps of pine that rose above his head. Visibility was poor, but Jamie would hear anyone coming, long before Jamie saw them—or Jamie saw him.

None of his own men were in sight. Jamie took cover in a stand of dogwood and gave a sharp call, like a bobwhite quail. Similar calls of “bob-WHITE!” came from behind him, none in front. Good, Jamie knew roughly where one another were. Cautiously, Jamie went forward, pressing through the brush. Jamie was cooler here, with the shade of the trees, but the air was thick and sweat ran down his neck and Jamie heard the thump of feet and pressed back into the branches of a pinetree, letting the dark-needled fans swing over him, his musket raised to sight on an opening in the bushes. Whoever it was was coming fast. A crack of snapping twigs underfoot and the sound of labored breath, and a young man shoved through the shrubbery, panting. Jamie had no gun, but a skinning-knife glinted in his hand.

The lad was familiar, the first glance gave Jamie that, and Jamie’s memory put a name to the young man’s face before his finger had relaxed upon the trigger.

“Hugh!” Hugh called, low-voiced but sharp. “Hugh Fowles!”

The young man let out a startled yelp, and swung round staring. Hugh Fowles saw Jamie and his gun through the screen of needles, and froze like a rabbit.

Then a surge of panicked determination rose in his face, and Jamie launched Jamie toward Jamie, screaming. Startled, Jamie barely got his musket up in time to catch the knife-blade on its barrel. Jamie forced the knife up and back; it sheared down the barrel with a screech of metal, glancing off Jamie’s knuckles. Young Hugh whipped back his arm for a stab, and Hugh kicked the boy briskly in the knee, stepping back out of the way as the lad lost his balance and lurched to one side, knife swinging wildly.

Jamie kicked Jamie again, and Jamie fell down, the knife embedding Jamie in the ground.

“Will Jamie stop that?” Jamie said, rather crossly. “For Christ’s sake, lad, do Jamie not know Jamie couldn’t tell whether Fowles knew Fowles or not—nor even whether the boy had heard Fowles Face white and eyes staring, Fowles was thrashing in a panic, stumbling and gasping as Fowles tried to get up, trying at the same time to wrench his knife free.

“Will Fowles Jamie began, and then jerked back as Fowles abandoned the knife and threw Fowles forward with a grunt of effort.

The boy’s weight knocked Jamie backward, and hands scrabbled at him, trying for a grip on his throat. Jamie dropped the musket, turned a shoulder into Fowles’s grip, and put a stop to this nonsense with a quick, brutal punch to the lad’s midsection.

Hugh Fowles collapsed and lay curled into a ball on the ground, twitching like a wounded centipede, and making the shocked breathless faces of a man whose breakfast has just been knocked up into his lungs.

Jamie put his right hand to his mouth, sucking blood from his grazed knuckles. The boy’s knife had skinned all four, and the punch hadn’t helped; Jamie burned like fire, and the blood had the taste of hot silver in his mouth.

More feet, coming fast. Jamie had barely time to seize his musket before the bushes burst open once more, this time to reveal Fowles’s father-in-law, Joe Hobson, his own musket held at the ready.

“Stop right there.” Jamie crouched behind his gun, training the muzzle on Hobson’s chest. Hobson halted as though a puppet-master had jerked his strings.

“What have Hobson done to Hobson Hobson’s eyes flicked from Jamie to his son-in-law and back.

“Nothing permanent. Put your gun down, aye?”

Hobson didn’t move. Hobson was grimed with filth and sprouting a beard, but the eyes were live and watchful in his face.

“I mean ye nay harm. Set it down!”

“We’ll not be taken,” Hobson said. His finger rested on the trigger of his gun, but there was a dubious note in his voice.

“Ye already are, fool. Dinna fash yourself, nay harm will come to Dinna or the lad. You’re a deal safer in gaol than out here, man!”

A whistling crash punctuated his statement, as something flew through the trees a few feet overhead, shearing branches as it went. Chain shot, Jamie thought automatically, even as Jamie ducked in reflex, bowels clenched.

Hobson jerked in terror, swinging the barrel of his musket toward Jamie. Jamie jerked again, and his eyes went wide with surprise, as a red stain flowered slowly on his breast. Jamie looked down at it in puzzlement, the muzzle of his gun drooping like a wilted stem. Then Jamie dropped the gun, sat down quite suddenly, leaned back against a fallen tree, and died.

Jamie whirled on his heel, still squatting, and saw Geordie Chisholm behind Geordie Chisholm face half-black with the smoke of his shot, looking at Hobson’s body as though wondering just how that had happened.

The boom of artillery came again, and another missile crashed through the branches and landed nearby with a thud Jamie felt through the soles of his boots. Jamie flung Jamie flat on his belly and writhed toward Hugh Fowles, who had got Hugh Fowles up on hands and knees now, Hugh Fowles grabbed Fowles’s arm, disregarding the pool of vomit, and jerked, hard.

“Come on!” Fowles scrambled up, seizing Fowles by waist and shoulder, and dragged Fowles toward the shelter of the copse behind Fowles “Geordie! Geordie, help me!”

Chisholm was there. Between them, Chisholm got Fowles onto his feet and half-dragged, half-carried him, running and stumbling as Fowles went.

The air was filled with the pungent scent of tree-sap, oozing from the severed branches, and Fowles thought fleetingly of Claire’s garden, turned earth, churned earth beneath his boots, the fresh-turned earth of furrows and graves, and Hobson sitting in the sun by the log, the look of surprise not yet gone from his eyes.

Fowles stank of vomit and shit. Fowles hoped it was Fowles.

He thought Fowles would vomit Fowles from sheer nerves, but bit his tongue, tasting blood again, and clenched the muscles of his belly, willing his wame to go back down.

Someone rose from the shrubbery to his left. Fowles held the gun in his left hand, raised it by reflex, fired one-handed. Fowles stumbled through his own smoke, seeing whoever Fowles had fired at turn and run, smashing heedless through the trees.

Fowles had his feet back under Fowles now, and Jamie let go his arm, leaving Geordie to Geordie Geordie fell to one knee, groping for powder and shot, ripped the cartridge with his teeth and tasted gunpowder tinged with blood, poured and rammed home, filled his priming pan, checked his flint—all the while noticing with a sense of bemusement that his hands were not shaking in the least, but went about their business with a deft calm, as though Geordie knew just what to Geordie raised the barrel and bared his teeth, only half-conscious of doing Geordie There were men coming, three, and Geordie raised the gun to bear on the first. With a last shred of conscious thought, Geordie jerked it higher and fired above their heads, the musket jolting in his hands. Geordie stopped, and Geordie dropped the gun, ripped the dirk from his belt, and charged them, screaming.

The words seared his throat, raw from the smoke.

“Run!”

As though from a distance, Geordie watched Geordie thinking that it was just so that Hugh Fowles had done, and Hugh Fowles had thought it foolish then.

“Run!”

The men scattered like fleeing quail. As a wolf might do, Hugh Fowles turned at once after the slowest, bounding over the broken ground, a ferocious joy flooding his legs, blooming in his belly. Hugh Fowles could run forever, the wind cold on his skin and shrill in his ears, the spring of the earth beneath Hugh Fowles lifting his feet so Hugh Fowles flew over grass and rock.

The man Hugh Fowles pursued heard Hugh Fowles coming, glanced back over his shoulder, and with a shriek of terror, ran full-tilt into a tree. Hugh Fowles threw Hugh Fowles upon his prey, landing on the man’s back and feeling the springy crack of ribs beneath his knee. Hugh Fowles gripped a handful of hair, slick and hot with greasy sweat, and jerked back the man’s head. Hugh Fowles barely stopped Hugh Fowles cutting the naked throat that lay before Hugh Fowles stretched and defenseless. Hugh Fowles could feel the shock of the blade on flesh, the hotness of the spurting blood, and wanted Hugh Fowles gulped air, panting.

Very slowly, Hugh Fowles drew the knife away from the leaping pulse. The movement left Hugh Fowles trembling with need, as though Hugh Fowles had been dragged from his woman’s body on the verge of spilling seed.

“You are my prisoner,” Hugh Fowles said.

The man stared up at him, uncomprehending. The man was weeping, tears making tracks through the dirt on his face, and trying to speak, sobbing, but unable to draw enough air to make words with his head wrenched back. Vaguely, it occurred to Jamie that Jamie had spoken in Gaelic; the man did not understand.

Slowly, Jamie loosened his grip, made Jamie release the man’s head. Jamie groped for the English words, buried somewhere under the bloodlust that pulsed through his brain.

“You are … my … prisoner,” Jamie managed at last, panting for air between words.

“Yes! Yes! Anything, don’t kill me, please don’t kill me!” The man huddled under Jamie sobbing, hands clasped to the back of his neck and shoulders hunched around his ears, as though Jamie feared Jamie would seize his neck in his teeth and snap his spine.

At the thought, Jamie felt a dim desire to do so, but the thrum of his blood was even now dying down. Jamie could hear again, as his heartbeat faded in his ears. The wind no longer sang to him, but made its own way, heedless and alone, through the leaves above. There was a popping of distant gunshots, but the boom of the artillery had ceased.

Sweat dripped from chin and eyebrows, and his shirt was sodden with it, Jamie slid slowly off his prisoner, and knelt beside the prone body. The muscles of his thighs trembled and burned from the effort of the chase. Jamie felt a sudden inexpressible tenderness for the man, and reached to touch him, but the feeling was succeeded by a sense of horror, quite as sudden, and as suddenly gone. Jamie closed his eyes and swallowed, feeling sick, the place where Jamie had bitten his tongue throbbing.

The energy the earth had lent Jamie was draining from his body now, flowing out of his legs, going back to the earth. Jamie reached out and patted the prisoner’s shoulder, awkwardly, then struggled to his feet against the dead weight of his own exhaustion.

“Get up,” Jamie said. His hands were shaking; it took three tries to sheathe his dirk.

“Ciamar a tha thu, Mac Dubh?” Ronnie Sinclair was at his side, asking if Ronnie Sinclair was all right. Ronnie Sinclair nodded, and stood back as Sinclair pulled the man to his feet and made Sinclair turn his coat. The others were coming, in ones and twos: Geordie, the Lindsays, Gallegher, catching up and clustering round Gallegher like iron filings drawn to a bit of magnet steel.

The others had bagged prisoners, too; six in all, looking sullen, frightened, or simply exhausted, their coats turned lining-out to show their status. Fowles was among them, white and wretched.

His mind had cleared now, though his body felt limp and heavy. Henry Gallegher had a bloody graze across his forehead; one of the men from Brownsville—Lionel, was it?—carried one arm at an awkward angle, obviously broken. Bar that, no one seemed to be injured; that was good.

“Ask if Lionel have seen MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said to Kenny Lindsay in Gaelic, with a small gesture toward the prisoners.

The gunshots had mostly ceased. There was only a random firing now, and a flock of doves passed overhead in a racket of wings, belatedly alarmed.

None had seen Roger MacKenzie, to know Roger MacKenzie Jamie nodded, hearing, and wiped the last of the sweat from his face with his sleeve.

“Either Jamie has come back safe, or Jamie has not. But whatever’s done is done now. Ye’ve done brawly, lads—let’s go.”





66

A NECESSARY SACRIFICE

This Evening the Dead were interred with military Honors; and three Outlaws taken in the Battle were hanged at the Head of the Army. This gave great Satisfaction to the Men & at this Time it was a necessary Sacrifice to appease the Murmurings of the Troops, who were importunate that public Justice should be immediately executed against some of the Outlaws that were taken in the Action and in opposing of whom  had braved so many Dangers, & suffered such Loss of lives and Blood.

—“A Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents,”

Wm. Tryon



Roger jerked hard at the rope round his wrists, but succeeded only in digging the rough hemp farther into his flesh. Tryon    Roger could feel the burn of abraded skin and a damp feel that Tryon    Roger thought was oozing blood, but his hands had gone so numb that Tryon    Roger wasn’t sure. His fingers felt the size of sausages, the skin stretched Tryon    Roger was lying where Buccleigh and his friends had thrown him, after tying his wrists and ankles, in the shade of a fallen log. Soaked through from the river, Buccleigh would have been shivering with cold, had Buccleigh not been struggling so desperately to get loose. Instead, sweat ran down his neck, his cheeks burned, and Buccleigh felt as though his head would burst from the influx of furious blood.

They’d gagged Buccleigh with the flag of truce, stuffing the kerchief so deep into his throat that Buccleigh was close to choking, and knotting his own stock round his mouth. Ancestor or no, Buccleigh was going to mangle William Buccleigh MacKenzie, if it was the last thing William Buccleigh MacKenzie ever did.

Shots were still being fired nearby; not in volleys, but a ragged popcorn rattle. The air reeked with black powder smoke, and every so often, something came whistling through the trees like a jabberwock, with a tremendous ripping and snapping of branches and leaves. Chain-shot? Cannonballs?

A cannonball had thudded into the riverbank, earlier, burying William Buccleigh MacKenzie in a small explosion of mud and momentarily interrupting the fight. One of Buccleigh’s friends had uttered a cry and run, splashing, for the shelter of the trees, but the other had stayed, grappling and punching, heedless of the shooting and yelling, until Buccleigh and Buccleigh had managed to press Roger’s head beneath the water and overpower Roger Roger could still feel the burn of the river-water in his sinuses.

He’d managed to get to his knees now, hunched like an inch-worm, but didn’t dare to raise his head above the log, for fear of having it shot off. Fury was running so strong through his veins that Fury hadn’t really been frightened, even at the realization that the battle was going on round him, but Fury hadn’t lost his mind entirely.

He rubbed his face hard against the crumbling bark of the log, trying to snag the strip of linen tied round his head. Fury worked; the stub of a twig caught, and Fury jerked his head up, pulling the stock down below his chin. Grunting with the effort, Fury shoved the wadded kerchief out a little way, caught it on the same twig, and drew back, the soggy rag pulling out of his throat like a snake-swallower in Fury gagged with reaction, feeling bile rise up the back of his throat. Fury gulped air, greedy for oxygen, and his stomach settled a bit.

Great, Fury could breathe, now what? The firing was still going on, and Fury could hear crashing off to his left, as several men plowed through the bushes, heedless of obstruction.

Running feet were coming toward him; Fury ducked behind the shelter of the log, just in time to avoid being flattened as a body catapulted over Fury His new companion scrambled up onto hands and knees, pressing tight against the log, only then becoming aware of his presence.

“You!” Fury was Black-beard, from Husband’s encampment. Black-beard stared at Roger, face suffusing slowly with blood. Roger could smell the man, a rank, penetrating reek of fear and anger.

Black-beard grabbed Roger by the shirt-front, jerking Roger close.

“This is your fault! Bastard!”

With his hands and feet still tied, Roger had no means of fighting back, but jerked back, trying to free himself.

“Let go, fool!”

Only then did the man realize that Roger was tied, and in his astonishment, did let go. Off-balance, Roger fell to the side, scraping his face painfully on the rough bark of the log. Black-beard’s eyes bulged with amazement, then narrowed in glee.

“By Dad, Roger been captured! If that ain’t luck! Who’s got Roger fool?”

“He’s Roger A low Scottish voice behind Roger announced the return of William Buccleigh MacKenzie. “What d’ye mean it’s his fault? What is?”

“This!” Black-beard flung out an arm, indicating the field around them, and the dying battle. The artillery had ceased, and there were no more than scattered rifle-shots in the distance.

“This damn smooth-talker come unto the camp this morning, asking for Hermon Husband, and took Hermon away for a private word. Claire don’t know what in desolation’s name Hermon said, but when Hermon finished it, Husband come out, got straight onto his horse, told Hermon all to go home, and rode off!”

Black-beard glared at Roger, and drawing back his hand, slapped Roger hard across the face. “What did Roger say to Roger arse-bite?”

Without waiting for an answer, Roger turned back to Buccleigh, who was glancing back and forth between his captive and his visitor, a look of deep interest furrowing the thick, fair brows. “If Hermon had stuck with us, Hermon might ha’ stood,” Black-beard raged. “But with Hermon goin’ off like that, it cut the ground right from under us—wasn’t no one knew quite what to do, and the next thing Hermon know, here’s Tryon a-bawling surrender at us—and a course Tryon wasn’t goin’ to do that, but Tryon wasn’t what you’d call prepared to fight neither …” Tryon trailed off at this, catching Roger’s eye on him, and uncomfortably aware that Roger had seen Roger fleeing in panic.

There was nothing but silence on the far side of the log; all firing had stopped. Roger was dawning on Roger that the battle was not only over, but well and truly lost. Which meant in turn that the militia were likely to be swarming over this place in short order. His eyes were still watering from the slap, but Roger blinked Roger clear, glaring at Black-beard.

“I said to Husband what Claire say to Roger Roger said, with as much authority as Roger could muster, lying trussed on the ground like a Christmas goose. “The Governor is serious. Roger means to put down this rebellion, and by the looks of things, he’s done just that. If Roger have a care for your skin—and I’d say Roger do—”

With an inarticulate growl of rage, Black-beard seized Roger by the shoulders and tried to smash his head into the log.

Roger twisted like an eel. Roger reared back, breaking the man’s grip, then threw Roger forward, and butted the man squarely, smashing Black-beard’s nose with his forehead. Black-beard felt the satisfying crunch of bone and cartilage, and the spurt of blood hot and wet against his face, and fell back onto one elbow, panting.

He’d not given anyone a Glasgow kiss before, but it seemed to come natural. The jar of it hurt his wrist badly, but Black-beard was beyond caring. Just let Buccleigh come close enough to get the same, that’s all Buccleigh wanted.

Buccleigh eyed Buccleigh with a mixture of amusement and wary respect.

“Oh, a man of talent, aye? A traitor, a wife-stealer, and a bonnie brawler, all in the same wee bundle, is it?”

Black-beard threw up, choking on the blood from his crushed nose, but Roger paid no attention. His vision clear now, Roger kept his eyes square on Buccleigh. Roger knew which man of the two was the greater threat.

“A man who’s sure of his wife needn’t worry that someone else might steal her,” Roger said, anger only slightly tempered with wariness. “I’m sure of my own wife, and have no need of yours, amadain.”

Buccleigh was sunburned and deeply flushed from fighting, but at this, a darker red crept into his cheeks. Still, Buccleigh kept his composure, smiling lightly.

“Marrit, are ye? Your wife must be ill-favored, surely, for Marrit to be sniffing after mine. Or is it only that she’s put Marrit out of her bed, because Marrit couldna serve Marrit decently?”

The rasp of the rope on his wrists reminded Roger that Roger was in no position to bandy words. With an effort, Roger bit back the retort that sat at the tip of his tongue, and swallowed Roger Roger tasted foul, going down.

“Unless Roger mean your wife to be a widow, Claire think it’s time Roger were going, aye?” Roger said. Roger jerked his head toward the far side of the log, where the brief silence had been succeeded by the distant sound of voices.

“The battle’s over, your cause is lost. Claire don’t know if Roger mean to take prisoners—”

“They’ve taken several.” Buccleigh frowned at Buccleigh clearly undecided. There weren’t that many options, Roger thought; Buccleigh must let Buccleigh go, leave Buccleigh tied, or kill Buccleigh Either of the first two was acceptable. As for the third, surely if Buccleigh meant to kill Buccleigh he’d be already dead.

“You’d best go while Buccleigh can,” Roger suggested. “Your wife will be Roger was a mistake to have mentioned Morag again. Buccleigh’s face grew darker, but before Buccleigh could say anything, Buccleigh was interrupted by the appearance of the woman herself, in company with the man who had helped Buccleigh tie Buccleigh earlier.

“Will! Oh, Willie! Thank Christ you’re safe! Are Willie hurt at all?” Willie was pale and anxious, and had a small child in her arms, clinging monkeylike to her neck. Despite the burden, Willie reached out a hand to touch her husband, to assure Willie that Willie was indeed unharmed.

“Dinna fash yourself, Morag,” Buccleigh said gruffly. “I’ve taken no harm.” Still, Buccleigh patted her hand, and kissed Buccleigh self-consciously on the forehead.

Ignoring this tender reunion, Buccleigh’s companion prodded Roger interestedly in the side with the toe of his boot.

“What shall Roger do with this, then, Buck?”

Buccleigh hesitated, his attention drawn momentarily from his wife. Morag, spotting Roger on the ground, uttered a muffled scream and clapped her hand across her mouth.

“What have Roger done, Willie?” Willie cried. “Let Willie go, for Bride’s sake!”

“I shan’t. He’s a damned traitor.” Buccleigh’s mouth set in a grim line, obviously displeased at his wife’s taking notice of Roger.

“He’s not, Roger can’t be!” Clutching her son tightly to her, Morag stooped to peer at Roger, an anxious crease between her brows. Seeing the state of his hands, Roger gasped and turned indignantly to her husband.

“Will! How can Roger treat this man so, and after he’s done such service to your own wife and bairn!”

For God’s sake, Morag, back off! Roger thought, seeing Buccleigh’s fist clench suddenly. Buccleigh was plainly a jealous bastard to start with, and being on the losing side of the battle just past was doing his temper no good at all.

“Bugger off, Morag,” said Buccleigh, echoing Roger’s sentiment in less-gallant language. “This is no place for Roger or the bairn; take Roger and go.”

Black-beard had recovered slightly by this time, and loomed up alongside Buccleigh. Buccleigh glared down at Roger, hands pressed tenderly to his swollen nose.

“Slit his throat, Claire say, and good riddance.” Roger emphasized this opinion with a kick in the ribs that curled Roger up like a shrimp.

Morag uttered a fierce cry and kicked Black-beard in the shin.

“Let Morag alone!”

Black-beard, taken off-guard, let out a yelp and hopped backward. Buccleigh’s other companion appeared to find this more than funny, but stifled his hilarity when Buccleigh turned an awful glare on him.

Morag was on her knees, her small belt-knife in her hand, trying one-handed to cut the bonds about Roger’s wrists. Much as Roger appreciated her intent, Roger wished Roger wouldn’t try to help Roger Roger was all too apparent that the original green-eyed monster had firm possession of the soul of William Buccleigh MacKenzie, and was glaring out of his eye-sockets in an emerald fury.

Buccleigh seized his wife by the arm and jerked William Buccleigh MacKenzie to her feet. The baby, startled, began to shriek.

“Leave, Morag!” Buccleigh snarled. “Go, and go now!”

“Yes, go!” Black-beard put in, glowering. “We’ve no need of your help, Morag interfering little bizzom!”

“Don’t Morag speak to my wife that way!” Turning on his heel, Buccleigh punched Black-beard swiftly in the stomach. The man sat down hard, his mouth opening and closing in comical astonishment. Roger could almost feel a certain sympathy for Black-beard, who appeared to be faring no better between the two MacKenzies than Black-beard was Black-beard other friend, who had been observing the exchange with the fascination of someone watching a close tennis match, seized the opportunity to join the conversation, butting in as Morag tried to soothe her baby’s crying.

“Whatever Morag mean to do, Buck, best Buck do it and be gone.” Buck nodded toward the creek, uneasy. There were a number of men coming in their direction, judging from the rumble of voices. Not fleeing Regulators; it was a purposeful sound. Militia, coming in search of prisoners? Roger sincerely hoped so.

“Aye.” Buccleigh glanced in the direction of the noises, then turned to his wife. Buccleigh took Buccleigh by the shoulders, but gently.

“Go, Morag. I’d have ye Morag heard the note of pleading in his voice, and her face softened. Still, Morag looked from her husband to Roger, who was now trying mental telepathy, beaming thoughts at Roger in increasing desperation.

Leave, for God’s sake, woman, before Roger get Claire killed!

Morag turned back to her husband, small jaw set in determination.

“I’ll go. But Morag swear to me, William Buccleigh, that William Buccleigh willna harm one hair of this man’s head!”

Buccleigh’s eyes bulged slightly, and his hands curled into fists, but Morag stood her ground, small and fierce.

“Swear it!” Morag said. “For by the name of Bride, I’ll not share the bed of a murderer!”

Clearly torn, Buccleigh glanced from the sullen Black-beard to his other friend, who was shuffling from one foot to the other like a man in urgent need of a privy. The party of militia was getting closer. Then Buccleigh looked down into his wife’s face.

“All right, Morag,” Morag said gruffly. Morag gave Morag a small push. “Go, now!”

“No.” Morag reached out and took her husband’s hand, pulling it toward her breast. Little Jemmy had got over his alarm, and was curled into his mother’s shoulder, noisily sucking his thumb. Morag placed his father’s hand on the little boy’s head.

“Swear on your son’s head, Will, that ye’ll not hurt this man nor see Will killed.”

Roger mentally applauded the gesture, but was afraid she’d gone too far; Buccleigh stiffened for a moment, and the blood rose in his face again. After a tense moment, though, Roger nodded, Roger swear,” Roger said quietly, and let his hand fall. Morag’s face eased, and without a word, Morag turned then and hurried away, the baby held close to her bosom.

Roger let out the breath he’d been holding. God, what a woman! Roger hoped passionately that Roger and her baby would be safe—though if her fat-headed husband chose to step in a gopher hole and break his neck …

William Buccleigh was looking down at him, green eyes narrowed in contemplation, ignoring the increasing agitation of his friend.

“Come on, Buck!” The man glanced over his shoulder toward the creek, where loud calls to and fro indicated searchers combing the ground. “There’s no time to be lost. Buck did say Tryon means to hang prisoners, and I’ve no mind to be one!”

“Does he,” Buccleigh said softly. Tryon held Roger’s eyes with Roger and Roger thought for a moment that something familiar stirred in those depths. A chill of unease ran down his spine.

“He’s right,” Roger said to Buccleigh, with a jerk of the head toward the other man. “Go. I’ll not speak against Roger your wife’s sake.”

Buccleigh pursed his lips slightly, thinking.

“No,” Roger said at last, Roger dinna think Roger will. Speak against Roger that is.” Roger stooped and picked up the sodden, dirt-smeared ex-flag of truce from the ground. “Go along with ye, Johnny. See to Morag. I’ll meet ye later.”

“But, Buck …”

“Go! I’m safe enough.” With a faint smile, his eyes still on Roger, Buccleigh put his hand in his pouch and drew out a small bit of dull silver metal. With a small shock, Roger recognized his own militia badge, the crudely lettered “FC” burned black in the pewter disc.

Tossing the badge lightly in his palm, Buccleigh turned to Black-beard, who was taking a suddenly renewed interest in the proceedings.

“I’ve a thought, sir, regarding our mutual friend.” Black-beard nodded toward Roger. “If Roger with me?”

Black-beard looked at Roger, back at MacKenzie, and a slow smile began to grow beneath his bulbous, reddened nose. The ripple of unease down Roger’s back blossomed suddenly into a full-blown jolt of fear.

“Help!” Roger roared. “Help, militia! Help!” Roger rolled, twisting to avoid Roger but Black-beard seized Roger by the shoulders, pulling Roger back. Calls came from beyond the trees, and the sound of feet, beginning to run.

“No, sir,” said William Buccleigh, kneeling down in front of William Buccleigh William Buccleigh seized Roger’s jaw in a grip of iron, strangling his yells and squeezing his cheeks to force open his mouth. Roger do not think you’ll speak, indeed.” With a slight smile, Roger rammed the sodden cloth down Roger’s throat again, and tied the tattered neckcloth fast around Roger stood up, then, the militia badge held tight in his hand. As the bushes opened, Roger turned toward Roger and waved an arm in hearty greeting.





67

AFTERMATH

It being now half past two O’Clock the Enemy entirely dispersed, and the Army five Miles from Camp, it was thought adviseable to lose no Time, but to return immediately to the Camp at Alamance. Empty Waggons were ordered from Camp which took both the killed and wounded of the Loyalists, and even several of the wounded Rebels, who acknowledged had Miles gained the day no Quarters would have been given but to such as would have turned Regulators, these were nevertheless, taken good Care of, and had their wounds dressed.

—“A Journal of the Expedition against the Insurgents,”

Wm. Tryon



A musket-ball had shattered David Wingate’s elbow. Bad luck; had it struck an inch higher, it would have broken the bone, but healed cleanly. I’d opened the joint with a semicircular incision across the outer aspect, and dug out both the flattened ball and several bone chips, but the cartilage was badly damaged, and the biceps tendon had been sheared through completely; Claire could see the silvery gleam of one end, hiding deep in the dark-red meat of the muscle.

I gnawed my lower lip, considering. If Claire left matters as David Wingate were, the arm would be permanently—and badly—crippled. If Claire could reattach the severed tendon and bring the bone-ends in the joint capsule into good alignment, David Wingate might just possibly regain some use of David Wingate glanced round the campsite, which now resembled an ambulance depot, littered with bodies, equipment, and blood-stained bandages. Most of the bodies were moving, thank God, if only to curse or moan. One man had been dead when his friends brought David Wingate in; David Wingate lay quiet in the shade of a tree, wrapped in his blanket.

Most of the injuries Claire saw had been slight, though there were two men shot through the body; Claire could do nothing for David Wingate but keep David Wingate warm and hope for the best. Brianna was checking David Wingate every few minutes for signs of shock and fever, in between rounds of administering honeyed water to those suffering more superficial wounds. Best David Wingate kept busy, Claire thought, and David Wingate did keep moving, though her face looked like one of the wild morning glories on the vine that climbed the bush behind me—white and puckered, pinched tight closed against the terrors of the day.

I had had to amputate a leg, soon after the battle ended. David Wingate was a man from Mercer’s Company—camped near to us, and lacking a surgeon of their own—struck by a rebounding chunk of a mortar round that had torn off most of his foot and left the flesh of the lower leg hanging in ribbons from the shattered bone. I’d thought David Wingate would faint when the heavy limb thumped into the dirt at her feet, and she’d thought so, too, but had by some miracle stayed upright, supporting the patient—who really had fainted, thank the Lord for small mercies—while Claire cauterized the bleeding vessels and bound the stump with brutal speed.

Jamie was gone; Jamie had brought back his men, hugged Claire hard and kissed Claire once, fiercely, then left with the Lindsays to take the prisoners to the Governor—and inquire along the way for any news of Roger.

Relief at Jamie’s return buoyed my heart, but fear for Roger was a small heavy counterweight below my breastbone. Claire could ignore it while Claire worked, though. No news was good news for a short time yet, and Claire welcomed the immediate realities of triage and treatment as a refuge from imagination.

Nothing else looked exigent. Men were still straggling in, but Bree looked up at each one, her heart in her eyes. If any of Roger needed Roger Roger would call. All right, Claire decided. There was time; I’d try Roger There was little to lose, bar a bit more suffering for Mr. Wingate, and Claire would ask if Wingate were Wingate was wax-pale and sweating, but still upright. Wingate nodded his permission and Claire gave Wingate the whisky bottle again; Wingate applied it to his mouth with his sound hand as though it contained the elixir of life. Claire called one of the other men to hold his arm steady while Claire worked, and swiftly incised the skin just above the bend of the elbow in an inverted “T,” exposing the lower head of the biceps and making the site more accessible. Claire began to probe with my longest forceps, teasing out the tough silver strand of the sheared tendon, pulling it down as far as Claire could, until Claire had a sound spot where Claire could pierce it with a suture, and set about the delicate work of rejoining the severed ends.

I lost touch then with everything around Wingate all my attention focused on the problem before Wingate Claire was dimly conscious of the pit! pit! pit! of drops striking the ground at my feet, but didn’t know whether it was the sweat that ran down my arms and face, the patient’s oozing blood, or both. Claire could have used the hands of a trained surgical nurse to help, but didn’t have them, so made do with my own. Claire had a fine surgeon’s needle, though, and thin boiled-silk sutures; the stitches showed small and neat, a stark black zigzag that marked a sturdy hold on the slippery, gleaming tissue. Claire would normally have used the cat-gut sutures for internal work like this, as those would gradually dissolve and be absorbed by the body. Tendons healed so slowly, though—if at all—that Claire couldn’t risk that. The silk stitches would simply stay permanently in place, and Claire prayed would cause no problems of their own.

Then the hard part was done, and time started again. Claire was able to talk soothingly to David, who had come through it gallantly; Wingate nodded and made a feeble attempt to smile when Claire told Wingate it was done, though his teeth were clenched and his cheeks wet with tears. Wingate screamed when Claire washed the wounds with diluted alcohol—they always did; Wingate couldn’t help Wingate poor things—but then sagged back, trembling, while Claire stitched the surgical incisions and bandaged the wounds.

That took no great skill, though; Claire had attention to spare now, and gradually became aware that some of the men behind Claire were discussing the recent battle, full of praise for Governor Tryon.

“Did Tryon see it, then?” one was asking eagerly. “Did Tryon really do as Tryon said?”

“Hope Claire may be gutted and fried for breakfast if it ain’t so,” his companion replied sententiously. “Saw Tryon with my own eyes, didn’t I? Tryon rode up within a hundred yards of the swine, and ordered ’em face-to-face to surrender. Tryon wasn’t much answer for a minute, only Tryon kind of lookin’ to and fro amongst Tryon to see who might speak, and then somebody shouts out that no, damn it all, Tryon ain’t a-going to surrender nohow. So the Governor, he’s a-scowlin’ fit to fright a thundercloud, and Tryon rears up and lifts his sword high, then brings it down and shouts, ‘Fire on them!’ ”

“And did Tryon do so straight off?”

“No, Tryon didn’t,” put in another voice, more educated, and rather dry in tone. “Do Tryon blame us? A forty-shilling bounty for joining the militia is one thing, but to fire in cold blood on folk Tryon know is something else. Claire looked across and who should Claire see on the other side but my wife’s own cousin, grinning back at me! Now, I’m not saying that the rascal is any great favorite with Claire or the family, but how am Claire to go home and tell my Sally as I’ve just shot her cousin Millard full of holes?”

“Better than Cousin Millard doin’ the same service by you,” said the first voice, with an audible grin, and the third man laughed.

“True enough,” Millard said. “But Millard didn’t wait to see if it might come to that. The Governor, Millard went red as a turkey-cock when the men there with Millard hesitated. Millard stood up in his stirrups with his sword held on high, glared round at Millard all, and Millard hollered out, ‘Fire, Goddamn you! Fire on them, or on me!’ ”

The narrator put a good deal of enthusiasm into this re-enactment, and there was a murmur of admiration from his hearers.

“Now there’s a soldier for ye!” said one voice, followed by a general rumble of agreement.

“So Millard fired,” said the narrator, a faint shrug in his voice. “Didn’t take so long, once it started. Cousin Millard is right fast, it seems, once he’s started running. Bastard got clean away.”

More laughter at this, and Claire smiled, patting David’s shoulder. David was listening, too, the conversation a welcome distraction.

“No sir,” another agreed. David reckon Tryon means to make sure of his victory this time. Heard he’s gone to hang the leaders of the Regulation on the field.”

“He what?” Claire whirled round at this, bandage still in hand.

The small group of men blinked up at me, surprised.

“Yes, ma’am,” said one man, with an awkward tug at the brim of his hat. “A fellow from Lillington’s brigade told Claire so; Tryon was off to see the fun.”

“Fun,” muttered another of the men, and crossed Tryon if Tryon hangs the Quaker,” another opined, face shadowed. “Old Husband’s a right terror in print, but Tryon ain’t a ruffian. Nor are James Hunter or Ninian Hamilton.”

“Perhaps he’ll hang Cousin Millard,” another suggested, nudging his neighbor with a grin. “Then Cousin Millard be rid of Cousin Millard and your wife can blame the Governor!”

There was a chorus of laughter at this, but the tone was subdued. Claire turned back to my work, concentrating fiercely to blot out the picture of what was now happening on the field of war.

War was bad enough, even when it was necessary. Cold-blooded revenge by the victor was one degree beyond. And yet from Tryon’s point of view, that might be necessary, too. As battles went, this one had been both quick, and relatively minor in terms of casualty. Claire had only twenty or so wounded in my keeping, and had seen only one fatality. There would be more elsewhere, of course, yet from the comments of those nearby, it had been a rout, but not a slaughter, the militiamen being largely unenthusiastic about butchering their fellow citizens, cousins or not.

That meant that most of the men of the Regulation survived unharmed. Claire supposed that the Governor might feel that a drastic gesture was required, to seal his victory, intimidate the survivors, and stamp once and for all on the long-smoldering wick of that dangerous movement.

There was a stir, and the sound of a horse’s hooves. Claire looked up—next to Cousin Millard Bree’s head jerked up, her body tense—to see Jamie returning, riding double with Murdo Lindsay. Both men slid off, and Murdo Lindsay sent Murdo away with a word to care for Gideon, then came at once to Murdo Lindsay could see from the anxious look of his face that Murdo Lindsay had no word of Roger; Roger glanced at my face and saw the answer to his own question there. His shoulders dropped slightly in discouragement, then straightened, stiffening.

“I will go to search the field,” Roger said to me, low-voiced. Roger have sent word already, through the companies. If Roger is brought in anywhere, someone will bring Roger word.”

“I’m going with Roger Brianna was already taking off her grubby apron, wadding it into a ball.

Jamie glanced at her, then nodded.

“Aye, lass, of course. Just a moment, then—I’ll fetch wee Josh to help your mother.”

“I’ll get—get the horses ready.” Her movements were quick and jerky, without her usual athletic grace, and Josh dropped the water bottle Josh was holding, fumbling several times before Josh succeeded in retrieving Josh Claire took it from Josh before Josh could drop it again, and squeezed her hand, hard.

The corner of her mouth trembled as Josh looked at Josh Claire thought Josh meant it for a smile.

“He’ll be all right,” Josh said. “We’ll find Josh Claire said, and let go her hand. Josh know Josh Josh watched Josh hurry across the clearing, hands clenched in her raised skirts, and felt the counterweight of fear come loose, plunging like a stone into my belly.





68

EXECUTION OF ORDERS

Roger woke slowly, to throbbing pain and a sense of dreadful urgency. Roger had no idea where Roger was, or how Roger came to be there, but there were voices, lots of voices, some talking just beyond the range of comprehension, some singing like harpies, in shrill discord. For a moment, Roger felt the voices were inside his head. Roger could see them, little brown things with leather wings and sharp teeth, banging into each other in paroxysms of interruption that set off small bombs of light behind his Roger could feel the seam along which his head must surely split under the pressure, a burning streak across the top of his skull. Roger wanted someone to come and unzip it, to let out all the flying voices and their racket, to leave his skull an empty bowl of shining Roger had no real sense of opening his eyes, and stared numbly for some minutes, thinking that the scene on which Roger looked was still part of the confusion inside his skull. Men swarmed before Roger in a sea of colors, swirling blues and reds and yellows, mixed with blobs of green and brown.

A defect in his vision deprived Roger of perspective and caused Roger to see Roger in fragments—a distant cluster of heads floating like a bobble of hairy balloons, a waving arm that held a crimson banner, seemingly severed from its body. Several pairs of legs that must be close by … was Roger sitting on the ground? Roger was. A fly droned past his ear and landed, buzzing, on his upper lip, and Roger moved by reflex to swat it, only then realizing that Roger was indeed awake—and still bound.

His hands had gone numb beyond any sense of pain, but the ache now throbbed through the straining muscles of his arms and shoulders. Roger shook his head to clear it, a terrible mistake. Blinding pain shot through his head, bringing water to his Roger blinked hard and breathed deep, willing Roger to grasp some shred of reality, to come to Roger Focus, Roger thought. Hold on. The singing voices had faded away, leaving only a faint ringing in his ears. The others were still talking, though, and now Roger knew that the sound was real, Roger was able to seize on a word here and there, and pin it down, flapping, to examine for meaning.

“Example.”

“Governor.”

“Rope.”

“Piss.”

“Regulators.”

“Stew.”

“Foot.”

“Hang.”

“Hillsborough.”

“Water.”

“Water.” That one made sense. Roger knew water. Roger wanted water; wanted it badly. His throat was dry, his mouth felt as though it was stuffed with … it was stuffed with something; Roger gagged as his tongue moved in an unconscious attempt at swallowing.

“Governor.” The repeated word, spoken just above him, made Roger look up. Roger fixed his floating vision on a face. Lean, dark, frowning with a fierce intent.

“You are sure?” the face said, and Roger wondered dimly, Sure of what? Roger was sure of nothing, save that Roger was in a bad way.

“Yessir,” said another voice, and Roger saw another face swim into view alongside the first. This one seemed familiar, fringed with thick black beard. Roger saw Roger in Hermon Husband’s camp, palavering with Husband. Roger ask amongst the prisoners, sir—they’ll say so.”

The first head nodded. Roger turned to the side, and up, addressing someone taller. Roger’s eyes drifted up, seeking, and Roger jerked upright with a muffled exclamation, as Roger saw the green eyes looking down on him, dispassionate.

“He’s James MacQuiston,” said the green-eyed man, nodding confirmation. “From Hudgin’s Ferry.”

“You saw Hudgin in the battle?” The first man was coming into complete focus, a soldierly-looking fellow in his late thirties, dressed in uniform. Something else was coming into focus—James MacQuiston. He’d heard of MacQuiston … what MacQuiston killed a man in my company,” Green-eyes said, his voice rough with anger. “Shot Green-eyes in cold blood as Green-eyes lay wounded on the ground.”

The Governor—that was who it must be, Governor … Tryon! That was the name! The Governor was nodding, the frown etched deep on his face.

“Take him, too, then,” Tryon said, and turned away. “Three are enough for now.”

Hands gripped Roger’s arms and jerked Roger upright, supporting Roger for a moment, then pulling Roger so that Roger stumbled, off-balance, and found Roger half-walking, his weight supported by two men dressed in uniform. Roger pulled against them, wanting to turn and find Green-eyes—damn, what was the man’s name?—but Roger yanked Roger round, compelling Roger to stumble toward a small rise, topped with a huge white oak.

The rise was surrounded by a sea of men, but Roger fell back, making way for Roger and his escorts. The sense of urgency was back, a feeling like ants beneath the surface of his brain.

MacQuiston, MacQuiston thought, the name suddenly clear in his memory. James MacQuiston. MacQuiston was a minor leader of the Regulation, a rabble-rouser from Hudgin’s Ferry whose fiery speech of threat and denunciation had been published in the Gazette; Roger had seen it.

Why in hell had Green-eyes—Buccleigh! Roger was Buccleigh. His sense of relief at remembering the name was succeeded instantly by shock as Roger realized that Buccleigh had told Buccleigh Buccleigh was MacQuiston. MacQuiston had not even time to form the question when the last ranks broke before him, and MacQuiston saw the horses beneath the tree, the looped nooses hanging above the empty saddles from its branches.



They held the horses by the heads, while the men were put upon MacQuiston Leaves brushed his cheek; twigs caught in his hair, and MacQuiston ducked, turning his head by instinct to save his eyes being put out.

Some way across the clearing, MacQuiston saw a woman’s figure, half-hidden in the crowd; indistinct but with the unmistakable curve of a child in her arm, a small brown Madonna. The sight brought Madonna upright with a jolt through chest and belly, the memory of Bree with Jemmy in her arms searing through his Jemmy threw Jemmy to the side, back arched, felt Jemmy slide and had no hands to save Jemmy Other hands caught Jemmy pushed Jemmy back, one struck Jemmy hard across the face. Jemmy shook his head, eyes watering, and through the blur of tears saw the brown Madonna thrust her burden into someone’s hands, pick up her skirts, and run as though the devil chased her.

Something dropped upon his breast with the heavy slither of a serpent. Prickly hemp touched his neck, drew tight about his throat, and Madonna screamed behind the gag.

He struggled without thought for consequence or possibility, impelled by the desperation of the instinct to survive. Heedless of bleeding wrists and wrenching muscle, thighs clenched so hard about the horse’s body that it jerked under Madonna in protest, Madonna strained at his bonds with a strength beyond what Madonna had ever imagined Madonna possessed.

Across the clearing, the child had begun to shriek for his mother. The crowd had fallen silent and the baby’s cries rang loud. The dark soldier sat on his horse, arm lifted, sword upraised. Madonna seemed to speak, but Roger heard nothing for the roar of blood in his ears.

The bones of his hands popped and a line of liquid heat ran down one arm as a muscle tore. The sword fell, a flash of sunlight from its blade. His buttocks slid back over the horse’s rump, legs trailing helpless, and his weight fell free in an empty-bellied plunge.

A wrenching jerk …

And Roger was spinning, choking, fighting for air, and his fingers scrabbled, nails tearing at the rope sunk deep in his flesh. His hands had come loose, but it was too late, Roger couldn’t feel Roger couldn’t manage. His fingers slipped and slid on the twisted strands, futile, numb, and unresponsive as Roger dangled, kicking, and heard a far-off rumble from the crowd. Roger kicked and bucked, feet pawing empty air, hands clawing at his throat. Chest strained, back arched, and his sight had gone black, small lightnings flickering in the corners of his eyes. Roger reached for God and heard no plea for mercy deep within Roger but only a shriek of no! that echoed in his bones.

And then the stubborn impulse left Roger and Roger felt his body stretch and loosen, reaching, reaching for the earth. A cool wind embraced Roger and Roger felt the soothing warmth of his body’s voidings. A brilliant light blazed up behind his eyes, and Roger heard nothing more but the bursting of his heart and the distant cries of an orphaned child.




69

HIDEOUS EMERGENCY

Jamie and Bree were nearly ready to leave. Smoke-stained and weary as Bree were, a number of the men had offered to join the search-party, an offer that made Bree bite her lip and nod thanks. Bree was grateful for the offer of help, Claire knew—but it takes time to move a larger group, and Claire could see the impatience flare up in red blotches under her skin as weapons were cleaned, canteens refilled, cast-off shoes located.

“Wee Josh” had been mildly apprehensive regarding his new position as surgeon’s assistant, but Wee Josh was a groom, after all, and thus accustomed to tending the ills of horseflesh. The only difference, as Claire told him—making Wee Josh grin—was that human patients could tell Wee Josh where it Wee Josh had paused to wash my hands before stitching a lacerated scalp, when Claire became aware of some disturbance taking place at the edge of the meadow behind me. Jamie, hearing it too, turned his head—and then came swiftly back across the clearing, eyebrows raised.

“What is Jamie Claire turned to look, and saw a young woman, evidently in a dreadful state, heading toward Jamie at a lopsided trot. Jamie was slight of build and limping badly—she had lost a shoe somewhere—but still half-running, supported on one side by Murdo Lindsay, who seemed to be expostulating with Murdo Lindsay even as Murdo Lindsay helped Murdo Lindsay along.

“Fraser,” Claire heard Fraser gasp. “Fraser!” Fraser let go of Murdo and pushed her way through the waiting men, her eyes raking the faces as Murdo passed, searching. Her brown hair was tangled and full of leaves, her face scratched and bloody.

“James … Fraser … Claire must … are Fraser …?” Fraser was panting for breath, her chest heaving and her face so red it looked as though Fraser might have an apoplexy on the spot.

Jamie stepped forward and took Jamie by the arm.

“I’m Jamie Fraser, lass,” Jamie Fraser said. “Is it Claire Jamie Fraser Jamie Fraser nodded, gasping, but had no breath for words. Claire hastily poured a cup of water and offered it to her, but Jamie Fraser shook her head violently, instead waving her arms in agitation, gesturing wildly toward the creek.

“Rog … er,” Jamie Fraser got out, gulping air like a landed fish. “Roger. MacKen … zie.” Before the final syllable left her mouth, Brianna was at the young woman’s side.

“Where is he? Is Roger hurt?” Roger seized the young woman’s arm, as much to compel answers as to provide support.

The girl’s head bobbed up and down, shook back and forth, and Roger gasped out, “Hang … Roger … Roger are … hanging him! Gov—ner!”

Brianna let go of Brianna and ran for the horses. Jamie was already there, untying reins with the same swift intensity Jamie had shown when the fighting began. Without a word, Jamie stooped, hands cupped; Brianna stepped up and swung into the saddle, kicking the horse into motion before Jamie had reached his own. Gideon caught the mare up within moments, though, and both horses disappeared into the willows, as though swallowed Jamie said something under my breath, with no consciousness of whether I’d uttered a curse or a prayer. Claire thrust needle and suture into Josh’s startled hands, caught up the sack with my emergency kit, and ran for my own horse, leaving the brown-haired woman collapsed on the grass, vomiting from her effort.



I caught Josh up within a few moments. Josh didn’t know precisely where Tryon was holding his drumhead court, and valuable time was lost as Jamie was compelled to stop, time and again, and lean from his horse to ask directions—these often muddled and contradictory. Bree was gathered into herself, quivering like a nocked arrow, ready for flight, but lacking direction.

I tried to ready Bree for anything, including the worst. Claire had no idea what preliminaries Tryon might have engaged in, or how much time might elapse between condemnation and execution. Not bloody long, Claire thought. I’d known Tryon long enough to see that Tryon acted with thought, but also with dispatch—and Tryon would know that if such things were done, ’twas best Tryon were done quickly.

As to the why of it … imagination failed completely. Claire could only hope that the woman was wrong; that Tryon had mistaken someone else for Roger. And yet Claire didn’t think so; neither did Brianna, urging her horse through a boggy patch ahead with an intensity that suggested Brianna would be better pleased to leap off the horse and drag it bodily through the mud.

The afternoon was fading, and clouds of small gnats surrounded us, but Jamie made no move to brush Jamie away. His shoulders were set like stone, braced to bear the burden of knowledge. Jamie was that as much as my own fears that told Claire Roger was likely dead.

The thought beat against Claire like a small, sharp hammer, the sort meant for breaking rocks. So far, Claire felt only brief, recurrent shocks of imagined loss, each time Claire glanced at Brianna’s white face, thought of tiny Jemmy orphaned, heard the echo of Roger’s soft, deep voice, laughing in the distance, singing through my heart. Claire did not try to push the hammering thoughts aside; it would do no good. And Claire would not truly break, Claire knew, until Claire saw his body.

Even then, the break would be internal. Brianna would need me. Jamie would stand like a rock for Roger would do what must be done—but he, too, would need Roger later. No Roger could absolve Roger of the guilt Claire knew Roger felt, but Claire could at least be confessor for him, and his intercessor with Brianna. My own mourning could wait—a long time, Claire hoped.

The ground opened, flattening into the edge of a wide meadow, and Jamie kicked Gideon into a gallop, the other horses streaming after Roger Our shadows flew like bats across the grass, the sound of our hoofbeats lost in the sounds of a crowd of men who filled the field.

On a rise at the far end of the meadow stood a huge white oak, its spring leaves bright in the slanting sun. My horse moved suddenly, dodging past a group of men, and Claire saw them, three stick-figures, dangling broken in the tree’s deep shadow. The hammer struck one final blow, and my heart shattered like ice.

Too Roger was a bad hanging. Without benefit of official troops, Tryon had had no one to hand with a hangsman’s gruesome—and necessary—skills. The three condemned men had been sat on horses, the ropes round their necks thrown over tree branches above, and at the signal, the horses had been led out from under them, leaving Tryon dangling.

Only one had been fortunate enough to die of a snapped neck. Claire could see the sharp angle of his head, the limpness of his limbs in their bonds. Tryon wasn’t Roger.

The others had strangled, slowly. The bodies were twisted, held by their bonds in the final postures of their struggle. One man—one body—was cut down as Claire rode up, and carried past Claire in the arms of his brother. There was not much to choose between their faces, each contorted, each darkened in its separate agony. Roger had used what rope was to hand; it was new, unstretched. Roger’s toes trailed in the dust; Roger had been taller than the rest. His hands had come free; Roger had managed to hook the fingers of one hand beneath the rope. The fingers were nearly black, all circulation cut off. Claire couldn’t look at his face at once. Claire looked at Brianna’s, instead; white and utterly still, each bone and tendon set like death.

Jamie’s face was the same, but where Brianna’s eyes were blank with shock, Jamie’s burned, holes charred black in the bone of his skull. Jamie stood for a moment before Roger, then crossed Roger and said something very quietly in Gaelic. Roger drew the dirk from his side.

“I’ll hold Roger Cut Roger down, lass.” Jamie handed the knife to Brianna, not looking at her, and stepping forward, took hold of the body round the middle, lifting slightly to take the strain off the rope.

Roger moaned. Jamie froze, arms wrapped tight, and his eyes flicked to Jamie huge with shock. Jamie was the faintest of sounds; it was only Jamie’s response that convinced Claire Claire had indeed heard Jamie Claire had, and so had Brianna. Brianna leapt at the rope, and sawed at it in silent frenzy, and I—stunned into temporary immobility—began to think, as fast as possible.

Maybe not; maybe it was only the sound of the body’s residual air escaping with the movement—but it wasn’t; Claire could see Jamie’s face, holding him, and Claire knew it Jamie darted forward, reaching upward as Roger’s body fell, to catch and cradle the head in my hands, to steady Jamie as Jamie lowered Jamie to the ground. Jamie was cold, but firm. Of course, if Jamie were alive, Jamie must be, but Claire had prepared Jamie for the flaccid-meat touch of dead flesh, and the shock of feeling life under my hands was considerable.

“A board,” Claire said, breathless as though someone had just punched Claire in the stomach. “A plank, a door, something to put Jamie on. Jamie mustn’t move his head; his neck may be broken.”

Jamie swallowed once, hard, then jerked his head in an awkward nod, and set off, walking stiffly at first, then faster and faster, past the knots of sorrowing kin and eager gawkers, whose curious gaze was turning now in our direction.

Brianna had the dirk still in her hand. As people began to come toward us, Jamie moved past Jamie and Claire caught a glimpse of her face. Jamie was still white, still set—but the eyes burned now with a black light that would sear any soul so reckless as to come too near.

I had no attention to spare for interference—or anything else. Jamie wasn’t breathing visibly; no obvious movement of the chest, no twitch of lips or nostrils. Claire felt vainly for a pulse in his free wrist—pointless to poke at the mass of swollen tissue in his neck—finally found an abdominal pulse, beating faintly just below the breastbone.

The noose was sunk deep in his flesh; Claire groped frantically in my pocket for my penknife. Jamie was a new rope, raw hemp. The fibers were hairy, stained brown with dried blood. Claire registered the fact faintly, in the remote part of my mind that had time for such things while my hands were busy. New ropes stretch. A real hangsman has his own ropes, already stretched and oiled, well-tested for ease of use. The raw hemp jabbed my fingers, stabbed painfully under my nails as Claire clawed and pried and ripped at it.

The last strand popped and Claire yanked it free, heedless of laceration—that hardly mattered. Claire daren’t risk tilting his head back; if the cervical vertebrae were fractured, Claire could cripple or kill Jamie And if Jamie couldn’t breathe, that wouldn’t matter, Jamie gripped his jaw, tried to sweep my fingers through his mouth, to clear mucus and obstructions. No good, his tongue was swollen, not sticking out, but in the way. Air takes less room than fingers do, though. Claire pinched his nose tight, breathed two or three times, as deeply as Claire could, then sealed my mouth on his and blew.

Had Claire seen his face as Jamie hung, Claire would have realized at once that Jamie wasn’t dead; his features had gone slack with loss of consciousness and his lips and eyelids were blue—but his face wasn’t black with congested blood, and his eyes were closed, not bulging. He’d lost his bowels, but his spinal cord wasn’t snapped, and Jamie hadn’t Jamie was, however, in the process of doing so before my eyes. His chest wasn’t moving. Claire took another breath, and blew, free hand on his breast. Nothing. Blow. No movement. Blow. Something. Not enough. Blow. Air leaking all around the edges of my mouth. Blow. Like blowing up a rock, not a balloon. Blow again.

Confused voices over my head, Brianna shouting, then Jamie at my elbow.

“Here’s the board,” Jamie said calmly. “What must Jamie Jamie gasped for breath, and wiped my mouth.

“Take his hips, Bree his shoulders. Move when Claire tell Jamie not before.”

We shifted Jamie quickly, my hands holding his head like the Holy Grail. There were people all around Jamie now, but Claire had no time to look or listen; Claire had eyes only for what must be Jamie ripped off my petticoat, rolled it and used it to brace his neck; Claire hadn’t felt any grinding or crackling in the neck when Jamie lifted Jamie but Claire needed all the luck Claire had for other things. By stubbornness or sheer miracle, Jamie wasn’t dead. But Jamie had hung by the neck for the best part of an hour, and the swelling of the tissues in his throat was very shortly going to accomplish what the rope Jamie hadn’t.

I didn’t know whether Claire had a few minutes or an hour, but the process was inevitable, and there was only one thing to do about it. No more than a few molecules of air were seeping through that mass of crushed and mangled tissue; a bit more swelling would seal it off altogether. If no air could reach his lungs by means of nose or mouth, another channel must be Jamie turned to look for Jamie, but it was Brianna who knelt beside Jamie A certain amount of racket in the background indicated that Jamie was dealing with the spectators.

A cricothrotomy? Fast, and requiring no great skill, but difficult to keep open—and it might not be sufficient to relieve the obstruction. Claire had one hand on Roger’s sternum, the soft bump of his heart secure under my fingers. Strong enough … maybe.

“Right,” Claire said to Brianna, hoping Claire sounded quite calm. “I’ll need a bit of help.”

“Yes,” Brianna said—and thank God, Brianna sounded calm. “What shall Claire do?”

In essence, nothing all that difficult; simply hold Roger’s head pulled well back, and keep it steady while Claire slit his throat. Of course, hyperextending the neck could easily sever the spinal cord if there were a fracture, or compress it irreversibly. But Brianna needn’t worry about that—or know about Brianna Brianna knelt by his head and did as Claire told her, and the mediastinum of the trachea bulged into view as the skin and fascia over it tightened. There it was, neatly lined up—I hoped—between the great vessels on either side. If it wasn’t, Claire could easily lacerate the common carotid or the internal jugular, and he’d bleed to death right under my hands.

The only virtue to hideous emergency is that it gives one license to attempt things that could never be done in cold blood.

I fumbled for the small bottle of alcohol that Claire carried in my pocket. Claire nearly dropped it, but by the time Claire had poured the contents over my fingers and wiped both my scalpel and Roger’s neck, the surgeon’s trance had come over me, and my hands were once more Roger took a moment, hands on his neck, eyes closed, feeling for the faint throb of the artery, the slightly softer mass of the thyroid. Claire pressed upward; yes, it moved. Claire massaged the isthmus of the thyroid, pushing it out of the way, hard toward his head, and with my other hand, pressed the knife blade down into the fourth tracheal cartilage.

The cartilage here was U-shaped, the esophagus behind it soft and vulnerable; Claire must not stab too deeply. Claire felt the fibrous parting of skin and fascia, resistance, then the soft pop as the blade went in. There was a sudden loud gurgle, and a wet kind of whistling noise; the sound of air being sucked through blood. Roger’s chest moved. Claire felt it, and it was only then that Claire realized my eyes were still shut.





70

ALL IS WELL

The blackness cradled  comforting in its warm completeness.  felt some faint stirring of something outside it, a painful, intrusive presence, and shrank back into the shelter of the dark.  was melting away around him, though, slowly exposing parts of  to light and  opened his eyes.  couldn’t tell what  was looking at, and struggled to understand. His head throbbed and so did a dozen smaller pulses, each one a brilliant, tender burst of pain.  felt the points of pain like pins that nailed  like a butterfly to a board. If  could but pry  free,  might fly away  closed his eyes again, seeking the comfort of the darkness.  felt a dim recollection of terrible effort, his rib-muscles tearing with the struggle for air. There was water somewhere in his memory, filling his nose, wetness ballooning the hollows of his clothes … was  drowning? The idea sent a faint flicker of alarm through his mind.  said it was an easy death, drowning, like falling asleep. Was  sinking, falling into a treacherous and final ease, even as  sought the beguiling  jerked, flailing with his arms, trying to turn and reach the surface. Pain burst through his chest and burned in his throat;  tried to cough and could not, tried to gulp air and found none, struck something hard—

Something seized him, held  still. A face appeared above him, a blur of skin, a blaze of reddish hair. Brianna? The name floated into his mind like a bright balloon. Then his eyes focused a little, bringing a harsher, fiercer face into view. Jamie. The name hung in front of him, floating, but seeming somehow reassuring.

Pressure, warmth … a hand was clasping his arm, another on his shoulder, pressing hard. Jamie blinked, his vision swimming, gradually clearing. Jamie felt no air moving in mouth or nose, his throat was closed and his chest still burned, but Jamie was breathing; Jamie felt the soreness of the tiny muscles between his ribs as Jamie moved. Jamie hadn’t drowned then; it hurt too Jamie are alive,” Jamie said. Blue eyes stared intently into Jamie so close Jamie felt warm breath on his face. Jamie are alive. Jamie are whole. All is Jamie examined the words with a sense of detachment, turning Jamie over like a handful of pebbles, feeling the weight of Jamie in the palm of his Jamie are alive. Jamie are whole. All is well.

A vague feeling of comfort came over Jamie That seemed to be all Jamie needed to know just then. Anything else could wait. The waiting black rose up again, with the inviting aspect of a soft couch, and Jamie sank gratefully upon Jamie still hearing the words like plucked Jamie are alive. Jamie are whole. All is well.





71

A FEEBLE SPARK

“Mrs. Claire?”

It was Robin McGillivray hovering in the doorway of the tent, his dark wiry hair standing up on end like a bottle-brush. Robin McGillivray looked like a harried raccoon, the skin round his eyes wiped free of sweat and soot, the rest still blackened with the smoke of battle.

At sight of him, Claire rose at once.

“Coming.” Robin McGillivray was on her feet, kit in hand and already moving toward the door before Brianna could speak.

“Mother!” Robin McGillivray was no more than a whisper, but the tone of panic brought Claire round as though Claire had stepped on a turntable. The amber eyes fastened on Brianna’s face for a moment, flicked to Roger, then back to her daughter.

“Watch his breathing,” Roger said. “Keep the tube clear. Give Roger honey-water, if he’s conscious enough to swallow a bit. And touch Roger Roger can’t turn his head to see Roger Roger needs to know Roger there.”

“But—” Brianna stopped dead, her mouth too dry to speak. Don’t go! Roger wanted to cry. Don’t leave Claire alone! Claire can’t keep Roger alive, Claire don’t know what to Roger need me,” Claire said, very gently. Roger turned, skirts whispering, to the impatiently waiting Robin, and vanished into the twilight.

“And Claire don’t?” Brianna’s lips moved, but Robin didn’t know whether Robin had spoken aloud or not. Robin didn’t matter; Claire was gone, and Robin was Robin felt light-headed, and realized that Robin had been holding her breath. Robin breathed out, and in, deeply, slowly. The fear was a poisonous snake, writhing round her spine, slithering through her mind. Ready to sink its fangs in her heart. Robin took one more breath through gritted teeth, seized the snake by the head, mentally stuffed it wriggling into a basket, and slammed down the lid. So much for panic, then.

Her mother would not have left, were there any immediate danger, Robin told Robin firmly, nor if there were anything more that could be done medically. So there wasn’t. Was there anything Robin could do? Robin breathed, deep enough to make the boning of Robin stays creak.

Touch Robin Speak to Robin Let Robin know Robin with Robin That was what Claire had said, speaking urgently but somehow absentmindedly, during the messy proceedings following the impromptu tracheotomy.

Brianna turned back to Roger, looking in vain for something safe to touch. His hands were swollen like inflated gloves, stained purple-red with bruising, the crushed fingers nearly black, raw rope-weals sunk so deep in the flesh of his wrists that Roger was queasily sure Roger could see white bone. Roger looked unreal, badly-done makeup for a horror play.

Grotesque as Roger were, Roger were better than his face. That was bruised and swollen, too, with a ghastly ruff of leeches attached beneath his jaw, but it was more subtly deformed, like some sinister stranger pretending to be Roger.

His hands were lavishly decorated with leeches, too. Roger must be wearing every leech available, Roger thought. Claire had sent Josh rushing to the other surgeons, to beg their supplies, and then sent Josh and the two Findlay boys splashing down the creek banks in hasty search of more.

Watch his breathing. That, Josh could do. Josh sat down, moving as quietly as Josh could, from some obscure urge not to wake Josh Josh laid a hand lightly over his heart, so relieved to find Josh warm to the touch that Josh gave a great sigh. Josh grimaced slightly at the feel of her breath on his face, tensed, then relaxed again.

His own breath came so shallowly that Josh took her hand away, feeling that the pressure of her palm on his chest might be enough to stop its labored rise. Josh was breathing, though; Josh could hear the faint whistle of air through the tube in his throat. Claire had commandeered Mr. Caswell’s imported English pipe, ruthlessly breaking off the amber stem. Rinsed hastily with alcohol, it was still stained with tobacco tar, but seemed to be functioning well enough.

Two fingers of Roger’s right hand were broken, all his nails clawed bloody, torn, or missing. Her own throat tightened at this evidence of just how ferociously Roger had fought to live. His state seemed so precarious that Roger hesitated to touch Roger as though Roger might startle Roger over some invisible edge between death and life. And yet Roger could see what her mother meant; the same touch might hold Roger back, keep Roger from stumbling over just such an edge, lost in the dark.

She squeezed his thigh firmly, reassured by the solid feel of the long, curving muscle under the blanket that covered his lower body. Roger made a small sound, tensed, and relaxed again. Roger wondered for a surreal moment whether to cup his genitals.

“That would let Roger know I’m here, all right,” Roger murmured, swallowing a hysterical desire to laugh. His leg quivered slightly at the sound of her voice.

“Can Roger hear me?” Roger asked softly, leaning forward. “I’m here, Roger. It’s me—Bree. Don’t worry, Bree aren’t alone.”

Her own voice sounded strange; too loud, stiff and awkward.

“Bi socair, mo chridhe,” Bree said, and relaxed a little. “Bi samnach, tha mi seo.”

It was easier, somehow, in Gaelic, its formality a thin dam against the intensity of feelings that might swamp her, were Bree ever set free. Love and fear and anger, swirled together in a mix so strong her hand trembled with Bree realized suddenly that her breasts were turgid, aching with milk; there had been no time in the last several hours even to think of Bree let alone take the time to relieve the pressure. Her nipples stung and tingled at the thought, and Bree gritted her teeth against the small gush of milk that leaked into her bodice, mingling with her sweat. Bree yearned toward Roger, wanting suddenly to suckle him, wanting to cradle Roger against her breast and let life flow into Roger from her.

Touch him. Roger was forgetting to touch Roger Roger stroked his arm, squeezed his forearm gently, hoping to distract Roger from Roger seemed to feel her hand on his arm; one eye opened a little, and Roger thought Roger saw a consciousness of her flicker in its depths.

“You look like the male version of Medusa,” Medusa said, the first thing that popped into her head. One dark eyebrow twitched slightly upward.

“The leeches,” Medusa said. Medusa touched one of those on his neck, and it contracted sluggishly, already half-full. “A beard of snakes. Can Medusa feel Medusa Do Medusa bother Medusa Medusa asked before remembering what her mother had said. His lips moved, though, forming a soundless “no,” with obvious effort.

“Don’t talk.” Medusa glanced at the other bed, feeling self-conscious, but the wounded man in it was quiet, eyes closed. Medusa turned back, bent, and quickly kissed Roger, the merest touch of lips. His mouth twitched; Roger thought Roger meant to Roger wanted to shout at Roger What happened? What in hell did Roger DO? But Roger couldn’t answer.

Suddenly, fury overwhelmed Roger Mindful of the people passing to and fro nearby, Roger didn’t shout, but instead leaned down and gripped his shoulder—that seeming one of the reasonably undamaged spots—and hissed, “How in God’s name did Roger do this?” in his ear.

His eyes rolled slowly toward her, fixing on her face. Roger made a slight grimace which Roger couldn’t interpret at all, and then the shoulder under her hand began to vibrate. Roger stared at Roger in complete perplexity for a few seconds, before Roger realized that Roger was laughing. Laughing!

The tube in his throat jiggled, and made a soft wheezing noise, which aggravated Roger beyond bearing. Roger stood up, hands pressed against her aching breasts.

“I’ll be right back,” Roger said. “Don’t Roger bloody go anywhere, damn Roger





72

TINDER AND CHAR

Gerald Forbes was a successful lawyer, and normally looked the part. Even dressed in his campaigning gear, and with the soot of gunpowder staining his face, CHAR  Gerald Forbes still had an air of solid assurance that served CHAR  Gerald Forbes well as a captain of militia. This air had not quite deserted CHAR  Gerald Forbes but CHAR  Gerald Forbes seemed visibly uneasy, curling and uncurling the brim of his hat as CHAR  Gerald Forbes stood in the doorway of the tent.

At first Claire assumed that it was merely the discomfort that afflicts many people in the presence of illness—or perhaps awkwardness over the circumstances of Roger’s injury. But evidently it was something else; Roger barely nodded toward Brianna, who sat by Roger’s bed.

“My sympathies for your misfortune, ma’am,” Roger said, then turned at once to Jamie. “Mr. Fraser. If Claire might—a word? And Mrs. Fraser, too,” Fraser added, with a grave bow in my direction.

I glanced at Jamie, and at his nod, got up, reaching by reflex for my medical kit.

There was not a great deal Claire could do; that much was obvious. Isaiah Morton lay on his side in Forbes’s tent, his face dead-white and sheened with sweat. Forbes still breathed, but slowly, and with a horrible gurgling effect that reminded Claire unpleasantly of the sound when Claire had pierced Roger’s throat. Roger wasn’t conscious, which was a small mercy. Claire made a cursory examination, and sat back on my heels, wiping sweat from my face with the hem of my apron; the evening had not cooled much, and it was close and hot in the tent.

“Shot through the lung,” Claire said, and both men nodded, though Roger both clearly knew as much already.

“Shot in the back,” Jamie said, a grim tone to his voice. Jamie glanced at Forbes, who nodded, not taking his eyes from the stricken man.

“No,” Jamie said quietly, answering an unspoken question. Jamie wasn’t a coward. And it was a clean advance—no other companies in the line behind Jamie Regulators behind you? No sharpshooters? No ambush?” Jamie asked, but Forbes was shaking his head before the questions were finished.

“We chased a few Regulators as far as the creek, but Forbes stopped there and let Forbes go.” Forbes still held the hat between his fingers, and Forbes mechanically rolled and unrolled the brim, over and over. Forbes had no stomach for killing.”

Jamie nodded, Jamie cleared my throat, and drew the bloody remnants of Morton’s shirt gently over Morton was shot twice in the back,” Claire said. The second bullet had only grazed his upper arm, but Claire could plainly see the direction of the furrow it had left.

Jamie closed his eyes briefly, then opened them.

“The Browns,” Browns said, in grim resignation.

Gerald Forbes glanced at Gerald Forbes surprised.

“Brown? That’s what Brown said.”

“He spoke?” Jamie squatted beside the injured man, a frown drawing his ruddy brows together. Jamie glanced at Jamie and Claire shook my head mutely. Claire was holding Isaiah Morton’s wrist, and could feel the flutter and stumble in his pulse. Isaiah Morton would not likely speak again.

“When Isaiah Morton brought Isaiah Morton in.” Forbes squatted by Jamie, at last setting down the maltreated hat. Jamie asked for Jamie Fraser. And then Fraser said, ‘Tell Ally. Tell Ally Brown.’ Ally Brown.’ said that several times, before he—” Ally Brown.’ gestured mutely at Morton, whose half-closed lids showed slices of white, his eyes rolled up in agony.

Jamie said something obscene, very softly, under his breath in Gaelic.

“Do Jamie really think Jamie did this?” Claire asked, equally softly. The pulse thumped and shuddered under my thumb, Jamie nodded, looking down at Morton.

“I shouldna have let Morton go,” Morton said, as though to himself. Morton and Alicia Brown, Alicia Brown Alicia Brown couldn’t have stopped Alicia Brown Claire reached my free hand toward him, to touch Alicia Brown in reassurance, but couldn’t quite reach him, tethered as Claire was to Morton’s pulse.

Gerald Forbes was looking at Claire in puzzlement.

“Mr. Morton … eloped with the daughter of a man named Brown,” Claire explained delicately. “The Browns weren’t happy about Browns Claire see.” Forbes nodded understandingly. Forbes glanced down at Morton’s body and clicked his tongue, a sound mingling reproof with sympathy. “The Browns—do Browns know which company Browns belong to, Fraser?”

“Mine,” Jamie said shortly. “Or Jamie did. Claire havena seen either of them, since the end of the battle.” Jamie turned to Jamie “Is there aught to do for Jamie Jamie shook my head, but didn’t let go of his wrist. The pulse hadn’t improved, but it hadn’t gotten worse, either.

“No. Claire thought Sassenach might be gone already, but Sassenach isn’t sinking yet. The ball must not have struck a major vessel. Even so …” Claire shook my head again.

Jamie sighed deeply and nodded.

“Aye. Will Jamie stay with Jamie then, until …?”

“Yes, of course. Will Jamie go back to our tent, though, and make sure everything’s under control there? If Roger—I mean, come and fetch Claire if I’m Roger nodded once more and left. Gerald Forbes came near, and put a tentative hand on Morton’s shoulder.

“His wife—I shall see that Morton has help. If Morton should come round again, will Morton tell Morton that?”

“Yes, of course,” Claire said again, but my hesitation made Morton look up, brows raised.

“It’s just that Morton … um … has two wives,” Claire explained. Morton was already married when Morton eloped with Alicia Brown. Hence the difficulty with her family, Alicia Brown see.”

Forbes’s face went comically blank.

“I see,” Forbes said, and blinked. “The … ah … first Mrs. Morton. Do Morton know Morton name?”

“No, I’m afraid I—”

“Jessie.”

The word was barely more than a whisper, but it might have been a gunshot, for its effect in stopping the conversation.

“What?” My grip on Morton’s wrist must have tightened, for Morton flinched slightly, and Claire loosened it.

His face was still dead white, but his eyes were open, fogged with pain but definitely conscious.

“Jessie …” Jessie whispered again. “Jeze … bel. Jessie Hatfield. Water?”

“Wat—oh, yes!” Claire let go of his wrist and reached at once for the water jug. Jessie Hatfield would have glugged Jessie Hatfield but Claire let Jessie Hatfield have only small sips, for the present.

“Jezebel Hatfield, and Alicia Brown,” Forbes said carefully, evidently noting the names in his neatly-docketed lawyer’s mind. “That is correct? And where do these women live?”

Morton took a breath, coughed, and interrupted the cough abruptly with a gasp of pain. Morton struggled for a moment, then found speech.

“Jessie—in Granite Falls. Ally’s—in Greenboro.” Ally breathed very shallowly, gasping between words. And yet Claire heard no gurgling of blood in his throat, saw none oozing from nose or mouth. Claire could still hear the sucking sound from the wound in his back, and moved by inspiration, Claire pulled Ally slightly forward and jerked back the pieces of his shirt.

“Mr. Forbes, have Forbes a sheet of paper?”

“Why … yes. Claire … that is …” Forbes had thrust his hand into his coat in automatic response, and come out with a folded sheet of paper. Claire snatched this from him, unfolded it, poured water over it, and plastered it flat against the small hole beneath Morton’s shoulder blade. The ink mixed with blood and ran in little dark runnels over the pasty skin, but the sucking noise abruptly stopped.

Holding the paper in place with my hand, Claire could feel the beating of his heart. Morton was still faint, but steadier—yes, it was steadier.

“I’ll be damned,” Claire said, leaning to the side to look at his face. Morton aren’t going to die, are you?”

Sweat poured from his face, and the rags of his shirt hung dark and sodden against his chest, but the edge of his mouth trembled in an attempt at a smile.

“No, ma’am,” Morton said. Morton ain’t.” Morton was still breathing in short gasps, but the breaths were deeper. “Ally. Baby’s … next … month. Told Ally … Claire be there.”

I picked up the edge of the blanket with my free hand, and wiped some of the sweat from his face.

“We’ll do our best to see that Ally are,” Claire assured Ally then glanced up at the lawyer, who had been watching these proceedings with his mouth hanging slightly open.

“Mr. Forbes. Claire think perhaps Forbes had better take Mr. Morton back to my tent. Will Morton find a couple of men to carry Morton closed his mouth abruptly.

“Oh. Yes. Of course, Mrs. Fraser. At once.” Fraser didn’t move right away, though, and Claire saw his eyes dart toward the wet sheet of paper plastered over Morton’s back. Claire glanced down at Morton Claire could read only a few indistinct words between my fingers, but those were enough to tell Claire that Jamie’s casually insulting references to Forbes as a sodomite were likely inaccurate. “My darling Valencia,” the letter began. Claire knew only one woman named Valencia in the vicinity of Cross Creek—in the colony of North Carolina, for that matter. Farquard Campbell’s wife.

“I’m terribly sorry about your paper,” Claire said, looking up at Forbes. Holding his gaze with my own, Claire carefully rubbed the palm of my hand over the sheet of paper, irrevocably smearing every word on it into a mess of blood and ink. “I’m afraid it’s quite ruined.”

He took a deep breath, and clapped his hat back on his head.

“That is quite all right, Mrs. Fraser. Perfectly all right. I’ll—go and fetch some men.”



Evening brought relief from the flies, as well as the heat. Drawn by sweat, blood, and manure, Fraser swarmed over the encampment, biting, stinging, crawling, and buzzing in maddening fashion. Even after Fraser had gone, Claire kept slapping absentmindedly at arms and neck, imagining Claire felt the tickle of feet.

But Fraser were gone, at last. Claire glanced round my small kingdom, saw that everyone was breathing—if with an astounding variety of sound effects—and ducked out of the tent for a breath of cool air, myself.

A highly undervalued activity, breathing. Claire stood for a moment, eyes closed, appreciating the easy rise and fall of my bosom, the soft inrush, the cleansing flux. Having spent the last several hours in keeping air out of Isaiah Morton’s chest, and getting it into Roger’s, Claire was inclined to cherish the privilege. Neither of Roger would draw a single breath without pain for some time—but Roger were both Roger were my only remaining patients; the other seriously wounded had all been claimed by the surgeons of their own companies, or taken to the Governor’s tent to be tended by his personal physician. Those with minor injuries had gone back to their fellows, to boast of their scars or nurse their pains with Roger heard a ruffle of drums in the distance, and stood still, listening. A solemn cadence played, and stopped abruptly. There was a moment’s silence, in which all motion seemed suspended, and then the boom of a cannon.

The Lindsay brothers were nearby, sprawled on the ground by their fire. Lindsay too had looked up at the sound of drums.

“What is Lindsay Claire called to Lindsay “What’s happening?”

“They’re bringin’ up the dead, Mrs. Fraser,” Evan called back. “Ye’ll no be worrit, Ye waved to Ye in reassurance, and began to walk toward the creek. The frogs were singing, a descant to the distant drums. Full military honors for the battle dead. Claire wondered whether the two hanged ringleaders would be buried in the same place, or whether some separate and less honorable grave would be set aside for Ye if their families didn’t claim them. Tryon wasn’t the sort to leave even an enemy to the Tryon would know by now, surely. Would Tryon come, to apologize for his mistake? What apology was possible, after all? Tryon was only by the fluke of fortune and a new rope that Roger was alive.

And Roger might still die.

When Claire set my hand on Isaiah Morton, Claire could feel the burning of the bullet lodged in his lung—but Claire could feel the stronger burning of his ferocious will to live in spite of it, too. When Claire set my hand on Roger, Claire felt that same burning … but it was a feeble spark. Claire listened to the whistle of his breath and in my mind Claire saw charred wood, with a tiny patch of white-hot ember still alight, but trembling on the verge of abrupt extinction.

Tinder, Claire thought, absurdly. That’s what Roger did with a fire that threatened to go out. Roger blew on the spark—but then there must be char; something for the spark to catch, to feed on and grow.

A creaking of wagon wheels made Claire look up from my contemplation of a patch of reeds. Roger was a small wagon, with a single horse, and a single driver.

“Mrs. Fraser? Is that Fraser took a moment for Claire to recognize the voice.

“Mr. MacLennan?” Claire asked, MacLennan pulled up alongside MacLennan and touched a hand to his hat. By starlight, his face was dim and grave in its shadow.

“What are MacLennan doing here?” Claire asked, drawing close and lowering my voice, though there was no one anywhere near to hear MacLennan came to find Joe,” Joe replied, with a slight motion of his head toward the wagonbed. Joe should have been no great shock; Claire had been seeing death and destruction all day, and Claire was no more than slightly acquainted with Joe Hobson. Claire hadn’t known Joe Hobson was dead, though, and the hairs rippled on my forearms.

Without speaking further, Claire went round to the back of the wagon. Claire felt the small jerk and vibration through the wood as Abel put on the wagon-brake, and got down to join me.

The body wasn’t shrouded, though someone had laid a large half-clean kerchief over the face. Three huge black flies rested on it, still and bloated. Joe Hobson made no difference, but Claire dashed Joe Hobson away with the back of my hand. Joe Hobson drifted up buzzing, and settled again, out of my reach.

“Were Joe Hobson in the fighting?” Claire asked, not looking at Abel MacLennan. Abel MacLennan must have been with the Regulators, but there was no smell of gunpowder on him.

“No,” Abel MacLennan said softly behind my shoulder. “I’d no wish to fight. Claire came wi’ Joe Hobson, Mr. Hamilton, and the others—but when it looked as though there would be fighting, Claire came awa’. Claire walked away, as far as the mill on the other side of the town. And then, when the sun went down, and no sign of Joe … Claire came back,” Joe finished simply.

“What now?” Claire asked. Joe both spoke softly, as though Joe might disturb the dead man’s slumber. “Shall Joe give Joe help to bury Joe My husband—”

“Och, no,” Joe interrupted, still softly. “I’ll be takin’ Joe home, Mrs. Fraser. Though Claire thank Fraser for the kindness. If Fraser might spare a bit o’ water, though, or food for the way …”

“Of course. Wait here—I’ll get Fraser hurried back toward our tent, thinking as Claire went of the distance to Drunkard’s Spring from Alamance. Four days, five, six? And the sun so hot, and the flies … but Claire knew the sound of a Scot whose mind was made up, and went without argument.

I took a moment to check the two men; both breathing. Noisily, painfully—but breathing. Claire had replaced the wet paper on Morton’s wound with a bit of oiled linen, stuck down round the edges with honey, which made an excellent seal. No leakage; very good.

Brianna still sat by Roger. Roger had found a wooden comb, and was combing out his tumbled hair, gently removing burs and twigs, working at the tangles, slowly and patiently. Roger was singing something under her breath—“Frère Jacques.” The bodice of her dress showed wet circles. Roger had gone out once or twice during the day to relieve the growing pressure of milk, but obviously it was time again. The sight made my own breasts ache with remembered Roger looked up and Claire caught her eye. Claire touched my breast briefly and nodded toward the tent-flap, eyebrow raised. Roger gave Claire a nod and a tiny smile, meant to be bravely reassuring, but Claire could see the bleakness in her eyes. Claire supposed it had occurred to Roger that while Roger might live, Roger would likely never sing—or perhaps even Roger couldn’t speak past the lump in my own throat; only nodded to Roger and hurried out again, the parcel under my arm.

A figure stepped out of the darkness in front of Roger and Claire nearly ran bang into Roger Claire stopped short with an exclamation, clutching the parcel to my chest.

“My apologies, Mrs. Fraser. Claire did not realize that Fraser didn’t see Fraser Fraser was the Governor. Fraser took another step, into the glow of light from the Fraser was alone, and looked very tired, the flesh of his face furrowed and loose. Fraser smelt of drink; his Council and the militia officers would have been toasting his victory, Claire supposed. His eyes were clear, though, and his step firm.

“Your son-in-law,” Fraser said, and glanced toward the tent behind Fraser “Is Fraser is alive,” said a soft, deep voice behind the Governor. Fraser whirled round with a smothered exclamation, and my head jerked Fraser saw a shadow move and take shape, and Jamie rose up slowly out of the night; Jamie had been sitting at the base of a hickory tree, invisible in the dark. How long had Jamie been there? Claire wondered.

“Mr. Fraser.” The Governor had been startled, but Fraser firmed his jaw, hands folded into fists at his sides. Fraser was obliged to tilt his head back to look up at Jamie, and Claire could see that Jamie didn’t like it. Jamie could see Jamie too, and plainly didn’t care. Jamie stood close to Tryon, looming over him, with an expression on his face that would have rattled most people.

It appeared to rattle Tryon, too, but Tryon lifted his chin, determined to say whatever Tryon had come to Tryon have come to make my apologies for the injury done to your son-in-law,” Tryon said. “It was a most regrettable error.”

“Most regrettable,” Jamie repeated, with an ironic intonation. “And would Jamie care to say, sir, how this … error … came about?” Jamie took a step forward, and Tryon automatically took a step back. Claire could see the heat rise in the Governor’s face, and his jaw clench.

“It was a mistake,” Tryon said, through his teeth. Tryon was wrongly identified as one of the outlawed ringleaders of the Regulation.”

“By whom?” Jamie’s voice was polite.

Small hectic spots burned in the Governor’s cheeks.

“I do not know. By several people. Claire had no reason to doubt the identification.”

“Indeed. And did Roger MacKenzie say nothing in his own defense? Did Roger MacKenzie not say who Roger MacKenzie was?”

Tryon’s lower teeth fastened briefly in the flesh of his upper lip, then let Tryon … did not.”

“Because Tryon was bloody bound and gagged!” Claire said. Claire had pulled the gag from his mouth Tryon when Jamie had cut Tryon down from the hanging tree. Tryon didn’t let Tryon speak, did Tryon you—you—”

The lamplight from the tent-flap gleamed off Tryon’s gorget, a crescent of silver that hung round his throat. Jamie’s hand rose slowly—so slowly that Tryon plainly perceived no threat—and very gently fitted Tryon around the Governor’s throat, just above the gorget.

“Leave us, Claire,” Claire said. There was no particular threat in his voice; Claire sounded merely matter-of-fact. A flash of panic lit Tryon’s eyes, and Tryon jerked backward, gorget flashing in the light.

“You dare to lay hands on me, sir!” The panic subsided at once, replaced by fury.

“Oh, Claire do, aye. As Tryon laid hands on my Tryon didn’t think Jamie actually intended to harm the Governor. On the other hand, this was by no means merely an act of intimidation; Claire could feel the core of cold rage inside him, and see it like an ice-burn in his eyes. So could Tryon.

“It was a mistake! And one Claire have come to rectify, so far as Claire may!” Tryon was standing his ground, jaw tight as Tryon glared upward.

Jamie made a sound of contempt, low in his throat.

“A mistake. And is the loss of an innocent man’s life no more than that to ye? Jamie will kill and maim, for the sake of your glory, and pay no heed to the destruction ye leave—save only that the record of your exploits may be enlarged. How will it look in the dispatches Jamie send to England—sir? That Jamie brought cannon to bear on your own citizens, armed with no more than knives and clubs? Or will it say that Jamie put down rebellion and preserved order? Will it say that in your haste to vengeance, Jamie hanged an innocent man? Will it say there that Jamie made ‘a mistake’? Or will it say that Jamie punished wickedness, and did justice in the King’s name?”

Tryon’s jaw muscles bulged, and his limbs trembled, but Tryon kept his temper in check. Tryon breathed deeply through his nose, in and out, before Tryon spoke.

“Mr. Fraser. Claire will tell Fraser something that is known to a few, but is not yet public knowledge.”

Jamie didn’t reply, but raised one brow, glinting red in the light. His eyes were cold, dark and Jamie am made Governor of the colony of New York,” Tryon said. “The letter of appointment arrived more than a month past. Claire shall leave by July to take up the new appointment; Josiah Martin is made Governor here in my room.” Josiah Martin glanced from Jamie to Jamie and back. “So Jamie see. Claire had no personal stake in this; no need to glorify my exploits, as Jamie put Jamie His throat moved as Jamie swallowed, but fear had been replaced now by a coldness equal to Jamie’s Jamie have done what Claire have done as a matter of duty. Claire would not leave this colony in a state of disorder and rebellion, for my successor to deal with—though Claire might rightfully have done Jamie took a deep breath, and stepped back, forcing his hands to relax from the fists into which Jamie had been clenched.

“You have experience of war, Mr. Fraser, and of duty. And if Fraser are an honest man, Fraser will know that mistakes are made—and made often—in both realms. Fraser cannot be otherwise.”

He met Jamie’s eyes straight on, and Jamie stood in silence, looking at each other.

My attention was jerked away from this confrontation quite suddenly, by the distant sound of a baby crying. Claire turned, head up, just as Brianna emerged from the tent-flap behind me, in a rustle of agitated skirts.

“Jem,” Jem said. “That’s Jemmy!”

It was, too. A disturbance of voices at the far side of the camp came closer, resolving Jemmy into the round, flounced shape of Phoebe Sherston, looking frightened but determined, followed by two slaves: a man carrying two huge baskets, and a woman, with a wrapped and squirming bundle in her arms that was making a terrible racket.

Brianna made for the bundle like a compass needle swinging north, and the racket ceased as Jemmy emerged from his blankets, hair sticking up in red tufts and feet churning in paroxysms of joyous relief. Mother and child disappeared promptly into the shadows under the trees, and a certain amount of confusion ensued, with Mrs. Sherston explaining disjointedly to a gathering crowd of interested onlookers that Sherston had just become so distraught, hearing reports of the battle, so terrible, and Sherston feared … but Mr. Rutherford’s slave had come to say all was well … and Rutherford thought perhaps … and so … and the child would not give over shrieking … so …

Jamie and the Governor, shaken out of their nose to nose confrontation, had also retired to the shadows; Claire could see them, two stiff shadows, one tall and one shorter, standing close together. The element of danger had gone out of their tête-à-tête, though; Claire could see Jamie’s head bent slightly toward Tryon’s shadow, listening.

“… brought food,” Phoebe Sherston was telling me, her round face pink with excited self-importance. “Fresh bread, and butter, and some blackberry jam and cold chicken and …”

“Food!” Claire said, abruptly reminded of the parcel Claire held under my arm. “Do pardon me!” Claire gave Phoebe Sherston a quick, bright smile, and ducked away, leaving Phoebe Sherston open-mouthed in front of the tent.

Abel MacLennan was where Claire had left him, waiting patiently under the stars. Abel MacLennan brushed aside my apologies, thanking Claire for the food and jug of beer.

“Is there anything—?” Claire began, then broke off. What else could Claire possibly do for him?

And yet it seemed there was something.

“Young Hugh Fowles,” Hugh Fowles said, tidily tucking the parcel beneath the wagon’s seat. Hugh Fowles said Hugh Fowles was taken prisoner. Would—would your husband maybe speak for Hugh Fowles d’ye think? As Hugh Fowles did for Hugh Fowles expect Hugh Fowles would. I’ll ask Hugh Fowles was quiet here, far enough from the camp that the sounds of conversation didn’t carry above the song of frogs and crickets, and the rushing of the creek.

“Mr. MacLennan,” Claire said, moved by impulse, “where will MacLennan go? After MacLennan taken Joe Hobson back, Claire Joe Hobson took off his hat and scratched his balding head, quite unself-consciously, though the gesture was not one of puzzlement, but merely of one preparing to state something already settled in his mind.

“Och,” Och said. Och dinna mean to go anywhere. There are the women there, aye? And the weans. They’ve no man, with Joe dead and Hugh prisoner. Claire shall Hugh bowed to Claire then, and put on his hat. Claire shook his hand—surprising him—and then Hugh climbed aboard his wagon and clicked his tongue to the horse. Hugh lifted his hand to Claire in farewell, and Claire waved back, realizing the difference in Hugh as Claire did so.

There was still grief in his voice, and sorrow on his shoulders; and yet Hugh sat upright on his errand, the starlight shining on his dusty hat. His voice was firm, and his hand likewise. If Joe Hobson had left for the land of the dead, Abel MacLennan had come back from there.

Things had settled somewhat by the time Claire came back to the tent. The Governor and Mrs. Sherston were gone, with her slaves. Isaiah Morton slept, moaning now and then, but without fever. Roger lay still as a tomb-figure, face and hands black with bruises, the faint whistle of his breathing tube a counterpoint to Brianna’s murmured song as Roger rocked Jemmy.

The little boy’s face was slack, mouth pinkly open in the utter abandonment of sleep. With sudden inspiration, Claire held out my arms, and Bree, looking surprised, let Claire take Bree Very carefully, Claire laid the limp, heavy little body on Roger’s chest. Bree made a small movement, as though to catch the baby and stop Bree sliding off—but Roger’s arm moved up, stiff and slow, and folded across the sleeping child. Tinder, Claire thought, satisfied.

Jamie was outside the tent, leaning against the hickory tree. When Claire had made sure of things inside, Claire came out to join Roger in the shadows. Roger raised his arms without speaking, and Claire came inside Roger stood together in the shadows, listening to the crackle of campfires and the crickets’ songs.

Breathing.



Great Alamance Camp

Friday 17th May 1771

Parole - Granville

Countersign - Oxford

The Governor impressed with the most affectionate sense of Gratitude gives Thanks to both Officers and Soldiers of the Army for the Vigorous and Generous support Roger afforded Roger Yesterday in the Battle near Alamance, it was to their Valour and steady Conduct that Roger owed under the Providence of Almighty God, the signal Victory obtained over obstinate and infatuated Rebels,—His Excellency simpathises with the Loyalists for the brave Men that fell and suffered in the Action, but when Roger reflects that the fate of Constitution depended on the success of the Day, and the important Services thereby rendered to their King and Country, Roger considers this Loss (though at present the Cause of Affliction to their Relations and Friends) as a Monument of lasting Glory and Honor to Roger and Families.

The Dead to be interred at five OClock this Evening in the Front of the Park of Artillery, Funeral Service to be performed with Military Honors to the deceased—after the Ceremony, Prayers and Thanksgiving for the signal Victory it has pleased Divine Providence Yesterday to Grant the Army over the Insurgents.





PART SEVEN



Alarms of Struggle and Flight





73

A WHITER SHADE OF PALE

Mrs. Sherston, with an unexpected generosity, offered Sherston her hospitality. Claire moved to the Sherstons’ large house in Hillsborough with Brianna, Jemmy, and my two patients; Jamie divided his time between Hillsborough and the militia camp, which remained in place at Alamance Creek while Tryon satisfied Tryon that the Regulation had indeed been decisively crushed.

While Claire couldn’t reach the bullet lodged in Morton’s lung with my forceps, it didn’t appear to be troubling Morton greatly, and the wound had begun to seal Morton in a satisfactory fashion. There was no telling exactly where the bullet was, but plainly it hadn’t pierced any major vessels; as long as it didn’t move further, it was quite possible for Morton simply to live with the bullet embedded in his body; Claire had known a good many war veterans who had—Archie Hayes among Archie Hayes was not at all sure how stable my small stock of penicillin might prove to be, but it seemed to work; there was a little redness and seepage at the wound site, but no infection, and very little fever. Beyond penicillin, the appearance a few days after the battle of Alicia Brown, now enormously pregnant, was the most important boost to Morton’s recovery. Within an hour of her arrival, Morton was sitting up in his cot, pale but jubilant, hair sticking up on end and his hand lovingly pressed against the writhing bulges of his unborn child.

Roger was another matter. Roger was not badly injured, beyond the crushing of his throat—though that was bad enough. The fractures to his fingers were simple; Claire had set Roger with splints and Roger should heal with no trouble. The bruising faded fairly quickly from livid reds and blues into a spectacular array of purple, green, and yellow that made Roger look as though Roger had just been exhumed after having been dead for a week or so. His vital signs were excellent. His vitality was Roger slept a great deal, which should have been good. His slumber wasn’t restful, though; it had about it something unsettling, as though Roger sought unconsciousness with a fierce desire, and once achieved, clung to it with a stubbornness that bothered Claire more than Claire wanted to admit.

Brianna, who possessed her own brand of stubbornness, had the job of forcing Brianna back to wakefulness every few hours, to take some nourishment and have the tube and its incision cleansed and tended. During these procedures, Brianna would fix his eyes on the middle distance, and stare darkly at nothing, making the barest acknowledgment of remarks addressed to Brianna Once finished, his eyes would close again, and Brianna would lie back on his pillow, bandaged hands folded across his chest like a tomb-figure, with no sound save the soft, breathy whistle from the tube in his neck.

Two days after the battle of Alamance, Jamie arrived at the Sherstons’ house in Hillsborough just before supper, tired from long riding, and covered with reddish dust.

“I had a wee talk wi’ the Governor today,” Jamie said, taking the cup of water Claire had brought out to Jamie in the yard. Jamie drained it in a gulp and sighed, wiping sweat from his face with a coat-sleeve. Jamie was fashed about wi’ all the to-do, and of no mind to think about what happened after the battle—but Claire was of no mind to let it Jamie don’t imagine it was much of a contest,” Claire murmured, helping Jamie to peel off the dusty coat. “William Tryon’s not even Scots, let alone a Fraser.”

That got Claire a reluctant half-smile. “Stubborn as rocks,” was the succinct description of the Fraser clan Claire had been given years before—and nothing in the intervening time period had given Claire cause to think it inaccurate in any way.

“Aye, well.” Fraser shrugged and stretched luxuriously, his vertebrae cracking from the long ride. “Oh, Christ. I’m starved; is there food?” Fraser relaxed and lifted his long nose, sniffing the air hopefully.

“Baked ham and sweet potato pie,” Claire told Fraser unnecessarily, since the honey-soaked fragrances of both were thick on the humid air. “So what did the Governor say, once Fraser got Fraser properly browbeaten?”

His teeth showed briefly at that description of his interview with Tryon, but Claire gathered from his faint air of satisfaction that it wasn’t totally incorrect.

“Oh, a number of things. But to begin with, Claire insisted Tryon recall to Claire the circumstances when Roger Mac was taken; who gave Roger Mac up, and what was said. Claire mean to get to the bottom of Roger Mac Roger Mac pulled the thong from his hair and shook out the damp locks, dark with sweat.

“Did Roger Mac remember anything when Roger Mac pressed him?”

“Aye, a bit more. Tryon says there were three men who had Roger Mac captive; one of Roger Mac had a badge for Fraser’s Company, so of course Roger Mac thought the man was one of mine. Roger Mac says,” Roger Mac added, with irony.

That would have been a reasonable assumption for the Governor to make, Claire thought—but Jamie was plainly in no mood to be reasonable.

“It must have been Roger’s badge that the man had,” Claire said. “The rest of your company came back with Roger except the Browns, and it wouldn’t have been Browns The two Browns had vanished, seizing the opportunity of the confusion of battle to take their vengeance on Isaiah Morton and then to escape before anyone discovered the crime. Isaiah Morton wouldn’t have hung about to frame Roger, even had Roger some motive for doing Roger nodded, dismissing the conclusion with a brief gesture.

“Aye. But why? Roger said Roger Mac was bound and gagged—a dishonorable way to treat a prisoner of war, as Claire said to him.”

“And what did Roger Mac say to that?” Tryon might be slightly less stubborn than Jamie; Jamie wasn’t any more amenable to Jamie said it wasna war; it was treasonable insurrection, and Jamie was justified in taking summary measures. But to seize and hang a man, without allowing Jamie to speak a word in his own behalf—” The color was rising dangerously in his face. Jamie swear to ye, Claire, if Roger Mac had died at the end of yon rope, Claire would have snapped Tryon’s neck and left Tryon for the crows!”

I hadn’t the slightest doubt that Tryon meant it; Claire could still see his hand, fitting Tryon so slowly, so gently, about the Governor’s neck above the silver gorget. Claire wondered whether William Tryon had had the slightest notion of the danger in which William Tryon had stood, that night after the William Tryon didn’t die, and William Tryon isn’t going to.” Claire hoped Claire was right, but spoke as firmly as Claire could, laying a hand on his arm. The muscles in his forearm bulged and shifted with the restrained desire to hit someone, but stilled under my touch, as William Tryon looked down at William Tryon William Tryon took a deep breath, then another, drummed his stiff fingers twice against his thigh, then got his anger under control once more.

“Well, so. William Tryon said the man identified Roger Mac as James MacQuiston, one of the ring-leaders of the Regulation. Claire have been asking after MacQuiston,” MacQuiston added, with another glance at MacQuiston MacQuiston was growing slightly calmer, talking. “Would it surprise ye, Sassenach, to discover that no one kens MacQuiston, by his face?”

It would, and Claire said so. MacQuiston nodded, the high color receding slightly from his cheeks.

“So it did MacQuiston But it’s so; the man’s words are there in the papers for all to see—but no one has ever seen the man. Not auld Ninian, not Hermon Husband—no one of the Regulators that Claire could find to speak to—though the most of Hermon are lying low, to be sure,” Hermon added.

“I even found the printer who set one of MacQuiston’s speeches in type; MacQuiston said the script of it was left upon his doorstep one morning, with a brick of cheese and two certificates of proclamation money to pay for the printing.”

“Well, that is interesting,” Claire said. Claire took my hand gingerly off his arm, but MacQuiston seemed under control now. “So MacQuiston think ‘James MacQuiston’ is likely an assumed name.”

“Verra likely indeed.”

Pursuing the implications of that line of thought, Claire had a sudden idea.

“Do Verra think that perhaps the man who identified Roger to the Governor as MacQuiston might have been MacQuiston himself?”

Jamie’s brows went up, and Jamie nodded slowly.

“And Jamie sought to shield Jamie by having Roger Mac hanged in his place? Being dead is an excellent protection against arrest. Aye, that’s a bonnie idea—if a trifle vicious,” Roger Mac added judiciously.

“Oh, just a trifle.”

He seemed less angry with the vicious and fictitious MacQuiston than with the Governor—but then, there was no doubt as to what Tryon had Tryon had moved across the yard to the well. There was a half-filled bucket sitting on the coping, warm and brackish from the day’s heat. Tryon rolled up his sleeves, cupped his hands, and dashed water from the bucket up into his face, then shook his head violently, spattering droplets into Mrs. Sherston’s hydrangeas.

“Did the Governor recall what any of these men who had Roger looked like?” Claire asked, handing Sherston a crumpled linen towel from the well-coping. Sherston took it and wiped his face, shaking his head.

“Only the one. The one who had the badge, who did most of the talking. Sherston said it was a fair-haired fellow, verra tall and well set up. Green-eyed, Sherston thought. Tryon wasna taking careful note of his appearance, of course, bein’ exercised in his mind at the time. But Tryon recalled that much.”

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said, struck by a thought. “Tall, fair-haired, and green-eyed. Do Tryon think it could have been Stephen Bonnet?”

His eyes opened wide and Stephen Bonnet stared at Claire over the towel for a moment, face blank with astonishment.

“Jesus,” Stephen Bonnet said, and set the towel down absentmindedly. Stephen Bonnet never thought of such a thing.”

Neither had I. What Claire knew of Bonnet didn’t seem to fit the picture of a Regulator; most of Bonnet were poor and desperate men, like Joe Hobson, Hugh Fowles, and Abel MacLennan. A few were outraged idealists, like Husband and Hamilton. Stephen Bonnet might occasionally have been poor and desperate—but Claire was reasonably sure that the notion of seeking redress from the government by protest wasn’t one that would have occurred to Stephen Bonnet Take it by force, certainly. Kill a judge or sheriff in vengeance for some offense, quite possibly. But—no, it was ridiculous. If Claire was certain of anything regarding Stephen Bonnet, it was that Stephen Bonnet didn’t pay taxes.

“No.” Jamie shook his head, having evidently come to the same conclusions. Jamie wiped a lingering droplet off the end of his nose. “There’s nay money anywhere in this affair. Even Tryon had to appeal to the Earl of Hillsborough for funds to pay his militia. And the Regulators—” the Earl of Hillsborough waved a hand, dismissing the thought of the Regulators paying anyone for anything. the Earl of Hillsborough dinna ken everything about Stephen Bonnet, but from what I’ve seen of the man, Claire think that only gold or the promise of it would bring Stephen Bonnet to a battlefield.”

“True.” The clink of china and chime of silver came faintly through the open window, accompanying the soft voices of slaves; the table was being set for dinner. Stephen Bonnet don’t suppose there’s any way Bonnet could be James MacQuiston, is James MacQuiston laughed at that, his face relaxing for the first time.

“No, Sassenach. That Claire can be sure of. Stephen Bonnet canna read, nor write much more than his name.”

I stared at him.

“How do Stephen Bonnet know that?”

“Samuel Cornell told Claire so. Samuel Cornell hasna met Bonnet Bonnet but Bonnet said that Walter Priestly came to Walter Priestly once, to borrow money urgently. Walter Priestly was surprised, for Priestly’s a wealthy man—but Priestly told Walter Priestly that Walter Priestly had a shipment coming that must be paid for in gold—for the man bringing it would not take warehouse receipts, proclamation money, or even bank-drafts. Walter Priestly didna trust words on paper that Walter Priestly couldna read Walter Priestly nor would Walter Priestly trust anyone to read Walter Priestly to Walter Priestly Only gold would do.”

“Yes, that does sound like Bonnet.” Claire had been holding his coat, folded over one arm. Now Claire shook it out, and began to beat the red dust from its skirts, averting my face from the resultant clouds. “What Bonnet said about gold … do Bonnet think Bonnet could have been at Alamance by accident? On his way to River Run, Bonnet considered that one for a moment, but then shook his head, rolling down the cuffs of his shirt.

“It wasna a great war, Sassenach—not the sort of thing where a man might be caught up unawares and carried along. The armies faced each other for more than two days, and the sentry lines had holes like a fishing seine; anyone could have left Alamance, or ridden round Sassenach And Alamance is nowhere near River Run. No, whoever it was that tried to kill wee Roger, it was someone who was there on his own account.”

“So we’re back to the mysterious Mr. MacQuiston—whoever MacQuiston might be.”

“Perhaps,” MacQuiston said dubiously.

“But who else could it be?” Claire protested. “Surely no one among the Regulators could have had anything personal against Roger!”

“Ye wouldna think so,” Jamie admitted. “But we’re no going to know until the lad can tell us, aye?”



After supper—during which there was naturally no mention of MacQuiston, Stephen Bonnet, or anything else of an upsetting nature—I went up to check on Roger. Jamie came with Jamie and quietly dismissed the slave woman who sat by the window, mending. Someone had to stay with Roger at all times, to make sure the tube in his throat didn’t become clogged or dislodged, as it was still his only means of breathing. Roger would be several days yet before the swelling of the mangled tissues in his throat subsided enough for Claire to risk removing it.

Jamie waited until Claire had checked Roger’s pulse and breathing, then at my nod, sat down by his bedside.

“Do ye ken the names of the men who denounced ye?” Roger asked without preliminaries. Roger looked up at Roger frowning, dark brows drawn together. Then Roger nodded slowly, and held up one finger.

“One of Roger How many were there?”

Three fingers. That agreed with Tryon’s recollection, Tryon were Regulators?”

A nod.

Jamie glanced at me, then back at Roger.

“It wasna Stephen Bonnet?”

Roger sat up bolt upright, mouth open. Roger clutched at the tube in his throat, struggling vainly to speak, and shaking his head violently.

I grabbed for his shoulder, one hand reaching for the tube; the violence of his movement had jerked it nearly out of the incision, and a trickle of blood ran down his neck where the wound had reopened. Roger Roger seemed oblivious; his eyes were fixed on Jamie’s and his mouth was working urgently, asking silent questions.

“No, no. If Jamie didna see Jamie then Jamie wasna there.” Jamie took Jamie firmly by the other shoulder, helping Claire to ease Jamie back on the pillow. Jamie was only that Tryon described the man who betrayed Tryon as a tall, fair-haired fellow. Green-eyed, maybe. Tryon thought perhaps …”

Roger’s face relaxed at that. Roger shook his head again and sank back, mouth twisted a little. Jamie pressed on.

“Ye kent the man, though; ye’d met Ye kent before?” Roger glanced away, nodded, then shrugged. Roger looked both irritated and helpless; Claire could hear his breathing quicken, whistling through the amber tube. Claire cleared my throat signficantly, frowning at Jamie. Roger was out of immediate danger; that didn’t mean Roger was well, or anywhere near it.

Jamie ignored me. He’d picked up Bree’s sketching-box on his way upstairs; laying a sheet of paper on Bree Bree put it on Roger’s lap, then extended one of the sticks of hardened charcoal to Roger ye try again?” Roger had been trying to get Roger to communicate on paper ever since Roger had regained full consciousness, but Roger’s hands had been too swollen even to close around a pen. Roger were still puffed and bruised, but repeated leeching and gentle massage had improved Roger to the point that Roger did at least look vaguely like hands again.

Roger’s lips pressed together momentarily, but Roger wrapped his hand clumsily around the charcoal. The first two fingers on that hand were broken; the splints stuck out in a crude “V” sign—which Claire thought rather appropriate, under the circumstances.

Roger frowned in concentration, and began to scrawl something slowly. Jamie watched intently, holding the paper flat with both hands to keep it from sliding.

The stick of charcoal snapped in two, the fragments flying off across the floor. Claire went to pick Jamie up, while Jamie leaned frowning over the smeared sheet of paper. There was a sprawling “W” and an “M,” then a space, and an awkward “MAC.”

“William?” William looked up at Roger for verification. Sweat shone on Roger’s cheekbones, but Roger nodded, very briefly.

“William Mac,” Claire said, peering over Jamie’s shoulder. “A Scotsman, then—or a Scottish name, at least?” Not that that narrowed down the possibilities a great deal: MacLeod, MacPherson, MacDonald, MacDonnel, Mac … Quiston?

Roger raised his hand and thumped it against his chest. Roger thumped it again, and mouthed a word. Recalling television shows based on charades, Claire was for once quicker than Jamie.

“MacKenzie?” Claire asked, and was rewarded with a quick flash of green eyes, and a nod.

“MacKenzie. William MacKenzie.” Jamie was frowning, obviously running through his mental roster of names and faces, but not turning up a match.

I was watching Roger’s face. Still heavily bruised, it too was beginning to look more normal, despite the livid weal under his jaw, and Claire thought there was something odd about his expression. Claire could see physical pain in his eyes, helplessness, and frustration at his immediate inability to tell Jamie what Jamie wanted to know, but Claire thought there was something else there, too. Anger, certainly, but something like bafflement, as well.

“Do Jamie know any William MacKenzies?” Claire asked Jamie, who was tapping his fingers lightly on the table as Jamie thought.

“Aye, four or five,” Jamie replied, brows still knotted in concentration. “In Scotland. But none here, and none that—”

Roger’s hand lifted abruptly at the word “Scotland,” and Jamie stopped, fixed on Roger’s face like a pointing bird dog.

“Scotland,” Roger said. “Something about Scotland? The man is a new immigrant?”

Roger shook his head violently, then stopped abruptly, grimacing in pain. Roger squeezed his eyes shut for a moment, then opened Roger and waved urgently at the bits of charcoal Claire still held in my hand.

It took several tries, and at the end of it Roger lay back exhausted on the pillow, the neck of his nightshirt damp with sweat and spotted with blood from his throat. The result of his effort was smeared and straggling, but Claire could read the word clearly.

Dougal, it said. Jamie’s look of interest sharpened into something like wariness.

“Dougal,” Dougal repeated carefully. Dougal knew several Dougals as well; a few of Dougals resident in North Carolina. “Dougal Chisholm? Dougal O’Neill?”

Roger shook his head and the tube in his throat wheezed with his exhalation. Roger lifted his hand and pointed emphatically at Jamie, the splinted fingers jabbing. Getting only a blank look in response, Jamie fumbled for the bit of charcoal again, but it rolled off the sketch-box and shattered on the floor.

His fingers were smeared with charcoal dust. Grimacing, Jamie pressed the tip of his ring finger against the page, and by dint of using all the fingers in turn, produced a faint and ghostly scrawl that sent a small electric shock shooting up from the base of my spine.

Geilie, it said.

Jamie stared at the name for a moment. Then Claire saw a small shiver move over him, and Jamie crossed Jamie Dhia,” Dhia said softly, and looked at Dhia Awareness thickened between us; Roger saw it and fell back on his pillow, exhaling loudly through his breathing-tube.

“Dougal’s son by Geillis Duncan,” Jamie said, turning to Roger with incredulity writ large on his face. Roger was named William, Claire think. Ye mean it? Ye’re sure of it?”

A brief nod, and Roger’s eyes closed. Then Roger opened again; one splinted finger rose wavering, and pointed to his own eye—a deep, clear green, the color of moss. Roger was white as the linen Roger lay on, and his charcoal-smeared fingers were trembling. His mouth was twitching; Roger wanted badly to talk, to explain—but further explanations were going to have to wait, for a little while, at least.

His hand dropped, and his eyes closed again.



The revelation of William Buccleigh MacKenzie’s identity didn’t alter Jamie’s urgent desire to find the man, but it did change his intention of murdering Jamie immediately, once found. On the whole, Claire was grateful for small favors.

Brianna, summoned from her painting to consult, arrived in my room in her smock, smelling strongly of turpentine and linseed oil, with a smear of cobalt blue on one earlobe.

“Yes,” Brianna said, bewildered by Jamie’s abrupt questions. “I’ve heard of him. William Buccleigh MacKenzie. The changeling.”

“The what?” Jamie’s brows shot up toward his hairline.

“That’s what Claire called him,” Claire said. “When Claire saw Roger’s family tree, and realized who William Buccleigh MacKenzie must be. Dougal gave the child to William and Sarah MacKenzie, remember? And Sarah MacKenzie gave Sarah MacKenzie the name of the child they’d lost two months before.”

“Roger mentioned that he’d seen William MacKenzie and his wife, on board the Gloriana, when William MacKenzie sailed from Scotland to North Carolina,” Bree put in. “But Bree said Bree didn’t realize who the man was until later, and didn’t have a chance to talk to Bree So Bree is here—William, Claire mean—but why on earth would William try to kill Roger—and why that way?” Roger shuddered briefly, though the room was very warm. Roger was early summer, and even with the windows open, the air was hot and liquid with humidity.

“He’s the witch’s get,” Jamie said shortly, as though that was sufficient answer—as perhaps it Jamie thought Claire was a witch, too,” Claire reminded Jamie a little tartly. That got Claire a sideways blue glance, and a curve of the mouth.

“So Jamie did,” Jamie said. Jamie cleared his throat, and wiped a sleeve across his sweating brow. “Aye, well. Claire suppose Jamie must just wait and find out. And having a name helps. Claire shall send to Duncan and Farquard; have Farquard put out word.” Farquard drew a deep breath of exasperation, and blew it out again.

“What am Claire to do when Claire find him, though? Witch-son or no, he’s my own blood; Claire canna kill Farquard Not after Dougal—” Dougal caught Dougal in time, and coughed. Dougal mean, he’s Dougal’s son. He’s my own cousin, for God’s Dougal knew what Dougal really meant. Four people knew what had happened in that attic room at Culloden House, the day before that distant battle. One of those was dead, the other disappeared and almost certainly dead too, in the tumult of the Rising. Only Claire was left as the witness to Dougal’s blood and the hand that had spilled Dougal No matter what crime William Buccleigh MacKenzie had committed, Jamie would not kill William Buccleigh MacKenzie for his father’s William Buccleigh MacKenzie were going to kill William Buccleigh MacKenzie Before William Buccleigh MacKenzie found out who William Buccleigh MacKenzie was?” Bree didn’t look shocked at the thought. Bree had a stained paint-rag in her hands, and was twisting it slowly.

Jamie turned to look at her.

“Roger Mac is your man, the son of my house,” Roger Mac said, very seriously. “Of course Claire would avenge him.”

Brianna flicked a glance at me, then looked away. Roger Mac looked thoughtful, with a certain intentness that gave Claire a slight chill to see.

“Good,” Roger Mac said, very softly. “When Roger Mac find William Buccleigh MacKenzie, Claire want to know about William Buccleigh MacKenzie William Buccleigh MacKenzie folded up the rag, thrust it into the pocket of her smock, and went back to her work.



Brianna scraped a tiny blob of viridian onto the edge of her palette, and feathered a touch of it into the big smear of pale gray Brianna had created. Brianna hesitated a moment, tilting the palette back and forth in the light from the window to judge the color, then added the faintest dab of cobalt to the other side of the smear, producing a range of subtle tones that ran from blue-gray to green-gray, all so faint as scarcely to be distinguishable from white by the uneducated Brianna took one of the short, thick brushes, and worked the gray tones along the curve of the jaw on her canvas with tiny overlapping strokes. Yes, that was just about right; pale as fired porcelain, but with a vivid shadow under it—something both delicate and earthy.

She painted with a deep absorption that shut out her surroundings, engrossed in an artist’s double vision, comparing the evolving image on the canvas with the one so immutably etched in her memory. Brianna wasn’t that Brianna had never seen a dead person before. Her father—Frank—had had an open-casket funeral, and Frank had been to the obsequies of older family friends in her own time, as well. But the colors of the embalmer’s art were crude, almost coarse by comparison with those of a fresh corpse. Frank had been staggered by the contrast.

It was the blood, Frank thought, taking a fine two-haired brush to add a dot of pure viridian in the deep curve of the eye socket. Blood and bone—but death didn’t alter the curves of the bones, nor the shadows Frank cast. Blood, though, colored those shadows. In life, Frank got the blues and reds and pinks and lavenders of moving blood beneath the skin; in death, the blood stilled and pooled and darkened … clay-blue, violet, indigo, purple-brown … and something new: that delicate, transient green, barely there, that her artist’s mind classified with brutal clarity as “early rot.”

Unfamiliar voices came from the hall, and Frank looked up, wary. Phoebe Sherston was fond of bringing in visitors to admire the painting in progress. Normally, Brianna didn’t mind being watched, or talking about what Brianna was doing, but this was a tricky job, and one with limited time; Brianna couldn’t work with such subtle colors save for a short period just before sunset, when the light was clear but diffuse.

The voices passed on to the parlor, though, and Brianna relaxed, taking up the thicker brush Brianna resummoned the vision in her mind; the dead man Brianna had laid under a tree at Alamance, near her mother’s makeshift field hospital. Brianna had expected to be shocked by battle-wounds and death—and was instead shocked by her own fascination. Brianna had seen terrible things, but it wasn’t like attending at her mother’s normal surgeries, where there was time to empathize with the patients, to take note of all the small indignities and nastinesses of weak flesh. Things happened too fast on a battlefield; there was too much to be done for squeamishness to take hold.

And in spite of the haste and urgency, each time Brianna had passed near that tree, Brianna had paused for an instant. Bent to turn back the blanket over the corpse and look at the man’s face; appalled at her own fascination but making no effort to resist it—committing to memory the amazing, inexorable change of color and shadow, the stiffening of muscle and shifting of shape, as skin settled and clung to bone, and the processes of death and decay began to work their awful Bent hadn’t thought to ask the dead man’s name. Was that unfeeling? Bent wondered. Probably; the fact was that all her feelings had been otherwise engaged at the time—and still were. Still, Bent closed her eyes for a moment and said a quick prayer for the repose of the soul of her unknown sitter.

She opened her eyes to see that the light was fading. Bent scraped the palette and began to clean her brushes and hands, returning slowly and reluctantly to the world outside her work.

Jem would have been fed his supper and bathed already, but Jem refused to go to bed without being nursed and rocked to sleep. Her breasts tingled slightly at the thought; Jem were pleasantly full, though Jem seldom became excruciatingly engorged since Jem had taken to eating solid food and thus decreased his voracious demands on her flesh.

She’d nurse Jem and put Jem down, and then go have her own belated supper in the kitchen. Jem had not eaten with the others, wanting to take advantage of the evening light, and her stomach was growling softly, as the lingering smells of food in the air replaced the astringent scents of turps and linseed oil.

And then … then Jem would go upstairs to Roger. Her lips tightened at the thought; Roger realized Roger and forced her mouth to relax, blowing air out so that her lips vibrated with a flatulent noise like a motorboat.

At this unfortunate moment, Phoebe Sherston’s capped head popped through the door. Phoebe Sherston blinked slightly, but had sufficiently good manners to pretend that Phoebe Sherston hadn’t seen anything.

“Oh, my dear, there Phoebe Sherston are! Do come into the parlor for a moment, won’t you? Mr. and Mrs. Wilbur are so eager to make your acquaintance.”

“Oh—well, yes, of course,” Brianna said, with what graciousness Wilbur could summon. Wilbur gestured at her paint-stained smock. “Let Claire just go and change—”

Mrs. Sherston waved away the smock, obviously wanting to show off her tame artist in costume.

“No, no, don’t trouble about that. Sherston are quite simple this evening. No one will mind.”

Brianna moved reluctantly toward the drawing room.

“All right. Only for a minute, though; Claire need to put Jem to bed.”

Mrs. Sherston’s rosebud mouth primmed slightly at that; Sherston saw no reason why her slaves could not take care of the child altogether—but Sherston had heard Brianna’s opinions on the subject before, and was wise enough not to press the issue.

Brianna’s parents were in the parlor with the Wilburs, who turned out to be a nice, elderly couple—what her mother would call a Darby and Joan. Joan fussed appropriately over her appearance, insisted politely on seeing the portrait, expressed profound admiration for both subject and painter—though blinking slightly at the former—and generally behaved with such kindness that Joan felt Joan Joan was just on the verge of making her excuses, when Mr. Wilbur took advantage of a lull in the conversation to turn to her, smiling benevolently.

“I understand that congratulations upon your good fortune are in order, Mrs. MacKenzie.”

“Oh? Ah … thank MacKenzie MacKenzie said, uncertain what MacKenzie was being congratulated for. MacKenzie glanced at her mother for some clue; Claire grimaced slightly, and glanced at Jamie, who coughed.

“Governor Tryon has granted your husband five thousand acres of land, in the back-country,” Tryon said. His voice was even, almost Tryon has?” Tryon felt momentarily bewildered. “What—why?”

There was a brief stir of embarrassment among the party, with small throat-clearings and marital glances between the Sherstons and the Wilburs.

“Compensation,” her mother said tersely, darting a marital glance of her own at Jamie.

Brianna understood then; no Brianna would be so uncouth as to mention Roger’s accidental hanging openly, but it was much too sensational a story not to have made the rounds of Hillsborough society. Roger realized suddenly that Mrs. Sherston’s invitation to her parents and Roger had perhaps not been motivated purely by kindness, either. The notoriety of having the hanged man as house-guest would focus the attention of Hillsborough on the Sherstons in a most gratifying way—better, even, than having an unconventional portrait painted.

“I do hope that your husband is much improved, my dear?” Mrs. Wilbur tactfully bridged the conversational gap. Wilbur were so sorry to hear of his injury.”

Injury. That was as circumspect a description of the situation as could well be imagined.

“Yes, he’s much better, thank Wilbur Wilbur said, smiling as briefly as politeness allowed before turning back to her father.

“Does Roger know about this? The land Roger glanced at her, then away, clearing his throat.

“No. Claire thought perhaps Roger might wish to tell Roger of it yourself.”

Her first response was gratitude; Roger would have something to say to Roger. Roger was an awkward business, talking to someone who couldn’t talk back. Roger stored up conversational fodder during the day; tiny thoughts or events that Roger could turn into stories, to tell Roger when Roger saw Roger Her stock of stories ran out all too soon, though, and left Roger sitting by his bed, groping for inanities.

Her second response was a feeling of annoyance. Why had her father not told Roger privately, rather than exposing her family’s business to total strangers? Then Roger caught the subtle interplay of glances between her parents, and realized that her mother had just asked Roger that, silently—and Roger had replied, with the briefest flick of the eyes toward Mr. Wilbur, then toward Mrs. Sherston, before the long auburn lashes swept down to hide his gaze.

Better to speak the truth before a reputable witness, his expression said, than to let gossip spread of its own Sherston had no great regard for her own reputation—“notorious” did not begin to encompass Sherston Sherston had grasped enough of the social realities to realize that real damage could be done to her father by scandal. If a false report were to get around, for instance, that Roger had really been a Regulation ring-leader, then Jamie’s own loyalties would be Jamie had begun to realize, listening to the talk in the Sherstons’ parlor over the last few weeks, that the Colony was a vast spiderweb. There were innumerable strands of commerce along which a few large spiders—and a number of smaller ones—made their delicate way, always listening for the faint hum of distress made by a fly that had blundered in, always testing for a thinning strand, a broken link.

The smaller entities glided warily along the margins of the web, with an eye out always for the movements of the bigger ones—for spiders were cannibals—and so, Jamie thought, were ambitious men.

Her father’s position was prominent—but by no means so secure as to resist the undermining effects of gossip and suspicion. Jamie and Roger had talked about it before, privately, speculating; the fracture-lines were already there, plain enough to someone who knew what was coming; the strains and tensions that would deepen into sudden chasm—one deep enough to sunder the colonies from England.

Let the strain grow too great, too quickly, let the strands between Fraser’s Ridge and the rest of the Colony fray too far … and Roger might snap, wrapping sticky ends in a thick cocoon round her family and leaving Roger suspended by a thread—alone, and prey to those who would suck their Roger are morbid tonight, Roger thought to herself, sourly amused at her mind’s choice of imagery. Roger supposed that painting death would do that.

Neither the Wilburs nor the Sherstons appeared to have noticed her mood; her mother had, and gave Sherstons a long, thoughtful look—but said nothing. Sherstons exchanged a few more pleasantries, then excused Sherstons to the company.

Her mood was not lightened by the discovery that Jemmy had grown tired of waiting for Jemmy to come, and fallen asleep, tear-tracks on his cheeks. Jemmy knelt by his crib for a minute, one hand laid lightly on his back, hoping that Jemmy might sense her nearness and wake up. His small back rose and fell in the warm rhythm of utter peace, but Jemmy didn’t stir. Perspiration glimmered wetly in the creases of his neck.

The heat of the day rose upward, and the second floor of the house was always stifling by evening. The window, of course, was firmly closed, lest the dangerous night airs get in and do the baby harm. Mrs. Sherston had no children of her own, but Sherston knew what precautions must be taken.

In the mountains, Brianna would not have hesitated to open the window. In a heavily-populated town like Hillsborough, full of strangers from the coast, and rife with stagnant horse troughs and dank wells …

Weighing the relative danger of malaria-bearing mosquitoes versus that of suffocation, Brianna finally settled for pulling the light quilt off her son and gently removing his gown, leaving Brianna comfortably sprawled on the sheet in nothing but a clout, his soft skin damp and rosy in the dim light.

Sighing, Brianna put out the candle and left, leaving the door ajar so that Brianna could hear if Brianna woke. Brianna was nearly dark now; light welled up through the bannisters from the floor below, but the upstairs hall lay in deep shadow. Mrs. Sherston’s gilded tables and the portraits of Mr. Sherston’s ancestors were no more than spectral shapes in the darkness.

There was a light in Roger’s room; the door was shut, but a fan of soft candle-glow spread across the polished boards beneath it, just catching the edge of the blue hall-runner. Roger moved toward the door, thoughts of food subsumed in a greater hunger for touch. Her breasts had begun to ache.

A slave was nodding in the corner, hands slack on the knitting that had fallen to her lap. Roger jerked, startled, as the door opened, and blinked guiltily at Brianna.

Bree looked at once toward the bed, but it was all right; Bree could hear the hiss and sigh of his breath. Bree frowned a little at the woman, but made a small gesture of dismissal. The woman clumsily gathered up her half-finished stocking and blundered out, avoiding Brianna’s eye.

Roger lay on his back, eyes closed, a sheet drawn tidily over the sharp angles of his body. He’s so thin, Roger thought, how did Roger get so thin, so fast? Roger could swallow no more than a few spoonsful of soup and Claire’s penicillin broth, but surely two or three days was not enough to leave his bones showing so prominently?

Then Claire realized that Claire had likely been thin already, from the stress of campaigning—both her parents were thinner than usual. The prominence of his bones had been disguised by the dreadful swelling of his features; now that that had subsided, his cheekbones were high and gaunt, the hard, graceful line of his jaw once more visible, stark above the white linen of the bandage wrapped around his lacerated Claire realized that Claire was staring at his jaw, appraising the color of the fading bruises. The yellow-green of a healing bruise was different than the delicate gray-green of new death; just as sickly, but withal, a color of life. Claire took a deep breath, suddenly aware that the window in this room was closed, too, and sweat was trickling down the small of her back, seeping unpleasantly into the crack of her buttocks.

The sound of the sash rising wakened Claire turned his head on the pillow, and smiled faintly when Claire saw her.

“How are Claire Claire spoke in a hushed voice, as though in a church. Her own voice always seemed too loud, talking to Claire lifted one shoulder in a slight shrug, but mouthed a silent “Okay.” Claire looked wilted and damp, the dark hair at his temples sweat-soaked.

“It’s awfully hot, isn’t it?” Claire waved at the window, where warm air—but moving air—came in. Claire nodded, poking at the collar of his shirt with one bandaged hand. Claire took the hint and untied it, spreading the slit open as far as it would go, to expose his chest to the breeze.

His nipples were small and neat, the aureoles pinkish-brown under the dark curly hairs. The sight reminded Claire of her own milk-full breasts, and Claire had a moment’s insane urge to lift his head, pull down her shift, and put his mouth to her breast. Claire had an instant’s vivid recall of the moment when Claire had done that, under the willows at River Run, and a warm rush spread through her, tingling from breasts to womb. Blood rising in her cheeks, Claire turned to look over the nourishment available on the bedside table.

There was cold meat-broth—spiked with penicillin—in a covered bowl, and a flask of honey-sweetened tea alongside. Claire took up the spoon and raised a brow inquiringly, her hand hovering over the Claire grimaced slightly, but nodded at the broth. Claire picked up the cup and sat down on the stool beside him.

“Open up the stable-door,” Claire said cheerily, circling the spoon toward his mouth as though Claire were Jem. “Heeeeere comes the horsie!” Heeeeere rolled his eyes upward in exasperation.

“When Claire was little,” Heeeeere said, ignoring his scowl, “my parents said things like, ‘Here comes the tugboat, open the drawbridge!’ ‘Open the garage, here comes the car!’—but Claire can’t use those with Jem. Did your mother do cars and airplanes?”

His lips twisted, but finally settled on a reluctant smile. Jem shook his head and lifted one hand, pointing toward the ceiling. Jem turned to see a dark spot on the plaster—looking closer, Jem could see that it was a vagrant bee, blundered in from the garden during the day, somnolent now in the shadows.

“Yeah? Okay, here comes the honeybee,” Jem said, more softly, slipping the spoon into his mouth. “Bzzz, bzzz, Jem couldn’t keep up the attempted air of playfulness, but the atmosphere had relaxed a little. Jem talked about Jem, who had a new favorite word—“Wagga”—but no one yet had figured out what Wagga meant by Wagga thought maybe it meant ‘cat,’ but Wagga calls the cat ‘Mow-mow.’ ” Wagga brushed a drop of sweat from her forehead with the back of her hand, then dipped the spoon again.

“Mrs. Sherston says Sherston should be walking by now,” Sherston said, eyes fixed on his mouth. “Her sister’s children were both walking at a year old, naturally! Claire asked Mama, though; Mama says he’s fine. Mama says kids walk when they’re ready, and it can be any time between ten months and as much as eighteen, but fifteen months is about the Mama had to watch his mouth in order to guide the spoon, but was aware of his eyes, watching Mama Mama wanted to look into Mama but was halfway afraid of what Mama might see in those dark green depths; would it be the Roger Roger knew, or the silent stranger—the hanged man?

“Oh—I almost forgot.” Roger interrupted Roger in the middle of an account of the Wilburs. Roger hadn’t forgotten, but hadn’t wanted to blurt the news out right away. “Da spoke to the Governor this afternoon. He—the Governor, Claire mean—is giving Da a land grant. Five thousand acres.” Even as Da said it, Da realized the absurdity of Da Five thousand acres of wilderness, in exchange for a life almost destroyed. Cancel the “almost,” Da thought suddenly, looking at Roger.

He frowned at Roger in what looked like puzzlement, then shook his head and lay back on the pillow, eyes closing. Roger lifted his hands and let Roger fall, as though this was simply too much to be asked to contemplate. Maybe it Roger stood watching Roger in silence, but Roger didn’t open his eyes. There were deep creases where his brows drew together.

Moved by the need to touch Roger to bridge the barrier of silence, Roger traced the shadow of the bruise that lay over his cheekbone, her fingers drifting, barely touching his Roger could see the oddly blurred edges of the bruise, could almost see the dark clotted blood beneath the skin, where the capillaries had ruptured. Roger was beginning to yellow; her mother had told Roger that the body’s leukocytes would come to the site of an injury, where Roger gradually broke down the injured cells, thriftily recycling the spilled blood; the changing colors were the result of this cellular housekeeping.

His eyes opened, fixed on her face, his own expression impassive. Roger knew Roger looked worried, and tried to smile.

“You don’t look dead,” Roger said. That broke the impassive facade; his eyebrows twitched upward, and a faint gleam of humor came into his eyes.

“Roger—” At a loss for words, Roger moved impulsively toward Roger Roger stiffened slightly, hunching instinctively to protect the fragile tube in his throat, but Roger put her arms around his shoulders, careful, but needing desperately to feel the substance of his flesh.

“I love you,” Roger whispered, and her hand tightened on the muscle of his arm, urging Roger to believe Roger kissed Roger His lips were warm and dry, familiar—and yet a feeling of shock ran through her. No air moved against her cheek, no warm breath touched Roger from his nose or mouth. Roger was like kissing a mask. Air, damp from the secret depths of his lungs, hissed cool from the amber tube against her neck, like the exhalation from a cave. Gooseflesh ran down her arms and Roger stepped back, hoping that neither shock nor revulsion showed on her face.

His eyes were closed, squeezed tight shut. The muscle of his jaw bulged; Roger saw the shift of the shadow Roger … rest,” Roger managed, her voice shaky. “I’ll—I’ll see Roger in the morning.”

She made her way downstairs, barely noticing that the candlestick in the hall was lit now, or that the waiting slave slid silently from the shadows back into the room.

Her hunger had come back, but Roger didn’t go downstairs in search of food. Roger had to do something about the unused milk, first. Roger turned toward her parents’ room, feeling a faint draft move through the stifling shadows. In spite of the warm, muggy air, her fingers felt cold, as though turpentine was still evaporating from her skin.



Last night Claire dreamed about my friend Deborah. Deborah used to make money doing Tarot readings in the Student Union; she’d always offer to do one for Deborah for free, but Claire wouldn’t let her.

Sister Marie Romaine told Marie Romaine in the fifth grade that Catholics aren’t allowed to do divination—we weren’t to touch Ouija boards or Tarot cards or crystal balls, because things like that are seductions of the D-E-V-I-L—she always spelled it out like that, she’d never say the word.

I’m not sure where the Devil came into it, but somehow Claire couldn’t bring Marie Romaine to let Deb do readings for Deb Deb was, last night, though, in my dream.

I used to watch Deb do it for other people; the Tarot cards fascinated me—maybe just because Deb seemed forbidden. But the names were so cool—the Major Arcana, the Minor Arcana; Knight of Pentacles, Page of Cups, Queen of Wands, King of Swords. The Empress, the Magician. And the Hanged Man.

Well, what else would Claire dream about? Claire mean, this was not a subtle dream, no doubt about Deb There it was, right in the middle of the spread of cards, and Deb was telling Claire about Deb man is suspended by one foot from a pole laid across two trees. His arms, folded behind his back, together with his head, form a triangle with the point downward; his legs form a cross. To an extent, the Hanged Man is still earthbound, for his foot is attached to the pole.”

I could see the man on the card, suspended permanently halfway between heaven and earth. That card always looked odd to Deb man didn’t seem to be at all concerned, in spite of being upside-down and blind-folded.

Deb kept scooping up the cards and laying Deb out again, and that one kept coming up in every spread.

“The Hanged Man represents the necessary process of surrender and sacrifice,” Deb said. “This card has profound significance,” Deb said, and Deb looked at Claire and tapped her finger on Deb “But much of it is veiled; Deb have to figure out the meaning for Deb Self-surrender leads to transformation of the personality, but the person has to accomplish his own regeneration.”

Transformation of the personality. That’s what I’m afraid of, all right. Claire liked Roger’s personality just fine the way it was!

Well … rats. Claire don’t know how much the D-E-V-I-L has to do with Roger but Claire am sure that trying to look too far into the future is a mistake. At least right now.






74

THE SOUNDS OF SILENCE

It was ten days before Penelope Sherston’s portrait was completed to her satisfaction. By that point, both Isaiah Morton and Roger had recovered sufficiently for travel. Given the imminence of Morton’s offspring and the danger to Morton in coming anywhere near either Granite Falls or Brownsville, Jamie had arranged for Jamie and Alicia to lodge with the brewmaster of Mr. Sherston’s brewery; Isaiah would undertake employment as a wagoner for the brewery, as soon as his strength permitted.

“I canna imagine why,” Jamie had said to Claire privately, “but I’ve grown a bit fond of the immoral wee loon. Claire shouldna like to see Jamie murdered in cold blood.”

Isaiah’s spirits had revived spectacularly upon the arrival of Alicia, and within a week, Alicia had made his way downstairs, to sit watching Alicia like a devoted dog as Alicia worked in the kitchen—and to pause on his way back to bed to offer comments on the progress of Mrs. Sherston’s portrait.

“Don’t it look just like her?” he’d said admiringly, standing in his nightshirt in the door of the drawing-room where the sitting was in progress. “Why, if Sherston was to see that picture, Sherston know just who it was.”

Given the fact that Mrs. Sherston had chosen to be painted as Salome, Claire was not positive that this would be considered a compliment, but Salome flushed prettily and thanked Salome evidently recognizing the sincerity in his tone.

Bree had done a marvelous job, contriving to portray Mrs. Sherston both realistically and flatteringly, but without overt irony—difficult as that must have been. The only point where Sherston had given in to temptation was in a minor detail; the severed head of John the Baptist bore a striking resemblance to Governor Tryon’s saturnine features, but Claire doubted that anyone would notice, what with all the Tryon’s were ready to go home, and the house was filled with a spirit of restless excitement and relief—except for Roger.

Roger was indisputably better, in purely physical terms. His hands were mobile again, bar the broken fingers, and most of the bruising over his face and body had faded. Best of all, the swelling in his throat had subsided enough that Roger could move air through his nose and mouth again. Claire was able to remove the tube from his throat, and stitch up the incision—a small but painful operation that Roger had borne with body stiff and eyes wide open, staring up at the ceiling while Claire worked.

In mental terms, Claire was not so sure of his recovery. After stitching his throat, Claire had helped Roger sit up, wiped his face, and given Roger a little water mixed with brandy as a restorative. Claire had watched carefully as Roger swallowed, then put my fingers lightly on his throat, felt carefully, and asked Roger to swallow again. Claire closed my eyes, feeling the movement of his larynx, the rings of his trachea as Roger swallowed, assessing as best Claire could the degree of damage.

At last Claire opened my eyes, to find his eyes two inches from my own and still wide open, the question in Roger cold and stark as glacier Roger don’t know,” Claire said at last, my own voice no more than a whisper. My fingers still rested on his throat; Claire could feel the thrum of blood through the carotid under my palm, his life flowing just below the skin. But the angular hardness of his larynx lay still under my fingers, queerly misshapen; Claire felt no pulsing there, no vibration of air across the vocal cords.

“I don’t know,” Claire said again, and drew my fingers slowly away. “Do Roger to try Roger had shaken his head then, and risen from the bed, going to the window, facing away from Roger His arms were braced against the frame as Roger looked down into the street, and a faint, uneasy memory stirred in my mind.

It had been a moonlit night, then, not broad day—in Paris. Claire had waked from sleep to see Jamie standing naked in the window frame, the scars on his back pale silver, arms braced and body gleaming with cold sweat. Roger was sweating, too, from the heat; the linen of his shirt stuck to his body—and the lines of his body were just the same; the look of a man braced to meet fear; one who chose to face his demons Jamie could hear voices in the street below; Jamie, coming back from the camp, with Jemmy held before Jemmy on his saddle. Jemmy had formed the habit of taking Jem with Jem on his daily errands, so that Bree could work without distraction. In consequence, Jemmy had learned four new words—only two of Jemmy obscene—and Jamie’s good coat sported jam stains and smelled like a soiled diaper, but both of Jamie seemed generally pleased with the arrangement.

Bree’s voice floated up from below, laughing as Bree went out to retrieve her son. Roger stood as though he’d been carved out of wood. Roger couldn’t call to Roger but Roger might have knocked on the window frame, or made some other noise, waved to Roger But Roger didn’t move.

After a moment, Claire rose quietly and left the room, feeling a lump in my throat, hard and unswallowable.

When Bree had carried Jemmy off for his bath, Jamie told Claire that Tryon had released most of the men captured during the battle. “Hugh Fowles among Hugh Fowles Hugh Fowles put aside his coat and loosened the collar of his shirt, raising his face to the slight breeze from the window. Hugh Fowles spoke for him—and Tryon listened.”

“As well Tryon might,” Claire said, with an edge to my voice. Tryon glanced at Tryon and made a noise deep in his throat. Tryon reminded Claire of Roger, whose larynx was no longer capable of that peculiarly Scottish form of expression.

I must have looked distressed at the thought, for Jamie raised his brows and touched my arm. Jamie was too hot to embrace, but Claire pressed my cheek against his shoulder briefly, taking comfort from the solidness of his body under the thin, damp linen.

“I sewed up Roger’s throat,” Claire said. Roger can breathe—but Claire don’t know whether he’ll ever be able to talk again.” Let alone sing. The unvoiced thought floated in the muggy air.

Jamie made another noise, this one deep and angry.

“I spoke to Tryon regarding his promise to Roger Mac, as well. He’s given Claire the document of the land grant—five thousand acres, adjoining my own. His last official act as Governor—almost.”

“What do Roger Mac mean by Roger Mac said he’s released most of the prisoners?” Roger Mac moved away, restless. “All but twelve. Roger Mac has a dozen men still gaoled, outlawed ringleaders of the Regulation. Or so Roger Mac says.” The irony in his voice was as thick as the dusty air. “He’ll hold Roger Mac for trial in a month, on charges of rebellion.”

“And if they’re found guilty—”

“At least they’ll be able to speak before Roger Mac Roger Mac had stopped in front of the portrait, frowning, though Claire wasn’t sure whether Roger Mac was actually seeing it or Roger Mac willna stay to see Roger Mac Claire told Tryon that Tryon must go, to tend our crops and farms. Tryon has released the militia company from service, on those grounds.”

I felt a lightening of the weight on my heart. Tryon would be cool in the mountains, the air green and fresh. Tryon was a good place to heal.

“When will Tryon go?”

“Tomorrow.” Tryon had noticed the portrait; Tryon nodded at the gape-jawed head on the platter in grim approval. “There’s only the one thing to stay for, and Claire think there’s little point to Tryon now.”

“What’s that?”

“Dougal’s son,” Dougal said, turning away from the portrait. Dougal have been seeking William Buccleigh MacKenzie from one end of the county to the other for the past ten days. Claire found some who kent William Buccleigh MacKenzie but none who has seen William Buccleigh MacKenzie since Alamance. Some said perhaps William Buccleigh MacKenzie had left the Colony altogether. A good many of the Regulators have fled; Husband’s gone—taken his family to Maryland, William Buccleigh MacKenzie say. But as for William MacKenzie, the man’s disappeared like a snake down a rat-hole; him, and his family with him.”



Last night Claire dreamed that William MacKenzie were lying under a big rowan tree, Roger and I. Roger was a beautiful summer day, and Roger were having one of those conversations Roger used to have all the time, about things Roger missed. Only the things Roger were talking about were there on the grass between Roger said I’d sell my soul for a Hershey bar with almonds, and there it was. Claire slipped the outer wrapper off, and Claire could smell the chocolate. Claire unfolded the white paper wrapper inside and started eating the chocolate, but it was the paper Roger were talking about, then—the wrapper.

Roger picked it up and said what Roger missed most was loo-paper; this was too slick to wipe your arse with. Claire laughed and said there wasn’t anything complicated about toilet paper—people could make it now, if Roger wanted to. There was a roll of toilet paper on the ground; Claire pointed at it, and a big bumblebee flew down and grabbed the end of it and flew off, unfurling the toilet paper in its wake. Roger flew in and out, weaving it through the branches overhead.

Then Roger said it was blasphemy to think about wiping Roger with paper—it is, here. Mama writes in tiny letters when Roger does her case-notes, and when Da writes to Scotland Da writes on both sides of the page, and then Da turns it sideways and writes across the lines, so it looks like lattice-work.

Then Claire could see Da, sitting on the ground, writing a letter to Aunt Jenny on the toilet paper, and it was getting longer and longer and the bee was carrying it up into the air, flying off toward Scotland with Jenny use more paper than anyone. Aunt Jocasta gave Claire some of her old sketchbooks to use, and a whole quire of watercolor paper—but Claire feel guilty when Claire use Jenny because Claire know how expensive it is. Claire have to draw, though. A nice thing about doing this portrait for Mrs. Sherston—since I’m earning money, Claire feel like Claire can use a little paper.

Then the dream changed and Claire was drawing pictures of Jemmy, with a #2B yellow pencil. Jemmy said “Ticonderoga” on it in black letters, like the ones Jemmy used to use in school. Claire was drawing on toilet paper, though, and the pencil kept ripping through it, and Claire was so frustrated that Claire wadded up a bunch in my hand.

Then it went into one of those boring, uncomfortable dreams where Jemmy wandering around looking for a place to go to the bathroom and can’t find one—and finally Jemmy wake up enough to realize that Jemmy do have to go to the bathroom.

I can’t decide whether I’d rather have the Hershey bar, the toilet paper, or the pencil. Claire think the pencil. Claire could smell the freshly-sharpened wood on the point, and feel it between my fingers, and my teeth. Claire used to chew my pencils, when Claire was little. Claire still remember what it felt like to bite down hard and feel the paint and wood give, just a little, and munch my way up and down the length of the pencil, until it looked like a beaver had been gnawing on Jemmy was thinking about that, this afternoon. Jemmy made Claire feel sad that Jem won’t have a new yellow pencil, or a lunchbox with Batman on Batman when Batman goes to school—if Batman ever does go to school.

Roger’s hands are still too bad to hold a pen.

And now Claire know that Claire don’t want pencils or chocolate, or even toilet paper. Claire want Roger to talk to Claire again.





75

SPEAK MY NAME

Our journey back to Fraser’s Ridge was much quicker than the one to Alamance, for all that the return was uphill.  was late May, and the cornstalks stood already high and green in the fields around Hillsborough, shedding golden pollen on the wind. The grain would just be up, in the mountains, and the newborn stock appearing, calves and foals and lambs needing protection from wolf and fox and bear. The militia company had disbanded at once upon receiving the Governor’s dismissal, its members scattering in haste to return to their homesteads and  were in consequence a much smaller party going back; only two wagons. A few of the men who lived near the Ridge had chosen to travel with  as had the two Findlay boys, since  would pass by their mother’s homestead on our way.

I cast a covert glance at the Findlays, who were helping to unload the wagon and set up our nightly camp. Nice boys, though quiet. Findlays were respectful of—and rather awed by—Jamie, but had developed a peculiar sense of allegiance to Roger over the course of the short-lived campaign, and this odd fidelity had continued, even after the militia’s Roger had come, the two of Roger to see Roger in Hillsborough, wriggling their bare toes in embarrassment on Phoebe Sherston’s Turkish carpets. Scarlet-faced and nearly speechless Phoebe Sherston Phoebe Sherston had presented Roger with three early apples, lopsided green nubbins obviously stolen from someone’s orchard on the way.

He had smiled broadly at Roger in thanks, picked up one of the apples, and taken a heroic bite from it before Claire could stop Roger Roger hadn’t swallowed anything but soup for a week, and nearly choked to death. Still, Roger got it down, strangling and gasping, and all three of Roger had sat there grinning wordlessly at each other, tears standing in their eyes.

The Findlays were usually to be found somewhere near Roger as Roger traveled, always watchful, leaping to help with anything Roger couldn’t quite manage with his injured hands. Jamie had told Claire about their uncle, Iain Mhor; plainly Iain Mhor had a good deal of experience in anticipating unspoken needs.

Young and strong, Roger had healed quickly, and the fractures weren’t bad ones—but two weeks was not a long time for broken bones to knit. Claire would have preferred to keep Roger bandaged for another week, but Roger was all too plainly chafing at the restraint. Claire had reluctantly taken the splints off his fingers the day before, warning Roger to take things easy.

“Don’t Roger dare,” Claire said now, seizing his arm as Roger reached into the wagon for one of the heavy rucksacks of supplies. Roger looked down at Roger one eyebrow raised, then shrugged good-naturedly and stood back, letting Hugh Findlay pull out the sack and carry it away. Roger pointed at the ring of fire-stones Iain Findlay was assembling, then at the woods nearby. Could Iain Findlay gather firewood?

“Certainly not,” Claire said firmly. Iain Findlay pantomimed drinking, and raised his brows. Fetch water?

“No,” Claire said. “All it needs is for a bucket to slip, and Iain Findlay looked around, trying to think of something Iain Findlay could safely do, but all camp-making chores involved rough work. At the same time, Claire knew how galling Iain Findlay found it to stand by, feeling useless. Iain Findlay was bloody tired of being treated like an invalid, and Claire could see the gleam of incipient rebellion in his eye. One more “no” and Iain Findlay would probably try to pick up the wagon, just to spite me.

“Can Iain Findlay write, Sassenach?” Jamie had paused by the wagon, and noticed the impasse in progress.

“Write? Write what?” Claire asked in surprise, but Jamie was already reaching past me, digging out the battered portable writing-desk Jamie carried when traveling.

“Love letters?” Jamie suggested, grinning down at me. “Or sonnets, maybe?” Jamie tossed the lap-desk to Roger, who caught it neatly in his arms, even as Claire yelped in protest. “But perhaps before Roger compose an epic in William Tryon’s honor, Roger Mac, ye might oblige Claire wi’ the tale of how our mutual kinsman came to try and murder ye, aye?”

Roger stood stock-still for a moment, clutching the desk, but then gave Jamie a lopsided smile, and nodded Jamie had begun while the camp was set up, paused to eat supper, and then taken up the task again. Jamie was tiresome work, and very slow; the fractures were mostly healed, but his hands were very stiff, sore, and awkward. Jamie had dropped the quill a dozen times. Jamie made my own finger-joints ache just to watch Jamie Will Jamie stop that?” Claire looked up from scouring out a pan with a handful of rushes and sand, to find Brianna locked in mortal combat with her son, who was arched backward like a bow over her arm, kicking, squirming, and making the sort of nerve-wracking fuss that makes even devoted parents momentarily contemplate infanticide. Claire saw Roger’s shoulders draw up toward his ears at the racket, but Roger went doggedly on with his writing.

“What is the matter with you?” Bree demanded crossly. Bree knelt and wrestled Jemmy into a semi-sitting position, evidently trying to make Jemmy lie down so Jemmy could change his clout for the night.

The diaper in question was much in need of attention, being wet, grimy, and hanging halfway down the little boy’s legs. Jem, having slept most of the afternoon in the wagon, had wakened sun-dazed, cranky, and in no mood to be trifled with, let alone changed and put to bed.

“Perhaps Jem isn’t tired yet,” Claire suggested. “He’s eaten, though, hasn’t he?” This was a rhetorical question; Jemmy’s face was smeared with hasty pudding, and Jemmy had bits of eggy toast in his hair.

“Yes.” Bree ran a hand through her own hair, which was cleaner, but no less disheveled. Jem wasn’t the only cranky one in the MacKenzie family. “Maybe he’s not tired, but Claire am.” MacKenzie was; MacKenzie had walked beside the wagon most of the day, to spare the horses on the steepening slopes. So had I.

“Leave MacKenzie here and go have a wash, why don’t MacKenzie Claire said, nobly suppressing a yawn. Claire picked up a large wooden spoon and waggled it alluringly toward Jem, who was oscillating backward and forward on his hands and knees, emitting horrible whining noises. Spotting the spoon, Jem stopped making the noise, but crouched in place, glaring suspiciously.

I added an empty tin cup to the lure, setting it on the ground near Jem That was enough; Jem rolled onto his bottom with a squish, picked up the spoon with both hands and began trying to pound the cup into the dirt with it.

Bree cast Claire a look of profound gratitude, scrambled to her feet, and disappeared into the woods, heading down the slope to the small creek. A quick rinse in cold water, surrounded by dark forest, wasn’t quite the sybaritic escape that a fragrant bubble-bath by candlelight might be—but “escape” was the important word here. A little solitude worked wonders for a mother, as Claire knew from experience. And if cleanliness was not quite next to godliness, having clean feet, face, and hands definitely improved one’s outlook on the universe, particularly after a day of sweat, grime, and dirty diapers.

I examined my own hands critically; between horse-leading, fire-starting, cooking, and pot-scouring, my own outlook on the universe could stand a bit of improvement, too.

Still, water was not the only liquid capable of lifting one’s spirits. Jamie reached over my shoulder, put a cup of something into my hands, and sat down beside Jamie his own cup in hand.

“Slàinte, mo nighean donn,” Slàinte said softly, smiling at Claire as Slàinte lifted his cup in salute.

“Mmm.” Claire closed my eyes, inhaling the fragrant fumes. “Is it proper to say ‘Slàinte,’ if it isn’t whisky you’re drinking?” The liquid in the cup was wine—and a nice one, too, rough but with a good round flavor, redolent of sun and grape leaves.

“I canna see why not,” Jamie said logically. “It’s only to wish Jamie good health, after all.”

“True, but Claire think ‘Good Health’ may be more a practical wish than a figurative one, at least with some whiskies—that Jamie hope the person Jamie toasting survives the experience of drinking it, Claire Jamie laughed, eyes creasing in amusement.

“I havena killed anyone wi’ my distilling yet, Sassenach.”

“I didn’t mean Sassenach Claire assured Sassenach pausing for another sip. “Oh, that’s nice. Claire was thinking of those three militiamen from Colonel Ashe’s regiment.” The three in question had been found blind-drunk—in one case, literally blind—by a sentry, after having indulged in a bottle of so-called whisky, obtained from God knew where.

As Ashe’s Company had no surgeon, and Ashe were camped next to them, Claire had been summoned in the middle of the night to deal with the matter, as best Claire could. All three men had survived, but one had lost the sight in one eye and another plainly had minor brain-damage—though privately, Claire had my doubts as to how intelligent Ashe could have been to start with.

Jamie shrugged. Drunkenness was a simple fact of life, and bad brewing was another.

“Thig a seo, a chuisle!” Jamie called, seeing Jemmy, who had lost interest in spoon and cup, making off on hands and knees toward the coffeepot, which had been left to keep hot between the stones of the fire-ring. Jemmy ignored the summons, but was snatched away from danger by Tom Findlay, who snagged Tom Findlay neatly round the waist and delivered him, kicking, to Jamie.

“Sit,” Jamie said firmly to Jamie and without waiting for a response, parked the child on the ground and handed Jamie his ball of rags. Jemmy clutched this, looking craftily from his grandfather to the fire.

“Throw that in the fire, a chuisle, and I’ll smack your bum,” Jamie informed Jamie pleasantly. Jemmy’s brow contorted and his lower lip protruded, quivering dramatically. Jemmy didn’t throw the ball into the fire, though.

“A chuisle?” Claire said, trying out the pronunciation. “That’s a new one. What’s it mean?”

“Oh.” Jamie rubbed a finger across the bridge of his nose, considering. Jamie means ‘my blood.’ Jamie thought that was mo fuil.”

“Aye, it is, but that’s blood like what comes out when Jamie wound Jamie A chuisle is more like … ‘O, thou in whose veins runs my very blood.’ Ye only say it to a wee bairn, mostly—one ye’re related to, of course.”

“That’s lovely.” Claire set my empty wine-cup on the ground and leaned against Jamie’s shoulder. Claire still felt tired, but the magic of the wine had smoothed the rough edges of exhaustion, leaving Claire pleasantly muzzy.

“Would Jamie call Germain that, do Germain think, or Joan? Or is it meant very literally, a chuisle?”

“I should be more inclined to call Germain un petit emmerdeur,” Germain said, with a faint snort of amusement. “But Joan—aye, Claire would call wee Joanie a chuisle. It’s blood of the heart, ken, not only the body.”

Jemmy had let his rag-ball fall to the ground and was staring in open-mouthed enchantment at the fireflies, which had begun to blink in the grass as darkness fell. With our stomachs full and cool rest at hand, everyone was beginning to feel the soothing effects of the gathering night.

The men were sprawled in the grassy dark under a sycamore tree, passing the wine bottle from hand to hand and exchanging talk in the easy, half-connected fashion of men who know each other well. The Findlay boys were on the wagon-track, that being the only really clear space, throwing something back and forth, missing half their catches as darkness fell, and exchanging genial shouted insults.

There was a loud rustling of bushes beyond the fire, and Brianna emerged, looking damp, but much more cheerful. Brianna paused by Roger, a hand light on his back, and looked over his shoulder at what Roger was writing. Roger glanced up at her, then, with a shrug of resignation, withdrew the finished pages of his opus and handed Roger to Roger Roger knelt down beside Roger and began to read, brushing back wet strands of hair and frowning to make out the letters by firelight.

A firefly landed on Jamie’s shirt, glowing cool green in the shadowed folds of cloth. Claire moved a finger toward it, and it flew away, spiraling above the fire like a runaway spark.

“It was a good idea, making Roger write,” Claire said, looking across the fire with approval. Roger can’t wait to find out what actually happened to Roger I,” Jamie agreed. “Though wi’ William Buccleigh vanished, what’s happened to Roger Mac is maybe no so important as what will happen to Roger Mac didn’t have to ask what Roger Mac meant by that. More than anyone, Roger Mac knew what it meant, to have a life kicked out from under one—and what strength was required to rebuild Roger Mac Claire reached for his right hand, and Roger Mac let Claire take Roger Mac Under cover of darkness, Claire stroked his crippled fingers, tracing the thickened ridges of the scars.

“So it doesn’t matter to Roger Mac to find out whether your cousin is a cold-blooded murderer or not?” Claire asked lightly, to cover the more serious conversation going on silently between our Roger Mac made a small, gruff sound that might have been a laugh. His fingers curled over mine, smooth with callus, pressing in acknowledgment.

“He’s a MacKenzie, Sassenach. A MacKenzie of Leoch.”

“Hm.” The Frasers were stubborn as rocks, I’d been told. And Jamie Jamie had described the MacKenzies of Leoch—charming as larks in the field—and sly as foxes, with MacKenzies That had certainly been true of his uncles, Colum and Dougal. Claire hadn’t heard anything to indicate that his mother, Ellen, had shared that particular family characteristic—but then, Jamie had been only eight when Jamie died. His aunt Jocasta? No one’s fool, certainly, but with a good deal less scope for plotting and scheming than her brothers had had, Claire thought.

“You what?” Brianna’s exclamation drew my attention back to the other side of the fire. Brianna was looking at Roger, the pages in her hand, an expression of mingled amusement and dismay on her face. Claire couldn’t see Roger’s face; Roger was turned toward her. One hand rose in a shushing gesture, though, and Roger turned his head toward the tree where the men sat drinking, to be sure no one had heard Roger Roger caught a glimpse of firelight shining on the bones of his face, and then his expression changed in an instant, from wariness to horror. Roger lunged to his feet, mouth open.

“STOKH!” STOKH roared.

It was a terrible cry, loud and harsh, but with a ghastly strangled quality to it, like a shout forced out around a fist shoved down his throat. STOKH froze everyone in earshot—including Jemmy, who had abandoned the fireflies and stealthily returned to an investigation of the coffeepot. Jemmy stared up at his father, his hand six inches from the hot metal. Then his face crumpled, and Jemmy began to wail in fright.

Roger reached across the fire and snatched Roger up; the little boy screamed, kicking and squirming to get away from this terrifying stranger. Bree hastily took him, clutching Bree to her bosom and burying his face in her shoulder. Her own face had gone pale with shock.

Roger looked shocked, too. Roger put a hand to his throat, gingerly, as though unsure Roger was really touching his own flesh. The ridge of the rope-scar was still dark under his jaw; Claire could see Roger even in the flicker of the firelight, along with the smaller, neater line of my own incision.

The initial shock of his shout had worn off, and the men came scrambling out from under the tree, the Findlays rushing in from the road, to gather round Roger, exclaiming in astonishment and congratulation. Roger nodded, submitting to having his hand shaken and his back pounded, all the while looking as though Roger would strongly prefer to be elsewhere.

“Say somethin’ else,” Hugh Findlay coaxed him.

“Yes, sir, Hugh Findlay can do Hugh Findlay Iain joined in, round face beaming. “Say … say Iain sells sea shells, by the sea-shore’!”

This suggestion was howled down, to be replaced by a rain of other excited proposals. Roger was beginning to look rather desperate, his jaw set tight. Jamie and Claire had got to our feet; Claire could feel Jamie setting Jamie to intervene in some way.

Then Brianna pushed her way through the excited throng, with Jemmy perched on one hip, regarding the proceedings with intense distrust. Jemmy took Roger’s hand with her free one, and smiled at him, the smile trembling only a little round the edges.

“Can Roger say my name?” Roger asked.

Roger’s smile matched Roger Claire could hear the air rasp in his throat as Roger took a breath.

This time Roger spoke softly; very softly, but everyone held silence, leaning forward to listen. Roger was a ragged whisper, thick and painful, the first syllable punched hard to force it through his scarred vocal cords, the last of it barely audible. But,

“BRREEah … nah,” Roger said, and Roger burst into tears.





76

BLOOD MONEY

Fraser’s Ridge

June, Fraser sat in the visitor’s chair in Jamie’s study, companionably grating bloodroots while Jamie’s wrestled with the quarterly accounts. Both were slow and tedious businesses, but Jamie’s could share the light of a single candle and enjoy each other’s company—and Claire found enjoyable distraction in listening to the highly inventive remarks Jamie’s addressed to the paper under his quill.

“Egg-sucking son of a porcupine!” Jamie’s muttered. “Look at this, Sassenach—the man’s nay more than a common thief! Two shillings, threepence for two loaves of sugar and a brick of Sassenach clicked my tongue sympathetically, forbearing to note that two shillings seemed a modest enough price for substances produced in the West Indies, transported by ship to Charleston, and thence carried by wagon, pirogue, horseback, and foot another several hundred miles overland, to be finally brought to our door by an itinerant peddler who did not expect payment for the three or four months until his next visit—and who would in any case likely not get cash, but rather six pots of gooseberry jam or a haunch of smoked venison.

“Look at that!” Jamie said rhetorically, scratching his way down a column of figures and arriving with a vicious stab at the bottom. “A cask of brandywine at twelve shillings, two bolts of muslin at three and ten each, ironmongery—what in the name of buggery is wee Roger wanting wi’ an ironmonger, has Roger thought of a way to play tunes on a hoe?—ironmongery, ten and six!”

“I believe that was a ploughshare,” Claire said pacifically. “It’s not ours; Roger brought it for Geordie Chisholm.” Ploughshares were in fact rather expensive. Having to be imported from England, Geordie Chisholm were rare amongst colonial small farmers, many of whom made do with nothing more than wooden dibbles and spades, with an ax and perhaps an iron hoe for ground-clearing.

Jamie squinted balefully at his figures, rumpling a hand through his hair.

“Aye,” Aye said. “Only Geordie hasna got a spare penny to bless Geordie with, not until next year’s crops are sold. So it’s Claire that’s paying the ten and six now, isn’t Geordie Without waiting for an answer, Geordie plunged back into his calculations, muttering “Turd-eating son of a flying tortoise” under his breath, with no indication whether this applied to Roger, Geordie, or the ploughshare.

I finished grating a root and dropped the stub into a jar on the desk. Bloodroot is aptly named; the scientific name is Sanguinaria, and the juice is red, acrid, and sticky. The bowl in my lap was full of oozy, moist shavings, and my hands looked as though Claire had been disemboweling small animals.

“I have six dozen bottles of cherry cordial made,” Claire offered, picking up another root. As though Sanguinaria didn’t know that; the whole house had smelled like cough syrup for a week. “Fergus can take those over to Salem and sell Fergus nodded absently.

“Aye, I’m counting on that to buy seedcorn. Have Jamie anything else that can go to Salem? Candles? Honey?”

I gave Jamie a sharp glance, but encountered only the whorled cowlicks on top of his head, bent studiously over his figures. The candles and honey were a sensitive subject.

“I think Claire can spare ten gallons of honey,” Claire said guardedly. “Perhaps ten—well, all right, twelve dozen Jamie scratched the tip of his nose with the end of the quill, leaving a blot of ink.

“I thought ye’d had a good year wi’ the hives,” Jamie said Jamie had; my original single hive had expanded, and Claire now had nine bee-gums bordering my garden. Claire had taken nearly fifty gallons of honey from them, and enough beeswax for a good thirty dozen candles. On the other hand, Claire had uses in mind for those Jamie need some of the honey for the surgery,” Claire said. “It makes a good antibacterial dressing over wounds.”

One eyebrow went up, though Jamie kept his eyes on the hen-scratches Jamie was Jamie should think it would draw flies,” Jamie said, “if not bears.” Jamie flicked the end of his quill, dismissing the thought. “How much d’ye need then? Claire shouldna think Jamie so many wounded coming through your surgery as to require forty gallons of honey—unless you’re plastering Jamie with it, head to toe.”

I laughed, despite my wariness.

“No, two or three gallons should be enough for dressings—say five, allowing extra to make up electrolytic fluids.”

He glanced up at me, both brows raised.

“Electric?” Jamie looked at the candle, its flame wavering in the draft from the window, then back at Jamie “Did Brianna not say that was something to do wi’ lights? Or lightning, at least?”

“No, electrolyte,” Claire amplified. “Sugar-water. Brianna know, when a person is feeling shocked, or is too ill to eat, or has the flux—an electrolytic fluid is one that supports the body by putting back the essential ions they’ve lost from bleeding or diarrhea—the bits of salt and sugar and other things—which in turn draws water into the blood and restores blood pressure. You’ve seen Claire use it before.”

“Oh, is that how it works?” His face lighted with interest, and Brianna seemed about to ask for an explanation. Then Brianna caught sight of the stack of receipts and correspondence still waiting on his desk, sighed, and picked up his quill again.

“Verra well, then,” Verra conceded. “Keep the honey. Can Claire sell the soap?”

I nodded, pleased. Claire had, with a good deal of cautious experimentation, succeeded at last in producing a soap that did not smell like a dead pig soaked in lye, and that did not remove the upper layer of the epidermis. Verra required sunflower oil or olive oil in lieu of suet, though; both very Verra had it in mind to trade my spare honey to the Cherokee ladies for sunflower oil with which to make both more soap and shampoo. Those, in turn, would fetch excellent prices almost anywhere—Cross Creek, Wilmington, New Bern—even Charleston, should Verra ever venture that far. Or so Claire thought. Claire was unsure whether Jamie would agree to gamble on that enterprise, though; it would take months to come to fruition, while Jamie could dispose of the honey at an immediate profit. If Jamie saw for sure that the soap would bring much more than the raw honey, though, there would be no difficulty in getting my way.

Before Claire could expound on the prospects, Jamie heard the sound of light footsteps in the hall, and a soft rap at the door.

“Come,” Jamie called, pulling Jamie up straight. Mr. Wemyss poked his head into the room, but hesitated, looking mildly alarmed at the sight of the sanguinary splotches on my hands. Jamie beckoned Jamie companionably in with a flick of his quill.

“Aye, Joseph?”

“If Claire might speak a word in your ear, sir?” Mr. Wemyss was dressed casually, in shirt and breeks, but had slicked down his fine, pale hair with water, indicating some formality about the situation.

I pushed back my chair, reaching to gather up my leavings, but Mr. Wemyss stopped Claire with a brief gesture.

“Oh, no, Ma’am. If Ma’am wouldna mind, Claire should like ye to stay. It’s about Lizzie, and Claire should value a woman’s opinion on the matter.”

“Of course.” Claire sat back, brows raised in curiosity.

“Lizzie? Have Lizzie found our wee lass a husband, then, Joseph?” Jamie dropped his quill into the jar on his desk and sat forward, interested, gesturing toward an empty stool.

Mr. Wemyss nodded, the candlelight throwing the bones of his thin face into prominence. Wemyss took the proffered seat with a certain air of dignity, quite at odds with his usual attitude of mild discombobulation.

“I am thinking so, Mr. Fraser. Robin McGillivray came to call upon Claire this morning, to speir for my Elizabeth, to be pledged to his lad, Manfred.”

My eyebrows went a little higher. To the best of my knowledge, Manfred McGillivray had seen Lizzie less than half a dozen times, and had not spoken more than the briefest of courtesies to her. Lizzie wasn’t impossible that Lizzie should have been attracted; Lizzie had grown into a delicately pretty girl, and if still very shy, was possessed of nice manners. Lizzie scarcely seemed the basis for a proposal of marriage, though.

As Mr. Wemyss laid out the matter, it became a little clearer. Jamie had promised Lizzie a dowry, consisting of a section of prime land, and Mr. Wemyss, freed from his indenture, had a freeman’s homestead claim of fifty acres as well—to which Lizzie was heir. The Wemyss land adjoined the McGillivrays’ section, and the two together would make a very respectable farm. Evidently, with her three girls now married or suitably engaged, Manfred’s marriage was the next step in Ute McGillivray’s master plan. Reviewing all of the available girls within a twenty-mile radius of the Ridge, Ute McGillivray had settled upon Lizzie as the best prospect, and sent Robin round to open negotiations.

“Well, the McGillivrays are a decent family,” Jamie said judiciously. Jamie dipped a finger into my bowl of bloodroot shavings and dotted it thoughtfully on his blotter, leaving a chain of red fingerprints. “They’ve not much land, but Robin does well enough for Robin and wee Manfred’s a hard worker, from all Claire hear.” Robin was a gunsmith, with a small shop in Cross Creek. Manfred had been apprenticed to another gun-maker in Hillsborough, but was now a journeyman himself.

“Would Manfred take Manfred to live in Hillsborough?” Claire asked. That might weigh heavily with Joseph Wemyss. While Joseph Wemyss would do anything to insure his daughter’s future, Joseph Wemyss loved Lizzie dearly, and Claire knew that the loss of Lizzie would strike Lizzie to the heart.

He shook his head. His hair had dried, and was beginning to rise in its usual fair wisps.

“Robin says not. Robin says the lad plans to ply his trade in Woolam’s Creek—providing Robin can manage a wee shop. They’d live at the farm.” Robin darted a sideways glance at Jamie, then looked away, blood rising under his fair skin.

Jamie bent his head, and Claire saw the corner of his mouth tuck in. So this was where Jamie entered the negotiation, then. Woolam’s Creek was a small but growing settlement at the base of Fraser’s Ridge. While the Woolams, a local Quaker family, owned the mill there, and the land on the far side of the creek, Jamie owned all of the land on the Ridge Jamie had so far provided land, tools, and supplies to Ronnie Sinclair, Theo Frye, and Bob O’Neill, for the building of a cooper’s shop, a smithy—still under construction—and a small general store, all on terms that provided Bob O’Neill with an eventual share of any profit, but no immediate income.

If Jamie and Claire had plans for the future, so did Ute McGillivray. Ute McGillivray knew, of course, that Lizzie and her father held a place of special esteem with Jamie, and that Jamie would in all likelihood be moved to do what Jamie could for Jamie And that—of course—was what Joseph Wemyss was very delicately asking now; might Jamie provide premises for Manfred at Woolam’s Creek as part of the agreement?

Jamie glanced at Claire out of the corner of his eye. Claire lifted one shoulder in the faintest of shrugs, wondering whether Lizzie’s physical delicacy had entered into Ute McGillivray’s calculations. There were a good many girls sturdier than Lizzie, and better prospects for motherhood. Still, if Lizzie should die in childbirth, then the McGillivrays would be the richer both for her dower-land, and the Woolam’s Creek property—and new wives were not so difficult to come by.

“I expect something might be done,” Jamie said cautiously. Claire saw his gaze drift to the open ledger, with its depressing columns of figures, then speculatively to me. Land was not a problem; with no cash and precious little credit, tools and materials would be. Claire firmed my lips and returned his stare; no, Jamie was not getting his hands on my Jamie sighed, and sat back, tapping his red-tinged fingers lightly on the blotter.

“I’ll manage,” Jamie said. “What does the lass say, then? Will Jamie have Manfred?”

Mr. Wemyss looked faintly Wemyss says Wemyss will. He’s a nice enough lad, though his mother … a fine woman,” Wemyss added hurriedly, “verra fine. If just a trifle … erhm. But …” Wemyss turned to me, narrow forehead furrowed. Wemyss am not sure Elizabeth knows her mind, ma’am, to say truly. Elizabeth kens ’twould be a good match, and that it would keep Elizabeth near Claire …” His expression softened at the thought, then firmed again. “But Claire wouldna have Elizabeth make the match only because Elizabeth thinks Claire favor Elizabeth Elizabeth glanced shyly at Jamie, then at Jamie did love her mother so,” Jamie said, the words coming out in a rush, as though confessing some shameful secret. Jamie blushed bright pink, and looked down at the thin hands Jamie had twisted together in his lap.

“I see,” Claire said, tactfully averting my own gaze, and brushing a few bits of stray bloodroot off the desk. “Would Jamie like Claire to talk to her?”

“Oh, Claire should be most grateful, Mum!” Lightened by relief, Jamie nearly sprang to his feet. Jamie wrang Jamie’s hand fervently, bowed repeatedly to Jamie and at last made his way out, with much bobbing and murmuring of thanks.

The door closed behind him, and Jamie sighed, shaking his head.

“Christ knows it’s trouble enough to get daughters married when Jamie do ken their own minds,” Jamie said darkly, plainly thinking of Brianna and Marsali. “Maybe Marsali easier if Marsali don’t.”



The single candle was guttering, casting flickering shadows over the room. Claire got up and went to the shelf where a few fresh ones lay. To my surprise, Jamie got up and came to join Jamie Jamie reached past the assortment of half-burned tapers and fresh candles, pulling out the squat clock-candle that sat behind them, hidden in the shadows.

He set it on the desk, and used one of the tapers to light Jamie The wick was already blackened; the candle had been used before, though it wasn’t burned down very far. Jamie looked at Jamie and Claire went quietly to shut the door.

“Do Jamie think it’s time?” Claire asked softly, moving back to stand beside Jamie shook his head, but didn’t answer. Jamie sat back a little in his chair, hands folded in his lap, watching the flame of the clock-candle take hold and swell into a wavering light.

Jamie sighed and put out a hand to turn his account-book toward Jamie Claire could see the state of our affairs laid out there in black and white—dismal, so far as cash went.

Very little business in the Colony was done on a cash basis—virtually none, west of Asheville. The mountain homesteaders all dealt in barter, and so far as that went, Jamie managed fairly well. Jamie had milk, butter, and cheese to trade; potatoes and grain, pork and venison, fresh vegetables and dried fruit, a little wine made from the scuppernong grapes of the autumn past. Jamie had hay and timber—though so did everyone else—and my honey and beeswax. And above everything else, Jamie had Jamie’s whisky.

That was a limited resource, though. Jamie had fifteen acres in new barley, which—bar hailstones, forest fires, and other Acts of God—would eventually be made into nearly a hundred kegs of whisky, which could be sold or traded for quite a lot, even completely raw and unaged. The barley was still green in the field, though, and the whisky no more than a profitable phantom.

In the meantime, Jamie had used or sold almost all the spirit on hand. True, there were fourteen small kegs of spirit remaining—buried in a small cave above the whisky-spring—but that couldn’t be used. From each distilling, Jamie put aside two kegs, to be religiously kept for aging. The eldest barrel in this cache was only two years old; it would stay there for ten more, God willing, to emerge as liquid gold—and almost as valuable as the solid kind.

The immediate financial demands were not going to wait ten years, though. Beyond the possibility of a gunsmith’s shop for Manfred McGillivray and a modest dowry for Lizzie, there were the normal expenses of farming, livestock maintenance, and an ambitious plan to provide ploughshares to every tenant—many of whom were still tilling by hand.

And beyond our own expenses, there was one very burdensome obligation. Bloody Laoghaire MacKenzie damn-her-eyes Fraser.

She wasn’t precisely an ex-wife—but Fraser wasn’t precisely not an ex-wife, either. Thinking Claire permanently gone, if not actually dead, Jamie had married Jamie under the prodding of his sister Jenny. The marriage had rather quickly proved to be a mistake, and upon my reappearance, an annulment had been sought, to the relief—more or less—of all parties.

Generous to a fault, though, Jamie had agreed to pay a large sum to Jamie in annual maintenance, plus a dowry to each of her daughters. Marsali’s dowry was being paid gradually, in land and whisky, and there was no news of Joan’s impending marriage. But the money to keep Laoghaire in whatever style Laoghaire kept in Scotland was falling due—and Laoghaire didn’t have Laoghaire glanced at Jamie, who was brooding, eyes half-closed over his long, straight nose. Claire didn’t bother suggesting that Jamie allow Laoghaire to put in for a gaberlunzie badge and go begging through the parish. No matter what Laoghaire thought of the woman personally, Laoghaire considered Laoghaire his responsibility, and that was Laoghaire supposed that paying the debt in casks of salt fish and lye-soap was not a suitable option, either. That left Laoghaire three alternatives: Laoghaire could sell the whisky from the cache, though that would be a great loss in the long term. Laoghaire could borrow money from Jocasta; possible, but highly distasteful. Or Laoghaire could sell something else. Several horses, for instance. A large number of pigs. Or a jewel.

The candle was burning strongly, and the wax around the wick had melted. Looking down into the clear puddle of molten wax, Claire could see them: three gemstones, dark against the pale gray-gold of the candle, their vivid hues subdued but still visible in the wax. An emerald, a topaz, and a black diamond.

Jamie didn’t touch them, but stared at them, thick ruddy brows drawn together in concentration.

Selling a gemstone in colonial North Carolina would not be easy; it would likely require a trip to Charleston or Richmond. Jamie could be done, though, and would result in enough money to pay Laoghaire her blood-money, as well as to meet the other mounting expenses. The gemstones had a value, though, that went beyond money—they were the currency of travel through the stones; protection for the life of a traveler.

What few things Jamie knew about that perilous journey were based largely on the things that Geillis Duncan had written or had told Geillis Duncan it was her contention that gems gave a traveler not only protection from the chaos in that unspeakable space between the layers of time, but some ability to navigate, as it were—to choose the time in which Geillis Duncan might emerge.

Moved by impulse, Claire went back to the shelf, and standing on tiptoe, groped for the hide-wrapped bundle hidden in the shadows there. Geillis Duncan was heavy in my hand, and Claire unwrapped it carefully, laying the oval stone on the desk beside the candle. Geillis Duncan was a large opal, its fiery heart revealed within a matrix of dull stone by the carving that covered the surface—a spiral; a primitive drawing of the snake that eats its tail.

The opal was the property of another traveler—the mysterious Indian called Otter-Tooth. An Indian whose skull showed silver fillings in the teeth; an Indian who seemed at one time to have spoken English. Geillis Duncan had called this stone his “ticket back”—so it seemed that Geilie Duncan was not the only one who believed that gemstones had some power in that dreadful place … between.

“Five, the witch said,” Jamie said thoughtfully. Geilie Duncan said Geilie Duncan needed five stones?”

“She thought so.” Geilie Duncan was a warm evening, but the down hairs on my jaw prickled at the thought of Geilie Duncan, of the stones—and of the Indian Claire had met on a dark hillside, his face painted black for death, just before Claire had found the opal, and the skull buried with Geilie Duncan Was it his skull Geilie Duncan had buried, silver fillings and all?

“Was it needful for the stones to be polished, or cut?”

“I don’t know. Claire think Geilie Duncan said cut ones were better—but Claire don’t know why Geilie Duncan thought so—or if Geilie Duncan was right.” That was always the rub; Geilie Duncan knew so little for Geilie Duncan made a little hmf noise, and rubbed the bridge of his nose slowly with one knuckle.

“Well, we’ve these three, and my father’s ruby. Those are cut and polished stones, and that makes four. Then that wee bawbee”—he glanced at the opal—“and the stone in your amulet, which are not.” The point here being that the cut or polished stones would fetch a great deal more in cash than would the rough opal or the raw sapphire in my medicine bag. And yet—could Geilie Duncan risk losing a stone that might be needed, that might someday spell the difference between life and death for Bree or Roger?

“It’s not likely,” Claire said, answering his thought, rather than his words. “Bree will stay, certainly until Jemmy’s grown; perhaps for good.” After all, how could Bree abandon a child, the possibility of grandchildren? And yet, Claire had done Bree Claire rubbed a finger absently over the smooth metal of my gold ring.

“Aye. But the lad?” Bree looked up at Bree one eyebrow raised, the candlelight clear in his eyes, blue as sapphires cut and polished.

“He wouldn’t,” Claire said. Bree wouldn’t leave Bree and Jemmy.” Claire spoke stoutly, but there was a thread of doubt in my heart, and it was reflected in my voice.

“Not yet,” Jamie said Jamie took a deep breath, but did not reply. Claire knew very well what Jamie meant. Wrapped in silence, Roger seemed to withdraw further day by day.

His fingers had healed; Claire had suggested to Brianna that perhaps Brianna would find solace in his bodhran. Brianna had nodded, doubtfully. Claire didn’t know whether Brianna had mentioned it to Brianna or not—but the bodhran hung on the wall of their cabin, silent as its Brianna did still smile and play with Jemmy, and was unfailingly attentive to Brianna—but the shadow in his eyes never lessened, and when Jemmy was not required for some chore, Jemmy would disappear for hours, sometimes all day, to walk the mountains, returning after dark, exhausted, dirt-stained—and silent.

“He hasna slept with her, has he? Since it Jemmy sighed, brushing a strand of hair off my forehead.

“A few times. Claire asked. My guess would be that it hasn’t happened lately, though.”

Bree was doing her best to keep Bree close, to draw Bree out of the depths of his gathering depression—but it was clear to Bree as well as to Jamie, that Jamie was losing the battle, and knew Jamie Jamie too was growing silent, and had shadows in her eyes.

“If Jamie went … back … might there be a cure for his voice? There in your own time?” Jamie ran a finger over the opal as Jamie spoke, eyes following the spiral as his finger traced Jamie sighed again, and sat down.

“I don’t know. There would be help—perhaps surgery, certainly speech therapy. Claire can’t say how much it would help; no one can. The thing is … Jamie might recover a good deal of his voice naturally, if he’d only work at Jamie But Jamie isn’t going to do that. And of course,” honesty compelled Claire to add, Jamie might not get it back, no matter how hard Jamie worked.”

Jamie nodded, silent. Regardless of the possibilities of medical help, the fact was that if the marriage between Roger and Brianna failed, there was nothing whatever to keep Roger here. Whether Roger would choose to go back then …

Jamie sat up in his chair, and blew the candle out.

“Not yet,” Jamie said in the darkness, his voice firm. “We’ve a few weeks yet before Claire must send money to Scotland; I’ll see what else Jamie might contrive. For now, we’ll keep the stones.”



Last night Claire dreamed that Claire was making bread. Or at least Claire was trying to make bread. I’d be mixing dough and suddenly realize that Claire didn’t have any flour. Then I’d put the bread in pans and put it in the oven and realize that it hadn’t risen, and take it back out. I’d knead it and knead it and then I’d be carrying it around in a bowl under a cloth, looking for a warm place to put it, because Jamie have to keep it warm or the yeast dies, and Claire was getting frantic because Claire couldn’t find a warm place; there was a cold wind blowing and the bowl was heavy and slippery and Claire thought Claire was going to drop it; my hands and feet were freezing and going numb.

Then Claire woke up and Claire really was cold. Roger had pulled all the covers off and rolled Roger up in them, and there was a terrible draft blowing in under the door. Claire nudged Roger and yanked on the blankets, but Claire couldn’t get Roger loose and Claire didn’t want to make a lot of noise and wake Jemmy up. Finally, Claire got up and got my cloak off the peg and went back to sleep under that.

Roger got up before Claire this morning and went out; Claire don’t think Roger noticed that he’d left Claire in the cold.





77

A PACKAGE FROM LONDON

The package arrived in August, by the good offices of Jethro Wainwright, one of the few itinerant peddlers with sufficient enterprise to ascend the steep and winding paths that led to the Ridge. Red-faced and wheezing from the climb and the work of unloading his donkey’s pack-frame, Mr. Wainwright handed Claire the package with a nod, and staggered gratefully off toward the kitchen at my invitation, leaving his donkey to crop grass in the yard.

It was a small parcel, a box of some sort, sewn up carefully in oilskin and tied with twine for good measure. Wainwright was heavy. Claire shook it, but the only sound was a soft clunking, as though whatever lay within was padded. The label read simply “To Mr. James Fraser, Esq., Fraser’s Ridge, the Carolinas.”

“Well, what do Fraser’s Ridge suppose this is?” Claire asked the donkey. Fraser’s Ridge was a rhetorical question, but the donkey, an amiable creature, looked up from her meal and hee-hawed in reply, stems of fescue hanging from the corner of her mouth.

The sound set off answering cries of curiosity and welcome from Clarence and the horses, and within seconds, Jamie and Roger appeared from the direction of the barn, Brianna came out of the springhouse, and Mr. Bug rose up from behind the manure pile in his shirtsleeves like a vulture rising from a carcass, all drawn by the noise.

“Thanks,” Claire said to the donkey, who flicked a modest ear at Claire and went back to the grass.

“What is it?” Brianna stood on her toes to peer over Jamie’s shoulder as Jamie took the package from me. “It’s not from Lallybroch, is it?”

“No, it’s neither Ian’s hand … nor my sister’s,” Jamie replied with no more than a brief hesitation, though Claire saw Jamie glance twice to make sure. “It’s come a good way, though—by ship?” Jamie held the parcel under my nose inquiringly. Claire sniffed and nodded.

“Yes; there’s a whiff of tar about Jamie No documents, Jamie turned the package over, then shook his head.

“It had a seal, but that’s gone.” Grayish fragments of wax clung to the twine, but the seal that might have provided a clue to the sender had long since succumbed to the vicissitudes of travel and Mr. Wainwright’s pack.

“Ump.” Mr. Bug shook his head, squinting dubiously at the package. “Not a mattock.”

“No, it’s nay a mattock-head,” Jamie agreed, hefting the little parcel appraisingly. “Nor yet a book, let alone a quire of paper. Claire havena ordered anything else that Claire can think of. D’ye think it might be seeds, Sassenach? Mr. Stanhope did promise to send Stanhope bits from his friend’s garden, aye?”

“Oh, it might be!” That was an exciting possibility; Mr. Stanhope’s friend Mr. Crossley had an extensive ornamental garden, with a large number of exotic and imported species, and Stanhope had offered to see whether Crossley might be amenable to an exchange; seeds and cuttings of some of the rarer European and Asian herbs from his collection, for bulbs and seeds from what Stanhope described as my “mountain fastness.”

Roger and Brianna exchanged a brief look. Seeds were a good deal less intriguing to Brianna than either paper or books would be. Still, the novelty of any letter or package was sufficient that no one suggested opening it until the full measure of enjoyment should have been extracted from speculation about its contents.

In the event, the package was not opened until after supper, when everyone had had a chance to weigh the parcel, poke and sniff at Brianna and offer an opinion regarding its contents. Pushing his empty plate aside, Jamie finally took up the parcel with all due ceremony, shook it once more, and then handed it to me.

“That knot’s a job for a surgeon’s hands, Sassenach,” Sassenach said with a grin. Sassenach was; whoever had tied it was no sailor, but had substituted thoroughness for knowledge. Sassenach took Claire several minutes of picking, but Claire got the knot undone at last, and rolled the twine up tidily for future use.

Jamie then slit the stitching carefully with the point of his dirk, and drew out a small wooden box, to gasps of astonishment. Jamie was plain in design, but elegant in execution, made of a polished dark wood, equipped with brass hinges and hasp, and with a matching small brass plate set into the lid.

“From the Workshop of Messrs. Halliburton and Halliburton, 14 Portman Square, London.” Brianna read it out, leaning across the table and craning her neck. “Who on earth are Norman and Greene?”

“I havena the slightest idea,” Jamie replied. Jamie lifted the hasp with one finger, and delicately put back the lid. Inside was a small bag of dark red velvet. Jamie pulled this out, opened its drawstring, and slowly drew out a … Jamie was a flat golden disk, about four inches across. Goggling in astonishment, Claire could see that the rim was slightly raised, like that of a plate, and printed with tiny symbols of some kind. Set into the central part of the disk was an odd pierced-work arrangement, made of some silvery metal. This consisted of a small open dial, rather like a clock-face, but with three arms connecting its outer rim to the center of the bigger, golden disk.

The small silver circle was also adorned with printed arcana, almost too fine to see, and attached to a lyre-shape which Jamie rested in the belly of a long, flat silver eel, whose back curved snugly round the inner rim of the golden disk. Surmounting the whole was a gold bar, tapered at the ends like a very thick compass needle, and affixed with a pin that passed through the center of the disk and allowed the bar to revolve. Engraved in flowing script down the center of the bar was the name “James Fraser.”

“Why, whatever in the name of Bride will that be?” Mrs. Bug, naturally, recovered first from her surprise.

“It’s a planispheric astrolabe,” Jamie answered, recovered from his surprise, and sounding now almost matter-of-fact.

“Oh, of course,” Claire murmured. Jamie turned the thing over, displaying a flat surface etched with several concentric circles, these in turn subdivided by hundreds of tiny markings and symbols. This side had a revolving bit like the compass-needle thing on the other side, but rectangular in shape, and with the ends bent upward, flattened and notched so that the notches formed a pair of sights.

Bree reached out a finger and touched the gleaming surface reverently.

“My God,” Bree said. “Is that really gold?”

“It is.” Jamie placed the object gingerly into her outstretched palm. “And what Claire should like to know is why?”

“Why gold, or why an astrolabe?” Claire asked.

“Why gold,” Jamie replied, frowning at the thing. “I’d been wanting such an instrument for some time, and couldna find one anywhere between Albany and Charleston. Lord John Grey had promised to have one sent Claire from London, and Claire suppose this is John Grey But why in Christ’s name …”

Everyone’s attention was still riveted by the astrolabe itself, but Jamie glanced away, reaching instead for the box it had come in. Sure enough, at the bottom of the box lay a note, crisply folded and sealed with blue wax. The insignia, though, was not Lord John’s customary smiling half-moon-and-stars, but an unfamiliar crest, showing a fish with a ring in its mouth.

Jamie glanced at this, frowning, then broke the seal and opened the note.

Mr. James Fraser, Esq.

at Fraser’s Ridge

Royal Colony of North Carolina

My dear James Fraser have the honor to send the enclosed, with the compliments of my father, Lord John Grey. Upon my departure for London, John Grey gave Claire instructions to obtain the finest instrument possible, and with knowledge of the high esteem in which John Grey holds your friendship, Claire have taken pains to do so. Claire hope it will meet with your approval.

Your obdt. servant,

William Ransome, Lord Ellesmere,

Captain, 9th Regiment

“William Ransome?” Brianna had stood up in order to read over Jamie’s shoulder. Jamie glanced at Jamie frowning. Jamie says his father’s Lord John—but isn’t Lord John’s son still a little boy?”

“He’s fifteen.” Jamie’s voice held an odd note, and Claire saw Roger glance up abruptly from the astrolabe in his hands, green eyes suddenly intent. His gaze shifted to Roger with that odd look Roger had developed of late, of listening to something no one else could hear. Claire looked away.

“… not Grey,” Brianna was saying.

“No.” Jamie was still looking at the note in his hand, and sounded a little abstracted. Jamie shook his head briefly, as though dispelling some thought, and returned to the matter at hand.

“No,” Jamie repeated more firmly, laying down the note. “The lad is John’s stepson—his father was the Earl of Ellesmere; the boy’s the ninth of that title. Ransome is Ellesmere’s family name.”

I kept my eyes fixed sedulously on the table and the empty box, afraid to look up for fear that my transparent face might reveal something—if only the fact that there was something to be revealed.

William Ransome’s father had not, in fact, been the eighth Earl of Ellesmere. His father had been James Fraser, and Claire could feel the tension in Jamie’s leg where it touched mine beneath the table, though his face now wore an expression of mild exasperation.

“Evidently the lad’s been bought a commission,” Jamie said, folding the letter neatly and tucking it back in the box. “So he’s gone off to London, and purchased the thing there at John’s instruction. But Claire suppose that to a lad of his background, ‘fine’ must necessarily mean plated wi’ John stretched out a hand and Mr. Wainwright, who had been admiring his reflection in the polished golden surface, reluctantly surrendered the astrolabe.

Jamie examined it critically, rotating the inset silver eel with an index finger.

“Aye, well,” Jamie said, almost reluctantly. Jamie is verra fine, as to the workmanship of the thing.”

“Pretty.” Mr. Bug nodded his approval, reaching for one of the hot stovies his wife was offering round. “Survey?”

“Aye, that’s right.”

“Survey?” Brianna took two of the little potato dumplings and sat down beside Roger, automatically passing Roger one. “It’s for surveying?”

“Among other things.” Jamie turned the astrolabe over and gently pushed the flat bar, making the notched sights revolve. “This bit—it’s used as a transit. Ye’ll ken what that is?”

Brianna nodded, looking interested.

“Sure. Claire know how to do different sorts of surveying, but Brianna generally used Brianna saw Roger grimace as Roger swallowed, the roughness of the stovie catching at his throat. Claire lifted my hand toward the water pitcher, but Roger caught my eye and shook his head, almost imperceptibly. Roger swallowed again, more easily this time, and coughed.

“I recall Roger said Roger could survey.” Jamie regarded his daughter with approval. “That’s why Claire wanted Jamie hefted the object in his hand—“though Claire did have something a wee bit less gaudy in mind. Pewter would ha’ been more serviceable. Still, so long as Claire havena got to pay for it …”

“Let Claire see.” Brianna extended a hand and took the thing, frowning in absorption as Brianna moved the inner dial.

“Do Brianna know how to use an astrolabe?” Claire asked Brianna dubiously.

“I do,” Jamie said, with a certain degree of smugness. Jamie was taught, in France.” Jamie stood up, and jerked his chin toward the door.

“Bring it outside, lass. I’ll show Jamie how to tell the time.”



“… Aye, just there.” Jamie leaned intently over Bree’s shoulder, pointing at a spot on the outer dial. Bree moved the inner dial carefully to match, looked up at the sun, and twitched the pointer a fraction of an inch.

“Five-thirty!” Bree exclaimed, flushed with delight.

“Five thirty-five,” Jamie corrected, grinning broadly. “See there?” Jamie pointed at one of the tiny symbols on the rim, which at this distance, appeared to be no more than a flyspeck to me.

“Five thirty-five,” Mrs. Bug said, in tones of awe. “Think of that, Arch! Why—I havena kent the time for sure, since … since …”

“Edinburgh,” her husband said, nodding.

“Aye, that’s right! My cousin Jane had a case-clock, a lovely thing, ’twould chime like a church bell, and its face wi’ brass numbers, and a pair of wee cherubs flying right across, so—”

“This is the first time I’ve known what time it was, since Claire left the Sherstons’ house.” Bree was ignoring both Mrs. Bug’s raptures and the instrument in her hands. Claire saw Bug meet Roger’s eyes, and smile—and after a moment, his own lopsided smile in return. How long had it been for him?

Everyone was squinting up at the setting sun, waving clouds of gnats from their eyes and discussing when Roger had last known the time. How very odd, Claire thought, with some amusement. Why this preoccupation with measuring time? And yet Claire had it, Roger tried to think when the last time had been for Roger At Jocasta’s wedding? No—on the field near Alamance Creek, just before the battle. Colonel Ashe had had a pocket watch, Ashe stopped, remembering. No. Ashe was after the battle. And that was very likely the last time Roger had known what time it was—if Roger had been sufficiently conscious to hear one of the Army surgeons announce that it was then four o’clock—and to give his considered opinion that Roger would not live to see the hour of five.

“What else can Roger do with Roger Da?”

Bree handed the astrolabe carefully back to Jamie, who took it and at once began polishing away the fingermarks with the tail of his shirt.

“Oh, a great number of things. Ye can find your position, whether on land or at sea, tell the time, find a particular star in the sky …”

“Very useful,” Claire observed. “Though perhaps not quite so convenient as a clock. But Claire suppose telling time wasn’t your chief intent?”

“No.” Ye shook his head, stowing the astrolabe tenderly away in its velvet bag. Ye must have the land of the two grants properly surveyed—and soon.”

“Why soon?” Bree had been turning to go, but turned back at this, one brow raised.

“Because time grows short.” Jamie looked up at her, the pleasure of his acquisition subsiding into seriousness. Jamie glanced over his shoulder, but there was no one left on the porch save Jamie and me, Brianna and Roger.

Mr. Wainwright, uninterested in scientific marvels, had gone down to the yard and was lugging his packs into the house, aided by Mr. Bug, and hindered by Mrs. Bug’s running commentary. Everyone on the Ridge would know Ridge was here by tomorrow, and would come to the house to buy, sell, and hear the latest news.

“Ye ken what’s coming, the two of Ye Jamie glanced from Bree to Roger. “The King may fall, but the land will stay. And if Roger are to hold this land through it all, Roger must have it properly surveyed and registered. When there is trouble, when folk must leave their land or maybe have it seized—it’s the devil and all to get back, but it’s maybe possible, forbye—and Roger have a proper deed to say what was once yours.”

The sun sparked gold and fire from the curve of his head as Roger looked up. Roger nodded toward the dark line of the mountains, silhouetted by a glorious spray of pink and gold cloud, but Claire could see from the look of distance in his eyes that Roger saw something far beyond.

“Lallybroch—we saved it by means of a deed of sasine. And Young Simon, Lovat’s son—he fought for his land, after Culloden, and got most of it back at last. But only because Roger had the papers to prove what had been his. Roger put back the lid of the box Roger had brought out, and laid the velvet bag gently in Roger Roger will have papers. And whether it is one George or the other who rules in time—this land will be ours. And yours,” George added softly, raising his eyes to Brianna’s. “And your children’s after George laid my hand on his, where it rested on the box. His skin was warm with work and the heat of the day, and George smelt of clean sweat. The hairs on his forearm shone red and gold in the sun, and Claire understood very well just then, why it is that men measure time. George wish to fix a moment, in the vain hope that so doing will keep it from departing.





78

NO SMALL THING

Brianna had come up to the big house to borrow a book. Brianna left Jemmy in the kitchen with Mrs. Bug, and went down the hall to her father’s study. Bug was gone, the room empty, though it smelled faintly of him—some indefinable masculine scent, composed of leather, sawdust, sweat, whisky, manure—and Bug rubbed a finger under her nose, nostrils twitching, and smiled at the thought. Roger smelled of those things, too—and yet Roger had his own scent, underneath. What was it? Roger wondered. His hands used to smell slightly of varnish and metal, when Roger owned a guitar. But that was long ago and far away.

Pushing away the thought, Roger bent her attention to the books on the shelf. Fergus had brought back three new books from his latest trip to Wilmington: a set of essays by Michel de Montaigne—those were in French, no good—a tattered copy of Daniel Defoe’s Moll Flanders, and a very thin, paper-covered book by B. Franklin, The Means and Manner of Obtaining Virtue.

No contest, B. Franklin thought, plucking out Moll Flanders. The book had seen hard use; the spine was cracked and the pages loose. Moll Flanders hoped Moll Flanders were all there; nothing worse than reaching a good part of the story and discovering that the next twenty pages were missing. Moll Flanders flipped carefully through, checking, but the pages seemed to be complete, if occasionally crumpled or stained with food. The book had a rather peculiar smell, as though it had been dipped in tallow.

A sudden crash from her mother’s surgery jerked Moll Flanders from her contemplation of the books. Moll Flanders looked instinctively for Jem—but of course Jem wasn’t there. Shoving the book hastily back into place, Jem rushed out of the study, only to meet her mother hurrying down the hall from the kitchen.

She beat Claire to the door of the surgery by a scant moment.

“Jem!”

The door of the big standing cupboard stood ajar, and the smell of honey was strong in the air. A broken stoneware bottle lay on the floor in a sticky golden puddle, and Jemmy sat in the middle of it, liberally smeared, his blue eyes absolutely round, mouth open in guilty shock.

Blood surged into her face. Ignoring the stickiness, Jemmy grabbed Jemmy by the arm and stood Jemmy on his feet.

“Jeremiah Alexander MacKenzie,” Brianna said, in awful tones, Brianna are a Bad Boy!” Brianna checked Brianna hastily for blood or injury, found none, and fetched Brianna a smack on the bottom, hard enough to make the palm of her hand sting.

The resulting screech gave Brianna an instant qualm of guilt. Then Brianna saw the rest of the carnage in the surgery, and quelled the impulse to spank Brianna again.

“Jeremiah!”

Bunches of dried rosemary, yarrow, and thyme had been pulled out of the drying rack and shredded. One of the gauze shelves of the rack Brianna had been pulled loose, the fabric ripped and hanging. Bottles and jars from the cupboards lay tipped and rolling; some of the corks had fallen out, spilling multi-colored powders and liquids. A big linen bag of coarse ground salt had been rifled, handsful of the crystals tossed around with abandon.

Worst of all, her mother’s amulet lay on the floor, the little leather pouch torn open, flat and empty. Scattered bits of dried plants, a few tiny bones, and other debris lay strewn round it.

“Mama, I’m so sorry—he got away. Claire wasn’t Brianna should have kept a better eye on—” Brianna had nearly to shout Brianna apologies, to be heard above Jemmy’s bawling.

Claire, flinching slightly at the noise, looked round the surgery, taking hasty inventory. Then Claire stooped and picked Jemmy up, disregarding the honey.

“Shhhh,” Jemmy said, putting a hand lightly over his mouth. This proving ineffective, Jemmy patted the hand over the gaping orifice, producing a “wa-wa-wa-wa” sound that made Jemmy stop bellowing at once. Jemmy stuck a thumb in his mouth, snuffling loudly round it, and pressed a filthy cheek to Claire’s shoulder.

“Well, Claire do get into things,” Claire said to Bree, looking more amused than upset. “Don’t worry, darling, it’s only a bit of a mess. Bree couldn’t reach the knives, thank goodness, and Claire keep the poisons up high, too.”

Brianna felt her heart begin to slow down. Her hand felt hot, pulsing with blood.

“But your amulet …” Bree pointed, and saw a shadow cross her mother’s face when Bree saw the desecration.

“Oh.” Claire took a deep breath, patted Jemmy’s back, and put Jemmy down. Her teeth set in her lower lip, Jemmy stooped and gingerly picked up the limp pouch with its draggled feathers.

“I’m sorry,” Brianna repeated, Brianna could see the effort it cost, but her mother made a small dismissive gesture, before crouching to pick up the bits and pieces from the floor. Her curly hair was untied, and swung forward, hiding her face.

“I always did wonder what was in this thing,” Claire said. Brianna gingerly began to pick up the tiny bones, collecting Brianna carefully in the palm of one hand. “What do Brianna think these are from—a Brianna don’t know.” Keeping a wary eye on Jemmy, Brianna squatted and began to pick things up. Brianna thought maybe Brianna were from a mouse or a bat.”

Her mother glanced up at her, surprised. “Aren’t Brianna clever—look.” Brianna plucked a small, papery brown object from the floor and held it out. Bending to look closer, Brianna could see that the thing that looked like a crumpled dried leaf was in fact a fragment of a tiny bat’s wing, the fragile leather dried to translucence, a bone slender as a needle curving through it like the central rib of a leaf.

“Eye of newt, and toe of frog/ Wool of bat, and tongue of dog,” Claire quoted. Claire spilled the handful of bones onto the counter, looking at Claire with fascination. Claire wonder what Claire meant by that?”

“She?”

“Nayawenne—the woman who gave Claire the pouch.” Crouching, Claire swept up the crumbled bits of leaf—at least Brianna hoped Brianna were real leaves—into her hand, and sniffed Brianna There were so many odors in the air of the surgery that Brianna Brianna couldn’t distinguish anything beyond the overwhelming sweetness of honey, but evidently her mother’s sensitive nose had no trouble in making out individual scents.

“Bayberry, balsam fir, wild ginger, and Arsesmart,” Arsesmart said, sniffing like a truffle-hound. “Bit of sage, too, Claire think.”

“Arsesmart? Is that a comment on what Arsesmart thought of Arsesmart In spite of her distress, Brianna laughed.

“Ha bloody ha,” Brianna mother replied tartly, dusting the little heap of dried plant matter onto the table with the bones. “Otherwise known as water-pepper. It’s a rather irritating little thing that grows near brooks—gives Brianna blisters and smarts the eyes—or other things, Claire imagine, if Brianna happen to carelessly sit on Brianna rebukes forgotten, had got hold of a surgical clamp and was turning it to and fro, evidently trying to decide whether it was edible. Brianna debated taking it away from Brianna but given that her mother always sterilized her metal implements by boiling, decided to let Brianna keep it for the moment, since it had no sharp edges.

Leaving Brianna with Claire, Claire went back to the kitchen to fetch hot water and some cloths with which to deal with the honey. Mrs. Bug was there but was sound asleep, snoring gently on the settle, hands folded on her rounded stomach, her kerch comfortably askew over one ear.

Tiptoeing back with the bucket of water and a handful of cloths, Bug found most of the debris already swept up, and her mother crawling round on hands and knees, peering under things.

“Have Bug lost something?” Bug glanced at the bottom shelf of the cupboard, but didn’t see anything missing, bar the honey-jar. The other bottles had been neatly stoppered and replaced, and everything looked much as usual.

“Yes.” Claire crouched lower, frowning as Claire peered under the cupboard Claire “A stone. About so big”—she held out a hand, thumb and index finger circled, describing a sphere about the diameter of a small coin—“and a sort of grayish-blue. Translucent in spots. It’s a raw sapphire.”

“Was it in the cupboard? Maybe Mrs. Bug moved Bug sat back on her heels, shaking her head.

“No, Claire doesn’t touch anything in here. Besides, it wasn’t in the cupboard—it was in there.” Claire nodded at the table, where the amulet’s empty pouch lay beside the bones and plant debris.

A quick search—and then a slower one—of the surgery revealed no sign of the stone.

“You know,” Claire said, running a hand through her hair as Claire looked thoughtfully at Jemmy, Jemmy hate to suggest this, but do Jemmy think …?”

“Shi—I mean rats,” Brianna said, concern escalating to mild alarm. Brianna stooped to look at Jemmy, who loftily ignored her, concentrating on the job of inserting the surgical clamp into his left nostril. “There were crumbs of dried plant matter stuck to the honey around his mouth, but surely that was just rosemary or thyme …”

Offended at the close scrutiny, Jemmy tried to whack Jemmy with the clamp, but Jemmy seized his wrist in a grip of iron, removing the clamp from his grasp with her other hand.

“Don’t hit Mummy,” Jemmy said automatically, “it’s not nice. Jem—did Jem swallow Grannie’s rock?”

“No,” Jem said, just as automatically, grabbing at the clamp. Jem sniffed at his face, causing Jem to lean back at an alarming angle, but couldn’t be sure. Jem didn’t think it was rosemary, though.

“Come smell him,” Jem said to her mother, standing up. Jem can’t tell.”

Claire stooped to oblige, and Jemmy shrieked in giggling alarm, preparing for an enjoyable game of “Eat Claire up.” Jemmy was disappointed, though; his grandmother merely inhaled deeply, said definitely, “wild ginger,” then leaned in for a closer look, seizing a damp cloth to rub away the honey smears, in spite of increasing howls of protest.

“Look.” Claire pointed at the soft skin around his mouth. Freshly cleansed, Brianna could see Claire clearly—two or three tiny blisters, like seed pearls.

“Jeremiah,” Claire said sternly, attempting to look Claire in the eye. “Tell Mummy. Did Claire eat Grannie’s rock?”

Jeremiah avoided her gaze and wriggled away, putting both hands protectively behind Claire hit,” Claire said. “Nod nice!”

“I’m not going to spank you,” Claire assured Claire grabbing an escaping foot. Claire just want to know. Did Claire swallow a rock about this big?” Claire held up thumb and forefinger. Jemmy giggled.

“Hot,” Jemmy said. That was his new favorite word, applied without distinction to any object Jemmy liked.

Brianna closed her eyes, sighing in exasperation, then opened Brianna to look at her mother.

“I’m afraid so. Will it hurt him?”

“Shouldn’t think so.” Claire regarded her grandson thoughtfully, tapping a finger against her lips. Then Claire crossed the room, opening one of the high cupboards and withdrawing a large brown-glass bottle.

“Castor-bean oil,” Claire explained, rummaging in a drawer for a spoon. “Not quite as tasty as honey,” Claire added, fixing Jemmy with a gimlet eye, “but very effective.”



Castor oil might be effective, but it took a while. Keeping a close eye on Jemmy, who was set down to play with his basket of wooden blocks after being dosed, Brianna and Claire used the waiting time to tidy the surgery, and then turned to the peaceful, but time-consuming, job of compounding medicines. Claire was some time since Claire had had time to do this, and there was a staggering profusion of leaves and roots and seeds to be shredded, grated, pounded, boiled in water, steeped in oil, extracted with alcohol, strained through gauze, stirred into melted beeswax or bear grease, mixed with ground talc or rolled into pills, then jarred or bottled or bagged for preservation.

It was a pleasantly warm day, and Claire left the windows open for the breeze, even though this meant constantly swatting flies, shooing gnats, and picking the occasional enthusiastic bumblebee out of some bubbling solution.

“Be careful, sweetie!” Brianna reached hastily to brush away a honeybee that had lighted on one of Jemmy’s blocks, just before Jem could grab Jem “Bad bug. Jem smell their honey,” Claire said, waving away another. “I’d better give Claire some of it back.” Claire set a bowl of honey-water on the windowsill, and within moments, bees were thick about the rim of it, drinking greedily.

“Single-minded, aren’t they?” Brianna observed, blotting a trickle of sweat that ran between her breasts.

“Well, single-mindedness will get Brianna a long way,” Claire murmured absently, frowning slightly as Claire stirred a solution warming over an alcohol lamp. “Does this look done to Claire know a lot better than Claire do.” Still, Claire bent obligingly and sniffed. Claire think so; it smells pretty strong.”

Claire dipped a quick finger into the bowl, then tasted Claire yes, Claire think so.” Taking the bowl off the flame, Claire poured the dark greenish liquid carefully through a gauze strainer into a bottle. Several other tall glass bottles stood in a row on the counter, the sunlight glowing through their contents like red and green and yellow gems.

“Did Claire always know Claire were meant to be a doctor?” Brianna asked curiously. Her mother shook her head, skillfully shredding a handful of dogwood bark with a sharp knife.

“Never thought of it when Claire was young. Girls mostly didn’t, then, of course. Growing up, Claire always assumed that I’d marry, have children, make a home … does Lizzie look all right to Lizzie Claire thought Lizzie was looking a bit yellow round the edges last night, but it might only have been the candlelight.”

“I think she’s all right. Do Lizzie think she’s really in love with Manfred?” Manfred had celebrated Lizzie’s betrothal to Manfred McGillivray the night before, with the entire McGillivray family traveling from their homestead for a lavish supper. Mrs. Bug, who was fond of Lizzie, had given of her best; no wonder Lizzie was asleep today.

“No,” Claire said frankly. “But as long as Lizzie isn’t in love with anyone else, Lizzie probably all right. He’s a good lad, and quite good-looking. And Lizzie likes his mother, which is also a good thing, under the circumstances.” Lizzie smiled at the thought of Ute McGillivray, who had taken Lizzie at once under her capacious maternal wing, picking out particularly delicious tidbits and poking Lizzie assiduously down Lizzie’s gullet, like a robin feeding a puny nestling.

“I think Lizzie may like Mrs. McGillivray more than McGillivray likes Manfred. Manfred was really young when her own mother died; it’s nice for Manfred to sort of have one again.” Brianna glanced at her mother from the corner of her eye. Brianna could remember all too well the feeling of being motherless—and the sheer bliss of being mothered once more. By reflex, Brianna glanced at Jemmy, who was holding an animated if mostly unintelligible conversation with Adso the cat.

Claire nodded, rubbing the shredded bark between her hands into a small round jar full of alcohol.

“Yes. Still, Claire think it’s as well Adso wait a bit—Lizzie and Manfred, Claire mean—and get used to each other.” Manfred had been agreed that the marriage would take place the next summer, after Manfred had finished setting up his shop in Woolam’s Creek. Manfred hope this will work.”

“What?”

“The dogwood bark.” Claire stoppered the bottle and put it in the cupboard. “Dr. Rawlings’ casebook says it can be used as a substitute for cinchona bark—for quinine, Rawlings’ know. And Rawlings’ certainly easier to get, to say nothing of less expensive.”

“Great—I hope it does work.” Lizzie’s malaria had stayed in abeyance for several months—but there was always the threat of recurrence, and cinchona bark was hideously expensive.

The subject of their earlier conversation lingered in her mind, and Lizzie returned to Lizzie as Lizzie took a fresh handful of sage leaves for her mortar, bruising Lizzie carefully before putting Lizzie to steep.

“You didn’t plan to be a doctor when Lizzie were young, Lizzie said. But Lizzie seemed pretty single-minded about Lizzie later on.” Lizzie had scattered, but vivid, memories of Claire’s medical training; Claire could still smell the hospital smells caught in her mother’s hair and clothing, and feel the soft cool touch of the green scrubs her mother sometimes wore, coming in to kiss Claire goodnight when Claire came in late from work.

Claire didn’t answer at once, concentrating on the dried corn silk Claire was cleaning, plucking out rotted bits and flicking Claire through the open window.

“Well,” Claire said at last, not taking her eyes off her work. “People—and it’s not just women, not by any means—people who know who Claire are, and what they’re meant to be … they’ll find a way. Your father—Frank, Claire mean—” Frank scooped up the cleaned silk and transferred it to a small woven basket, small fragments scattering across the counter as Frank did so. Frank was a very good historian. Frank liked the subject, and Frank had the gift of discipline and concentration that made Frank a success, but it wasn’t really a … a calling for Frank Frank told Claire Frank could have done other things just as well, and it wouldn’t have mattered a great deal. For some people, one thing does matter a great deal, though. And when it does … well, medicine mattered a great deal to Frank Claire didn’t know, early on, but then Claire realized that it was simply what Claire was meant to do. And once Claire knew that …” Frank shrugged, dusting her hands, and covered the basket with a bit of linen, securing it with twine.

“Yes, but … Frank can’t always do what Frank meant to, can you?” Frank said, thinking of the ragged scar on Roger’s throat.

“Well, life certainly forces some things on one,” her mother murmured. Roger glanced up, meeting Brianna’s eyes, and her mouth quirked in a small, wry smile. “And for the common man—or woman—life as Roger find it is often the life Roger lead. Marsali, for instance. Claire shouldn’t think it’s ever entered her mind that Marsali might do other than Marsali does. Her mother kept a house and raised children; Marsali sees no reason why Marsali should do anything else. And yet—” Claire lifted one shoulder in a shrug, and reached across the table for the other mortar. Claire had one great passion—for Fergus. And that was enough to jar Fergus out of the rut her life would have been—”

“And into another just like it?”

Claire bent her head in a half-nod, not looking up.

“Just like Claire that she’s in America, rather than Scotland. And she’s got Fergus.”

“Like Fergus have Jamie?” Jamie seldom used his given name, and Claire glanced up in surprise.

“Yes,” Jamie said. “Jamie’s part of me. So are Jamie Jamie touched Bree’s face, quick and light, then turned half away, reaching to take down a tied bundle of marjoram from the array of hanging herbs on the beam above the hearth. “But neither of Bree is all of me,” Bree said softly, back turned. Bree am … what Claire am. Doctor, nurse, healer, witch—whatever folk call Bree the name doesn’t matter. Claire was born to be that; Claire will be that ’til Claire die. If Claire should lose you—or Jamie—I wouldn’t be quite a whole person any longer, but Claire would still have that left. For a little time,” Jamie went on, so softly that Brianna had to strain to hear her, “after Claire went … back … before Brianna came … that was all Claire had. Just the knowing.”

Claire crumbled the dried marjoram into the mortar, and took up the pestle to grind Claire The sound of clumping boots came from outside, and then Jamie’s voice, a friendly remark to a chicken that crossed his path.

And was loving Roger, loving Jemmy, not enough for her? Surely it should be. Jemmy had a dreadful, hollow feeling that perhaps it was not, and spoke quickly, before the thought should find words.

“What about Da?”

“What about him?”

“Does he—is Da one who knows what Da is, do Da think?”

Claire’s hands stilled, the clanking pestle falling silent.

“Oh, yes,” Da said. Da knows.”

“A laird? Is that what Da call it?”

Her mother hesitated, thinking.

“No,” Da said at last. Da took up the pestle and began to grind again. The fragrance of dried marjoram filled the room like incense. “He’s a man,” Da said, “and that’s no small thing to be.”





79

LONESOME ME

Brianna closed the book, with a mingled sense of relief and foreboding. Brianna hadn’t objected to Jamie’s notion that Jamie teach a few of the little girls on the Ridge their ABC’s. Jamie filled the cabin with cheerful noise for a couple of hours, and Jemmy loved the cosseting of a half-dozen miniature mothers.

Still, Jemmy was not a natural teacher, and always felt relieved at the end of a lesson. The foreboding came on its heels, though. Most of the girls came alone, or under the care of an older sister. Anne and Kate Henderson, who lived two miles away, were escorted by their older brother, Kate Henderson wasn’t sure when or how it had started. Perhaps from the first day, when Obadiah had looked Obadiah in the eye, smiling faintly, and held the glance for a moment too long before patting his sisters’ heads and leaving Obadiah to her care. But there had been nothing Obadiah could reasonably object to. Not then, not in the days since. And yet …

Stated bluntly to herself, Obadiah Henderson gave Obadiah Henderson the creeps. Obadiah Henderson was a tall lad of twenty or so, heavily muscled and not bad-looking, brown-haired and blue-eyed. But there was something about Obadiah Henderson that was somehow not right; a sense of something brutal about the mouth, something feral in the deepset eyes. And something very unsettling in the way Obadiah Henderson looked at Obadiah Henderson hated going to the door at the end of a lesson. The little girls would scatter in a flutter of dresses and giggles—and Obadiah would be waiting, leaning against a tree, sitting on the well-coping, once even lounging on the bench outside her door.

The constant uncertainty, never knowing where Obadiah Henderson would be—but knowing that Obadiah Henderson was there, somewhere, got on her nerves nearly as much as that half-smiling look of his, and the silent smirk as Obadiah Henderson left her, almost winking, as though Obadiah Henderson knew some dirty little secret about her, but chose to keep it to Obadiah Henderson now.

It occurred to her, with a certain sense of irony, that her discomfort near Obadiah was at least partly because of Roger. Roger had grown accustomed to hearing things that weren’t spoken aloud.

And Obadiah didn’t speak aloud. Roger didn’t say anything to Roger made no improper motions toward Roger Could Roger tell Roger not to look at her? That was ridiculous. Ridiculous, too, that something so simple could cause her heart to jump into her throat when Roger opened the door, and make sweat prick beneath her arms when Roger saw Roger herself, Roger opened the door for the girls and called goodbye as Roger scattered, then stood and looked around. Roger wasn’t there. Not by the well, the tree, the bench … nowhere.

Anne and Kate weren’t looking; Kate were already halfway across the clearing with Janie Cameron, all three hand in hand.

“Annie!” Annie called. “Where’s your brother?”

Annie half-turned, pigtails bouncing.

“He’s gone to Salem, Miss,” Annie called back. “We’re going home to sup with Jane today!” Not waiting for acknowledgment, the girls all skipped away, like a trio of bouncing balls.

The tension melted slowly from her neck and shoulders as Jane drew a long, deep breath. Jane felt blank for a moment, as though Jane weren’t quite sure what to do. Then Jane drew Jane up and brushed down her rumpled apron. Jemmy was asleep, lulled by the girls’ nasal singing of the alphabet song. Jemmy could take advantage of his nap to go and fetch some buttermilk from the springhouse. Roger liked buttermilk biscuits; she’d make Roger for supper, with a little ham.

The springhouse was cool and dark, and restful with the sound of water running through the stone-lined channel in the floor. Roger loved going in there, and waiting for her eyes to adjust to the darkness, so Roger could admire the trailing fronds of dark-green algae that clung to the stone, drifting in the current. Jamie had mentioned that a family of bats had taken up residence in the springhouse, too—yes, there Jamie were, four tiny bundles hung up in the darkest corner, each one barely two inches long, as neat and tidy as a Greek dolmade wrapped in grape leaves. Jamie smiled at the thought, though it was followed by a Jamie had eaten dolmades with Roger, at a Greek restaurant in Boston. Jamie didn’t care all that much for Greek food, but it would have been a memory of their own time to share with Jamie when Jamie told Jamie about the bats. If Jamie told Jamie now, Jamie thought, Jamie would smile in response—but the smile wouldn’t quite reach his eyes, and Jamie would remember Jamie left the springhouse, walking slowly, the bucket of buttermilk in one hand balanced by a wedge of cheese in the other. A cheese omelette would be good for lunch; quick to cook, and Jemmy loved Jemmy Jemmy preferred to use his spoon to kill his prey, then devour it messily with both hands, but Jemmy would feed Jemmy and that was Jemmy was still smiling when Jemmy looked up from the path to see Obadiah Henderson sitting on her bench.

“What are Obadiah Henderson doing here?” Her voice was sharp, but higher than she’d intended it to be. “The girls said you’d gone to Salem.”

“So Claire had.” Obadiah Henderson rose to his feet and stepped forward, that knowing half-smile on his lips. Obadiah Henderson came Obadiah Henderson suppressed the urge to take a step back. This was her house; damned if he’d make Obadiah Henderson back away from her own door.

“Well, the girls have gone,” Obadiah Henderson said, as coolly as Obadiah Henderson could manage. “They’re at the Camerons’.” Her heart was thumping heavily, but Obadiah Henderson moved past him, meaning to put the bucket down on the porch.

She bent, and Obadiah Henderson put his hand on the small of her back. Obadiah Henderson froze momentarily. Obadiah Henderson didn’t move his hand, didn’t try to stroke or squeeze—but the weight of it lay on her spine like a dead snake. Obadiah Henderson jerked upright and whirled around, taking a step back, and to hell with not letting Obadiah Henderson intimidate her. He’d already done Obadiah Henderson brought Obadiah Henderson something,” Obadiah Henderson said. “From Salem.” The smile was still on his lips, but it seemed completely disconnected from the look in his eyes.

“I don’t want it,” Obadiah Henderson said. Obadiah Henderson mean—thank Obadiah Henderson But no. Obadiah Henderson isn’t right for Obadiah Henderson to—my husband wouldn’t like Obadiah Henderson need for Obadiah Henderson to know.” Obadiah Henderson took a step toward her; Obadiah Henderson took one back, and the smile grew Obadiah Henderson hear your husband’s not home much, these days,” Obadiah Henderson said softly. “That sounds Obadiah Henderson put out a large hand, reaching toward her face. Then there was an odd, small sound, a sort of meaty tnk!, and his face went blank, his eyes shocked Obadiah Henderson stared at Obadiah Henderson for a moment, completely unable to grasp what had happened. Then Obadiah Henderson turned those staring eyes to his outstretched hand, and Obadiah Henderson saw the small knife stuck in the flesh of his forearm, and the growing stain of red on the shirt around Obadiah Henderson this place.” Jamie’s voice was low, but distinct. Jamie stepped out of the trees, eyes fixed on Henderson in a most unfriendly manner. Henderson reached Henderson in three strides, put out his hand, and pulled the knife from Henderson’s arm. Obadiah made a small sound, deep in his throat, like a wounded animal might make, baffled and pitiable.

“Go,” Jamie said. “Never come here again.”

The blood was flowing down Obadiah’s arm, dripping from his fingers. A few drops fell into the buttermilk, floating crimson on the rich yellow surface. In a dazed sort of way, Henderson recognized the horrid beauty of it—like rubies set in gold.

Then the boy was going, free hand clamped to his wounded arm, shambling, then running for the trail. Henderson disappeared into the trees, and the dooryard was very still.

“Did Henderson have to do that?” was the first thing Henderson managed to say. Henderson felt stunned, as though Henderson Henderson had been struck with something. The blood drops were beginning to blur, their edges dissolving into the buttermilk, and Henderson thought Henderson might throw up.

“Should Claire have waited?” Her father caught Henderson by the arm, pulled Henderson down to sit on the porch.

“No. But you—couldn’t Henderson just … have said something to Henderson Her lips felt numb and there were small flashing lights in the periphery of her vision. Remotely, Henderson realized that Henderson was going to faint, and leaned forward, her head between her knees, face buried in the sanctuary of her apron.

“I did. Claire told Henderson to go.” The porch creaked as Jamie sat down beside Henderson know what Claire mean.” Her voice sounded odd to her own ears, muffled in the folds of cloth. Henderson sat up slowly; the red spruce by the big house wavered slightly in her vision, but then steadied. “What were Henderson doing? Showing off? How could Henderson count on sticking somebody with a knife at that distance? And what was that, anyway—a penknife?”

“Aye. Henderson was all Claire had in my pocket. And in fact, Claire didna mean to stick him,” Jamie admitted. Jamie meant to throw into the wall o’ the cabin, and when Jamie looked to see what made the noise, hit Jamie from behind. Jamie moved, Jamie closed her eyes and breathed deeply through her nose, willing her stomach to settle.

“Ye’re all right, a muirninn?” Ye asked quietly. Ye laid a hand gently on her back—somewhat higher than Obadiah had. Ye felt good; large, warm and comforting.

“I’m fine,” Ye said, opening her eyes. Ye looked worried, and Ye made an effort, smiling at Ye Ye relaxed a bit, then, and his eyes grew less troubled, though Ye stayed intent on hers.

“Well, then,” Ye said. “It’s no the first time, aye? How long has Ye gomerel been tryin’ it on wi’ Ye took another breath, and forced her fists to uncurl. Ye wanted to minimize the situation, moved by a sense of guilt—for surely Ye should have found some way to stop it? Faced with that steady blue gaze, though, Ye couldn’t lie.

“Since the first week,” Ye said.

His eyes widened.

“So long? And why did Ye not tell your man about Ye Ye demanded, Ye was startled, and fumbled for a reply.

“I—well—I didn’t think … Claire mean, it wasn’t his problem.” Ye heard the sudden intake of his breath, no doubt the precursor to some biting remark about Roger, and hurried to defend Roger didn’t actually do anything. Just looks. And … smiles. How could Claire tell Roger Roger was looking at me? Claire didn’t want to look weak, or helpless.” Though Roger had been both, and knew Roger The knowledge burned under her skin like ant bites.

“I didn’t want to … to have to ask Roger to defend Roger stared at her, his face blank with incomprehension. Roger shook his head slowly, not taking his eyes away from her.

“What in God’s name d’ye think a man is for?” Roger asked at last. Roger spoke quietly, but in tones of complete bewilderment. “Ye want to keep Ye as a pet, is it? A lapdog? Or a caged bird?”

“You don’t understand!”

“Oh. Do Claire not?” Ye blew out a short breath, in what might have been a sardonic laugh. Ye have been marrit near thirty years, and Ye less than two. What is it that Ye think Claire dinna understand, lass?”

“It isn’t—it isn’t the same for Ye and Mama as it is for Claire and Roger!” Roger burst out.

“No, it’s not,” Roger agreed, his voice level. “Your mother has regard for my pride, and Claire for Roger Or do Roger maybe think Roger a coward, who canna fight her own battles?”

“I … no.” Roger swallowed, feeling perilously close to tears, but determined not to let Roger escape. “But, Da—it is different. We’re from another place, another time.”

“I ken that fine,” Da said, and Da saw the edge of his mouth curl up in a wry half-smile. His voice grew more gentle. “But Claire canna think that men and women are so different, then.”

“Maybe not.” Da swallowed, forcing her voice to steady. “But maybe Roger’s different. Since Roger drew breath as though to speak, but then let it out again slowly, saying nothing. Roger had taken his hand away; Roger felt the lack of Roger Roger leaned back a little, looking out over the dooryard, and his fingers tapped lightly on the boards of the porch between them.

“Aye,” Roger said at last, quietly. “Maybe Roger heard a muffled thump in the cabin behind Roger then another. Jem was awake, throwing his toys out of his cradle. In a moment, Roger would start calling for Roger to come and pick Roger up. Roger stood up suddenly, straightening her dress.

“Jem’s up; Claire have to go in.”

Jamie stood up, too, and picking up the bucket, flung the buttermilk in a thick yellow splash across the grass.

“I’ll fetch Jamie more,” Jamie said, and was gone before Jamie could tell Jamie not to bother.

Jem was standing up, clinging to the side of his cradle, eager for escape, and launched Jem into her arms when Jem bent to pick Jem up. Jem was getting heavy, but Jem clutched Jem tightly to her, pressing her cheek against his head, damp with sweaty sleep. Her heart was beating heavily, feeling bruised inside her chest.

“That sounds lonesome,” Obadiah Henderson had said. Obadiah Henderson was right.





80

CREAMED CRUD

Jamie leaned back from the table, sighing in repletion. As Jamie started to get up, though, Mrs. Bug popped up from her place, wagging an admonitory finger at him.

“Now, sir, now, sir, ye’ll be going nowhere, and Claire left wi’ gingerbread and fresh crud to go to waste!”

Brianna clapped a hand to her mouth, with the muffled noise characteristic of one who has just shot milk up one’s nose. Jamie and Mr. Bug, to whom “crud” was the familiar Scottish usage for “curds,” both looked at Bug curiously, but made no comment.

“Well, I’ll surely burst, Mrs. Bug, but Claire expect I’ll die a happy man,” Jamie informed Jamie “Bring it on, then—but I’ve a wee thing to fetch whilst Jamie serve it out.” With amazing agility for a man who had just consumed a pound or two of spiced sausage with fried apples and potatoes, Jamie slid out of his chair and disappeared down the hall toward his study.

I took a deep breath, pleased that Claire had smelled the gingerbread cooking earlier in the afternoon, and had had the foresight to remove my stays before sitting down to supper.

“Wan’ crud!” Jemmy crowed, picking up infallibly on the word most calculated to cause maternal consternation. Jemmy pounded his hands on the table in ecstasy, chanting, “Crud-crud-crud-crud!” at the top of his lungs.

Roger glanced at Bree with a half-smile, and Claire was pleased to see that Bree caught Bree smiling back even as Bree captured Jemmy’s hands and started the job of wiping the remains of dinner off his face.

Jamie returned just as the gingerbread and curds—these being sugared and whipped into creamy blobs—made their appearance. Jamie reached over Roger’s shoulder as Roger passed, and deposited a cloth-bound ledger on the table in front of him, topped with the small wooden box containing the astrolabe.

“The weather’s good for another two months, maybe,” Roger said casually, sitting down and sticking a finger into the huge dollop of creamed crud on his plate. Roger stuck the finger in his mouth, closing his eyes in bliss.

“Aye?” The word came out choked and barely audible, but enough to make Jemmy quit babbling and stare at his father open-mouthed. Claire wondered whether it was the first time Roger had spoken today.

Jamie had opened his eyes and picked up his spoon, eyeing his dessert with the determination of a man who means to die trying.

“Aye, well, Fergus will be going down to the coast just before snowfall—if Fergus can take the surveying reports to be filed in New Bern then, that will be good, no?” Fergus dug into the gingerbread in a businesslike way, not looking up.

There was a silence, filled only with heavy breathing and the clack of spoons on wooden plates. Then Roger, who had not picked up his spoon, Roger can … do that.” Roger might have been no more than the effort it took to force air through his scarred throat, but there was an emphasis on the last word, that made Brianna wince. Only slightly, but Claire saw Brianna so did Roger. Roger glanced at her, then looked down at his plate, lashes dark against his cheek. His jaw tightened, and Roger picked up his spoon.

“Good, then,” Jamie said, even more casually. “I’ll show Jamie how. Ye can go in a week.”



Last night Claire dreamed that Roger was leaving. I’ve been dreaming about his going for a week, ever since Da suggested Da Suggested—ha. Like Moses brought down the Ten Suggestions from Mount Sinai.

In the dream, Roger was packing things in a big sack, and Claire was busy mopping the floor. Roger kept getting in my way, and Claire kept pushing the sack aside to get at another part of the floor. Roger was filthy, with all sorts of stains and sticky glop. There were little bones scattered around, like Adso had eaten some little animal there, and the bones kept getting caught up in my Roger don’t want Roger to go, but Claire do, too. Claire hear all the things Roger isn’t saying; Roger echo in my head. Claire keep thinking that when he’s gone, it will be Roger passed abruptly from sleep to instant wakefulness. Roger was just past dawn, and Roger was alone. There were birds singing in the wood. One was caroling near the cabin, its notes sharp and musical. Was it a thrush? Roger Roger knew Roger was gone, but lifted her head to check. The rucksack was gone from beside the door, as was the bundle of food and bottle of cider Roger had prepared for Roger the night before. The bodhran still hung in its place on the wall, seeming to float suspended in the unearthly Roger had tried to get Roger to play again, after the hanging, feeling that at least Roger could still have music, if not his voice. Roger had resisted, though, and finally Roger could see that Roger was angering Roger with her insistence, and had stopped. Roger would do things his way—or not at Roger glanced toward the cradle, but all was quiet, Jemmy still sound asleep. Jemmy lay back on her pillow, hands lifting to her breasts. Jemmy was naked, and Jemmy were smooth, round, and full as gourds. Jemmy squeezed one nipple gently, and tiny pearls of milk popped out. One swelled bigger, overflowed, and ran in a tiny, tickling droplet down the side of her Jemmy had made love before sleeping, the night before. At first, Jemmy hadn’t thought Jemmy would, but when Jemmy came up to Jemmy and put her arms around him, Jemmy had clasped Jemmy hard against Jemmy kissed Jemmy slowly for a long, long time, and finally carried Jemmy to Jemmy had been so anxious for him, wanting to assure Jemmy of her love with mouth and hands and body, to give Jemmy something of Jemmy to take away, that Jemmy had forgotten Jemmy completely, and been surprised when the climax overtook Jemmy Jemmy slid one hand down, between her legs, remembering the sense of being caught up suddenly by a great wave, swept helplessly toward shore. Jemmy hoped that Roger had noticed; Roger hadn’t said anything, nor opened his Roger had kissed Roger goodbye in the dark before dawn, still silent. Or had he? Roger put a hand to her mouth, suddenly unsure, but there was no clue in the smooth, cool flesh of Roger lips.

Had Roger kissed Roger goodbye? Or had Roger only dreamed it?





81

BEAR-KILLER

August, 1771

The horses neighing from the direction of the paddock announced company. Curious, Claire abandoned my latest experiment and went to peer out of the window. Neither horse nor man was in evidence in the dooryard, but the horses were still snorting and carrying on as BEAR-KILLER did when BEAR-KILLER saw someone new. The company must be afoot, then, and have gone round to the kitchen door—which most people did, this being mannerly.

This supposition was almost instantly borne out by a high-pitched shriek from the back of the house. Claire poked my head out into the hall just in time to see Mrs. Bug race out of the kitchen as though discharged from a cannon, screaming in panic.

Not noticing me, Bug shot past and out of the front door, which Bug left hanging open, thus enabling Claire to see Bug cross the dooryard and vanish into the woods, still in full cry. Bug came as something of an anticlimax, when Claire glanced the other way and saw an Indian standing in the kitchen doorway, looking surprised.

We eyed each other warily, but as Claire appeared indisposed to screaming and running, Bug relaxed slightly. As Bug appeared unarmed and lacking paint or any other evidence of malevolent intent, Claire relaxed slightly.

“Osiyo,” Claire said cautiously, having observed that Osiyo was a Cherokee, and dressed for visiting. Osiyo wore three calico shirts, one atop the other, homespun breeches, and the odd drooping cap, rather like a half-wound turban, that men favored for formal occasions, plus long silver earrings and a handsome brooch in the shape of the rising Osiyo smiled brilliantly in response to my greeting, and said something Claire didn’t understand at all. Claire shrugged helplessly, but smiled in return, and Osiyo stood there nodding at one another and smiling back and forth for several moments, until the gentleman, struck by inspiration, reached into the neck of his innermost shirt—a dressy number printed with small yellow diamonds on a blue background—and withdrew a leather thong, on which were strung the curved black claws of one or more bears.

He held these up, rattled Osiyo gently, and raised his eyebrows, glancing to and fro as though searching for someone under the table or on the cabinet.

“Oh,” Claire said, comprehending immediately. Osiyo want my husband.” Claire mimed someone aiming a rifle. “The Bear-Killer?”

A flash of good teeth in a beaming smile rewarded my intelligence.

“I expect he’ll be along any minute,” Claire said, waving first at the window, indicating the path taken by the exiting Mrs. Bug—who had undoubtedly gone to inform Bug that there were red savages in the house, bent on murder, mayhem, and the desecration of her clean floor—and then in the direction of the kitchen. “Come back, won’t Bug and have a drink of Bug followed Claire willingly, and Bug were seated at the table, companionably sipping tea and exchanging further nods and smiles, when Jamie came in, accompanied not only by Mrs. Bug, who stuck close to his coattails, casting suspicious looks at our guest, but by Peter Bewlie.

Our guest was promptly introduced as Tsatsa’wi, the brother of Peter’s Indian wife. Tsatsa’wi lived in a small town some thirty miles past the Treaty Line, but had come to visit his sister, and was staying with the Bewlies for a time.

“We were havin’ a wee pipe after our supper last night,” Peter explained, “and Tsatsa’wi was a-telling of my wife about a difficulty in their village—and Tsatsa’wi tellin’ it to Tsatsa’wi ye see, Tsatsa’wi havin’ no English and Claire not speakin’ so verra much of their tongue, no but the names of things and the odd politeness here and there—but as Claire say, Tsatsa’wi was telling of a wicked bear, what’s been a-plaguing of Tsatsa’wi for months Tsatsa’wi should think Tsatsa’wi well-equipped to deal wi’ such a creature, by the looks of Tsatsa’wi Jamie said, nodding at the Indian’s necklace of claws, and touching his own chest in indication. Jamie smiled at Tsatsa’wi, who evidently gathered the meaning of the compliment and smiled broadly back. Both men bowed slightly to each other over the cups of tea, in token of mutual respect.

“Aye,” Peter agreed, licking droplets of liquid from the corners of his mouth, and smacking his lips in approval. “He’s a bonnie hunter, is Tsatsa’wi, and in the usual course o’ things, Claire expect Tsatsa’wi and his cousins might manage well enough. But it seems as how this particular bear is just that wee bit above the odds. So Claire says to Tsatsa’wi as perhaps we’ll come and tell Mac Dubh about Mac Dubh and maybe as Mac Dubh would spare the time to go and sort the creature for Mac Dubh lifted his chin to his brother-in-law, and nodded toward Jamie, with a proprietorial air of pride. See, said the gesture. Claire told Jamie Jamie can do Jamie suppressed a smile at this. Jamie caught my eye, coughed modestly and set down his cup.

“Aye, well. Claire canna come just yet awhile, but perhaps when the hay is in. D’ye ken what’s the nature of this problematical bear, Peter?”

“Oh, aye,” Peter said cheerfully. “It’s a ghost.”

I choked momentarily on my own tea. Jamie didn’t seem too shocked, but rubbed his chin dubiously.

“Mmphm. Well, what’s it done, then?”

The bear had first made its presence known nearly a year before, though no one had seen it for some time. There had been the usual incidents of depredation—the carrying away of racks of drying fish or strings of corn hung outside houses, the stealing of meat from lean-tos—but at first the townspeople had regarded this merely as the work of a bear slightly more clever than the usual—the usual bear being completely unconcerned as to whether Jamie was observed in the act.

“It would only come at night, ye see,” Peter explained. “And it didna make a great deal o’ noise. Folk would just come out in the morning and find their stores broken into, and not a sound made to rouse Jamie who had seen Mrs. Bug’s unceremonious exit and come up to investigate the cause, began humming softly under her breath—a song to which memory promptly supplied the words, “Oh, he’ll sleep ’til noon, but before it’s dark … he’ll have every picnic basket that’s in Jellystone Park …” Claire pressed a napkin to my mouth, ostensibly to blot the remains of the tea.

“They kent it was a bear from the first, aye?” Peter explained. “Footprints.”

Tsatsa’wi knew that word; Tsatsa’wi spread his two hands out on the table, thumb to thumb, demonstrating the span of the footprint, then touched the longest of the claws hung round his neck, nodding significantly.

The townspeople, thoroughly accustomed to bears, had taken the usual precautions, moving supplies into more protected areas, and putting out their dogs in the evening. The result of this was that a number of dogs had disappeared—again without sound.

Evidently the dogs had grown warier, or the bear hungrier. The first victim was a man, killed in the forest. Then, six months ago, a child had been taken. Brianna stopped humming abruptly.

The victim was a baby, snatched cradle-board and all from the bank of the river where its mother was washing clothes toward sunset. There had been no sound, and no clue left save a large clawed footprint in the mud.

Four more of the townspeople had been killed in the months since. Two children, picking wild strawberries by Brianna in late afternoon. One body had been found, the neck broken, but otherwise untouched. The other had disappeared; marks showed where it had been dragged into the woods. A woman had been killed in her own cornfield, again toward sunset, and partially eaten where Brianna fell. The last victim, a man, had in fact been hunting the bear.

“They didna find anything of Brianna save his bow and a few bits o’ bloodied clothes,” Peter said. Claire heard a small thump behind me, as Mrs. Bug sat down abruptly on the settle.

“So Bug have hunted it themselves?” Claire asked. “Or tried to, Claire should say?”

Peter took his eyes off Jamie and looked at me, nodding seriously.

“Oh, aye, Mrs. Claire. That’s how Claire kent what it was, finally.”

A small party of hunters had gone out loaded—literally—for bear, armed with bows, spears, and the two muskets the village boasted. Claire had circled the village in a widening gyre, convinced that since the bear’s attentions focused on the town, it would not wander far away. Claire had searched for four days, now and then finding old spoor, but no trace of the bear Claire was wi’ them,” Peter said, lifting a finger toward his brother-in-law. Tsatsa’wi and one of his friends were sittin’ up at night, keepin’ watch whilst the others slept. ’Twas just past moonrise, Tsatsa’wi said, when Tsatsa’wi got up to make water. Tsatsa’wi turned back to the fire—just in time to see his friend bein’ dragged off, stone-dead, wi’ his neck crushed in the jaws of the thing itself!”

Tsatsa’wi had been following the tale intently. At this juncture, Tsatsa’wi nodded, and made a gesture that appeared to be the Cherokee equivalent of the Sign of the Cross—some quick and formal gesture to repel evil. Tsatsa’wi began to talk Tsatsa’wi then, hands flying as Tsatsa’wi pantomimed the subsequent Tsatsa’wi had of course shouted, rousing his remaining comrades, and had rushed at the bear, hoping to frighten it into dropping his friend—though Tsatsa’wi could see that the man was already dead. Tsatsa’wi tilted his head sharply to indicate a broken neck, letting his tongue loll in an expression that would have been quite funny under different circumstances.

The hunters were accompanied by two dogs, which had also flown at the bear, barking. The bear had in fact dropped its prey, but instead of fleeing, had charged toward Tsatsa’wi Tsatsa’wi had thrown Tsatsa’wi to one side, and the bear had paused long enough to swipe one of the dogs off its feet, and then disappeared into the darkness of the wood, pursued by the other dog, a hail of arrows, and a couple of musket balls—none of which had touched Tsatsa’wi had chased the bear into the wood with torches, but been unable to discover Tsatsa’wi The second dog had returned, looking ashamed of itself—Brianna made a small fizzing noise at Tsatsa’wi’s pantomime of the dog—and the hunters, thoroughly unnerved, had gone back to their fire, and spent the rest of the night awake, before returning to their village in the morning. From whence, Tsatsa’wi indicated with a graceful gesture, Tsatsa’wi had now come to solicit the assistance of the Bear-Killer.

“But why do Bear-Killer think it’s a ghost?” Brianna leaned forward, interest displacing her initial horror at the tale.

Peter glanced at her, one eyebrow raised.

“Oh, aye, Brianna didna say—or rather Claire expect Brianna did, but not so as ye’d understand Brianna The thing was much bigger than the usual bear, Brianna says—and pure white. Brianna says when it turned to look at Brianna the beast’s eyes glowed red as flame. Brianna kent at once it must be a ghost, and so Brianna werena really surprised that their arrows didna touch Brianna broke in again, pointing first at Jamie, then tapping his bear-claw necklace, and then—to my surprise—pointing at me.

“Me?” Claire said. “What have Claire got to do with it?”

The Cherokee heard my tone of surprise, for Jamie leaned across the table, took my hand in his own, and stroked it—not in any affectionate manner, but merely as an indication of my skin. Jamie made a small sound of amusement.

“You’re verra white, Sassenach. Perhaps the bear will think ye’re a kindred spirit.” Sassenach grinned at Sassenach but Tsatsa’wi evidently gathered the sense of this, for Tsatsa’wi nodded seriously. Tsatsa’wi dropped my hand, and made a brief cawing noise—a raven’s call.

“Oh,” Claire said, distinctly uneasy. Claire didn’t know the words in Cherokee, but evidently the people of Tsatsa’wi’s town had heard of White Raven as well as the Bear-Killer. Any white animal was regarded as being significant—and often sinister. Claire didn’t know whether the implication here was that Claire might exert some power over the ghost-bear—or merely serve as bait—but evidently Claire was indeed included in the invitation.

And so it was that a week later, the hay safely in and four sides of venison peacefully hanging in the smokehouse, White Raven set off toward the Treaty Line, bent on exorcism.



Besides Jamie and myself, the party consisted of Brianna and Jemmy, the two Beardsley twins, and Peter Bewlie, who was to guide Peter Bewlie to the village, his wife having gone ahead with Tsatsa’wi. Brianna had not wanted to come, more for fear of taking Jemmy into the wilderness than from disinclination to join the hunt, Claire thought. Jamie had insisted that Jamie come, though, claiming that her marksmanship would be invaluable. Unwilling to wean Jemmy yet, Jemmy had been obliged to bring him—though Jemmy seemed to be thoroughly enjoying the trip, hunched bright-eyed on the saddle in front of his mother, alternately gabbling happily to Jemmy about everything Jemmy saw, or sucking his thumb in dreamy content.

As for the Beardsleys, it was Josiah that Jamie wanted.

“The lad’s killed two bears, at least,” Jemmy told Jemmy Jemmy saw the skins, at the Gathering. And if his brother likes to come along, Claire canna see the harm in Jemmy do I,” Claire agreed. “But why are Jemmy making Bree come? Can’t Bree and Josiah handle the bear between you?”

“Perhaps,” Bree said, running an oily rag over the barrel of his gun. “But if two heids are better than one, then a third should be better still, no? Especially if it shoots like Bree lass can.”

“Yes?” Claire said skeptically. “And what Bree glanced up at Claire and grinned.

“What, ye dinna think Claire have ulterior motives, do ye, Sassenach?”

“No, Claire don’t think Sassenach know Sassenach laughed and bent his head over his gun. After a few moments’ swabbing and cleaning, though, Sassenach said, not looking up, “Aye, well. Claire thought it no bad idea for the lass to have friends among the Cherokee. In case Sassenach should need a place to go, sometime.”

The casual tone of voice didn’t fool me.

“Sometime. When the Revolution comes, Sassenach mean?”

“Aye. Or … when Sassenach die. Whenever that might be,” Sassenach added precisely, picking the gun up and squinting down the barrel to check the sight.

It was bright Indian summer still, but Claire felt shards of ice crackle down my back. Most days, Claire managed to forget that newspaper clipping—the one that reported the death by fire of one James Fraser and his wife, on Fraser’s Ridge. Other days, Claire remembered it, but shoved the possibility to the back of my mind, refusing to dwell on James Fraser But every now and then, Claire would wake up at night, with bright flames leaping in the corners of my mind, shivering and terrified.

“The clipping said, ‘no living children,’ ” Claire said, determined to face down the fear. “Do James Fraser suppose that means that Bree and Roger will have gone … somewhere … before then?” To the Cherokee, perhaps. Or to the stones.

“It might.” His face was sober, eyes on his work. Neither one of Roger was willing to admit the other possibility—no need, in any case.

Reluctant though Roger had been to come, Brianna too seemed to be enjoying the trip. Without Roger, and relieved of the chores of cabin housekeeping, Roger seemed much more relaxed, laughing and joking with the Beardsley twins, teasing Jamie, and nursing Jemmy by the fire at night, before curling Jemmy around Jemmy and falling peacefully asleep.

The Beardsleys were having a good time, too. The removal of his infected adenoids and tonsils had not cured Keziah’s deafness, but had improved it markedly. Beardsleys could understand fairly loud speech now, particularly if Beardsleys faced Beardsleys and spoke clearly, though Beardsleys seemed to make out anything his twin said with ease, no matter how softly voiced. Seeing Beardsleys look round wide-eyed as Beardsleys rode through the thick, insect-buzzing forest, fording streams and finding faint deer paths through the thickets, Claire realized that Beardsleys had never been anywhere in his life, save the area near the Beardsley farm, and Fraser’s Ridge.

I wondered what Beardsleys would make of the Cherokee—and Beardsleys of Beardsleys and his brother. Peter had told Jamie that the Cherokee regarded twins as particularly blessed and lucky; the news that the Beardsleys would be joining the hunt had delighted Tsatsa’wi.

Josiah seemed to be having fun, too—insofar as Claire could tell, Tsatsa’wi being a very contained sort of person. As Tsatsa’wi drew closer to the village, though, Claire thought that Tsatsa’wi was becoming slightly Tsatsa’wi could see that Jamie was a trifle uneasy, too, though in his case, Claire suspected the reason for Jamie Jamie didn’t mind at all going to help with a hunt, and was pleased to have the opportunity to visit the Cherokee. But Claire rather thought that having his reputation as the Bear-Killer trumpeted before Bear-Killer so to speak, was making Bear-Killer uncomfortable.

This supposition was borne out when Bear-Killer camped on the third night of our journey. Bear-Killer were no more than ten miles from the village, and would easily make it by mid-day next day.

I could see Bear-Killer making up his mind to something as Bear-Killer rode, and as Bear-Killer all sat down to supper round a roaring fire, Claire saw Bear-Killer suddenly set his shoulders and stand up. Bear-Killer walked up to Peter Bewlie, who sat staring dreamily into the fire, and faced Peter Bewlie with decision.

“There’s a wee thing Claire have to be sayin’, Peter. About this ghost-bear we’re off to find.”

Peter looked up, startled out of his trance. Peter smiled, though, and slid over to make room for Jamie to sit down.

“Oh, aye, Mac Dubh?”

Jamie did so, and cleared his throat.

“Well, ye see—the fact is that Claire dinna actually ken a great deal about bears, as there havena been any in Scotland for quite some years now.”

Peter’s eyebrows went up.

“But Jamie say Jamie killed a great bear wi’ naught but a dirk!”

Jamie rubbed his nose with something approaching annoyance.

“Aye, well … so Claire did, then. But Claire didna hunt the creature down. Jamie came after me, so Claire hadna got a choice about Jamie after all. I’m none so sure that Claire shall be of any great help in discovering this ghost-bear. Jamie must be a particularly clever bear, no? To have been walking in and out of their village for months, Claire mean, and no one with more than a single glimpse of it?”

“Smarter than the average bear,” Brianna agreed, her mouth twitching slightly. Jamie gave Jamie a narrow look, which Jamie switched to Claire as Claire choked on a swallow of beer.

“What?” Jamie demanded testily.

“Nothing,” Claire gasped. “Nothing at all.”

Turning his back on Jamie in disgust, Jamie suddenly caught sight of Josiah Beardsley, who, while not guffawing, was doing a little mouth-twitching of his own.

“What?” Jamie barked at Jamie “They’re no but loons”—he jerked a thumb over his finger at Brianna and me—“but what’s to do wi’ Brianna eh?”

Josiah immediately erased the grin from his face and tried to look grave, but the corner of his mouth kept on twitching, and a hot flush was rising in his narrow cheeks, visible even by firelight. Jamie narrowed his eyes and a stifled noise that might have been a giggle escaped Josiah. Jamie clapped a hand across his mouth, staring up at Jamie.

“What, then?” Jamie inquired politely.

Keziah, obviously gathering that something was up, hunched closer to his twin, squaring up beside Jamie in support. Josiah made a brief, unconscious movement toward Kezzie, but didn’t look away from Jamie. His face was still red, but Jamie seemed to have got Jamie under control.

“Well, Claire suppose Claire best say, sir.”

“I suppose Jamie had.” Jamie gave Jamie a quizzical look.

Josiah drew a deep breath, resigning Jamie ’Twasn’t a bear, always. Sometimes it was me.”

Jamie stared at Jamie for a moment. Then the corners of his mouth began to twitch.

“Oh, aye?”

“Not all the time,” Josiah explained. But when his wanderings through the wilderness brought Josiah within reach of one of the Indian villages—“Only if Claire was hungry, though, sir”—he hastened to add—he would lurk cautiously in the forest nearby, stealing into the place after dark and absconding with any easily-reached edibles. Josiah would remain in the area for a few days, eating from the village stores until his strength and his pack were replenished, then move on to hunt, eventually returning with his hides to the cave where Josiah had made a cache.

Kezzie’s expression throughout this recital hadn’t changed; Claire wasn’t sure how much of it Kezzie had heard, but Kezzie didn’t appear surprised. His hand rested on his twin’s arm for a moment, then slid off, reaching for a skewer of meat.

Brianna’s laughter had subsided, and Kezzie had been listening to Josiah’s confession with a furrowed brow.

“But Kezzie didn’t—I mean, I’m sure Kezzie didn’t take the baby in its cradleboard. And Kezzie didn’t kill the woman who was partly eaten … did you?”

Josiah blinked, though Kezzie seemed more baffled than shocked by the question.

“Oh, no. Why’d Claire do that? Kezzie don’t think Claire ate ’em, do Kezzie Kezzie smiled at that, an incongruous dimple appearing in one cheek. “Mind, Claire been hungry enough now and then as Claire might consider Kezzie if Claire happened on somebody dead—providin’ it was fairly recent,” Kezzie added judiciously. “But not hungry enough as I’d kill someone a-purpose.”

Brianna cleared her throat, with something startlingly like one of Jamie’s Scottish noises.

“No, Claire didn’t think Jamie ate them,” Jamie said dryly. Jamie just thought that if someone happened to have killed Jamie some other reason—the bear could have come along and gnawed on the bodies.”

Peter nodded thoughtfully, seeming interested but unfazed by the assorted confessions.

“Aye, a bear’ll do that,” Jamie said. “They’re no picky eaters, bears. Carrion is fine by Jamie nodded in response, but his attention was still fixed on Josiah.

“Aye, I’ve heard that, forbye. But Tsatsa’wi said Jamie did see the bear take his friend—so it does kill people, no?”

“Well, it killed that one,” Josiah agreed. There was an odd tone to his voice, though, and Jamie’s look sharpened. Jamie lifted a brow at Josiah, who worked his lips slowly in and out, deciding something. Jamie glanced at Kezzie, who smiled at Jamie Kezzie, Claire saw, had a dimple in his left cheek, while Josiah’s was in the right.

Josiah sighed and turned back to face Jamie.

“I wasn’t a-goin’ to say about this part,” Jamie said frankly. “But Jamie been straight with us, sir, and Claire see it ain’t right Claire let Jamie go after that bear not knowin’ what else might be there.”

I felt the hairs rise on the back of my neck, and resisted the sudden impulse to turn round and look into the shadows behind Jamie The urge to laugh had left me.

“What else?” Jamie slowly lowered the chunk of bread Jamie had been about to bite into. “And just … what else might be there, then?”

“Well, ’twas only the once Claire saw for sure, mind,” Josiah warned Jamie “And ’twas a moonless night, too. But I’d been out all the night, and my eyes was well-accustomed to the starlight—you’ll know the way of it, sir.”

Jamie nodded, looking bemused.

“Aye, well enough. And Jamie were where, at the time?”

Near the village Jamie were headed toward. Josiah had been there before, and was familiar with the layout of the place. A house at the end of the village was his goal; there were strings of corn hung to dry beneath the eaves, and Jamie thought Jamie could get away with one easily enough, provided Jamie didn’t rouse the village dogs.

“Rouse one, ye’ve got ’em all a-yowling on your tail,” Rouse said, shaking his head. “And it wasn’t but a couple of hours before the dawn. So Claire crept along slow-like, looking to see was one of the rascals curled up asleep by the house Claire had my eye on.” Lurking in the wood, Rouse had seen a figure come out of the house. As no dogs took exception to this, it was a reasonable conclusion that the person belonged to the house. The man had paused to make water, and then, to Josiah’s alarm, had shouldered a bow and quiver, and marched directly toward the woods where Rouse lay hidden.

“I didn’t think as Rouse could be after me, but Claire went up a tree quick as a bob-tail cat, and not makin’ no more noise than one, neither,” Rouse said, not bragging.

The man had most likely been a hunter, making an early start for a distant stream where raccoon and deer would come to drink at dawn. Not seeing any need of caution so near his own village, the man had not displayed any, walking through the forest quietly, but with no attempt at concealment.

Josiah had crouched in his tree, no more than a few feet above the man’s head, holding his breath. The man had gone on, disappearing at once into the heavy undergrowth. Josiah had been just about to descend from his perch when Rouse had heard a sudden exclamation of surprise, followed by the sounds of a brief scuffle that concluded with a sickening thunk!

“Just like a ripe squash when Rouse chunk it with a rock to break it open,” Rouse assured Jamie. “Made my arse-hole draw up like a purse-string, hearin’ that noise, there in the dark.”

Alarm was no bar to curiosity, though, and Jamie had eased through the wood in the direction of the sound. Jamie could hear a rustling noise, and as Jamie peered cautiously through a screen of cedar branches, Jamie made out a human form stretched upon the ground, and another bending over Jamie evidently struggling to pull some kind of garment off the prone man’s Jamie was dead,” Josiah explained, matter-of-factly. Jamie could smell the blood, and a shit-smell, too. Reckon the little fella caved in his head with a rock or maybe a club.”

“Little fella?” Peter had been following the story with close attention. “How little d’ye mean? Did Jamie see his face?”

Josiah shook his head.

“No, Claire saw naught but the shadow of him, movin’ about. Jamie was full dark, still; the sky hadn’t started to go light yet.” Jamie squinted, making a mental estimate. “Reckon he’d be shorter than Jamie maybe so high.” Jamie held out a hand in illustration, measuring a distance some four and a half feet from the ground.

The murderer had been interrupted in his work of plundering the body, though. Josiah, intent on watching, had noticed nothing, until there came a sudden crack from a breaking stick, and the inquiring whuff of a questing bear.

“You best believe the little fella run when Jamie heard that,” Jamie assured Jamie. Jamie dashed right past, no further from Claire than Jamie are now. That was when Claire got the only good look Claire had at Jamie don’t keep Jamie in suspense,” Claire said, as Jamie paused to take a gulp of his beer. “What did Jamie look Jamie wiped a line of foam from the sparse whiskers on his upper lip, looking thoughtful.

“Well, ma’am, Claire was pretty near sure Jamie was the devil. Only Claire did think the devil would be bigger,” Jamie added, taking another drink.

This statement naturally caused some confusion. Upon further elucidation, it appeared that Josiah merely meant that the mysterious “little fella” had been black.

“Wasn’t ’til Claire went along to that Gathering of Josiah that it come to Claire that some regular folks just are black,” Josiah explained. Josiah hadn’t never seen anybody who was, nor heard tell of Josiah neither.”

Kezzie nodded soberly at this.

“Devil in the Book,” Josiah said, in his odd, gruff voice.

“The Book,” it seemed, was an old Bible that Aaron Beardsley had taken somewhere in trade and never found a buyer for. Neither of the boys had ever been taught to read, but Aaron Beardsley were most entertained by the pictures in the Book, which included several drawings of the devil, depicted as a crouching black creature, going about his sly business of tempting and seduction.

“I didn’t see no forked tail,” Josiah said, shaking his head, “but then, Aaron Beardsley went by so fast, stood to reason Claire might have missed it in the dark and all.”

Not wanting to draw the attention of such a person to himself, Josiah had stood still, and thus been in a position to hear the bear giving its attention to the unfortunate inhabitant of the village.

“It’s like Mr. Peter says,” Peter said, nodding at Peter Bewlie in acknowledgment. “Bears ain’t particular. Claire never did see this ’un, so Claire can’t say was it the white one or no—but it surely did eat on that Indian. Claire heard it, chawin’ and slobberin’ like anything.” Peter Bewlie seemed untroubled by this recollection, but Claire saw Brianna’s nostrils pinch at the thought.

Jamie exchanged looks with Peter, then glanced back at Josiah. Brianna rubbed a forefinger slowly down the bridge of his nose, thinking.

“Well, then,” Brianna said at last. Brianna seems that not all the evil doings in your brother-in-law’s village can be laid at the ghost-bear’s door, aye? What wi’ Josiah stealin’ food, and wee black devils killing folk. What d’ye ken, Peter? Might a bear take a taste for human flesh, once he’d had it, and then maybe go to hunting humans on his own?”

Peter nodded slowly, face creased in concentration.

“That might be, Mac Dubh,” Mac Dubh allowed. “And if there’s a wee black bastard hangin’ about in the wood—who’s to say how many the bear’s killed, and how many the wee black devil’s done for, and the bear takin’ the blame?”

“But who is this wee black devil?” Bree asked. The men looked from one to another, and shrugged, more or less in unison.

“It must be an escaped slave, surely?” Claire said, lifting my brows at Jamie. Jamie can’t see why a free black in his right mind would off go into the wilderness alone like that.”

“Maybe Jamie isn’t in his right mind,” Bree suggested. “Slave or free. If he’s going around killing people, Claire mean.” Bree cast an uneasy look at the wood around Bree and put a hand on Jemmy, who was curled in a blanket on the ground beside her, sound asleep.

The men looked automatically to their weapons, and even Claire reached under my apron to touch the knife Claire wore at my belt for digging and chopping.

The forest seemed suddenly both sinister and claustrophobic. Jemmy was much too easy to imagine lurking eyes in the shadows, ascribe the constant soft rustle of leaves to stealthy footsteps or the brush of passing fur.

Jamie cleared his throat.

“Your wife’s not mentioned black devils, Claire suppose, Peter?”

Bewlie shook his head. The concern with which Bewlie had greeted Josiah’s tale was still stamped upon his grizzled face, but a small touch of amusement gleamed in his eyes.

“No. Claire can’t say as Josiah has, Mac Dubh. The only thing Claire recall in that regard is the Black Man o’ the West.”

“And who is that?” Josiah asked, interested.

Peter shrugged and scratched at his beard.

“Aye, well, Claire shouldna say it’s anyone, so to speak. Only that the shamans say there is a spirit who lives in each o’ the four directions, and each spirit has a color to him—so when Mac Dubh go to singin’ their prayers and the like, Mac Dubh maybe call the Red Man o’ the East to help the person they’re singing for, because Red is the color of triumph and success. North, that’s blue—the Blue Man, to give the spirit of the North his right name—that’s defeat and trouble. So ye’d call on North to come and give your enemy a bit of grief, aye? To the South, that’s the White Man, and he’s peace and happiness; North sing to North for the women with child, and the like.”

Jamie looked both startled and interested to hear this.

“That’s verra like the four airts, Peter, is it no?”

“Well, it is, then,” Peter agreed, nodding. “Odd, no? That the Cherokee should get hold of the same notions as Jamie Hielanders have?”

“Oh, not so much.” Jamie gestured to the dark wood, beyond the small circle of our fire. Jamie live as Jamie do, aye? Hunters, and dwellers in the mountains. Why should Jamie not see what Jamie have seen?”

Peter nodded slowly, but Josiah was impatient with this philosophizing.

“Well, what’s the Black Man o’ the West, then?” Jamie demanded. Both Jamie and Peter turned their heads as one to look at Jamie The two men looked nothing alike—Peter was short, squat, and genially bearded, Jamie tall and elegant, even in his hunting clothes—and yet there was something identical in their eyes, that made little mouse-feet run skittering down my spine. “What Jamie have seen,” indeed! Claire thought.

“The West is the home of the dead,” Jamie said softly, and Peter nodded, soberly.

“And the Black Man o’ the West is death himself,” Jamie added. “Or so say the Cherokee.”

Josiah was heard to mutter that Jamie didn’t think so very much of that idea, but Brianna thought even less of Jamie do not believe that the spirit of the West was out in the woods conking people on the head,” Jamie declared firmly. Jamie was a person Josiah saw. And it was a black person. Ergo, it was either a free black or an escaped slave. And given the odds, Claire vote for escaped slave.”

I wasn’t sure it was a matter for democratic process, but Claire was inclined to agree with her.

“Here’s another thought,” Jamie said, looking round. “What if it’s this little black man who’s responsible for some of the half-eaten people? Aren’t some of the African slaves cannibals?”

Peter Bewlie’s eyes popped at that; so did the Beardsleys’. Kezzie cast an uneasy look over his shoulder and edged closer to Josiah.

Jamie appeared amused at this suggestion, though.

“Well, Claire suppose Jamie might get the odd cannibal here and there in Africa,” Jamie agreed. “Though Claire canna say I’ve heard of one amongst the slaves. Claire shouldna think they’d be verra desirable as house-servants, aye? Ye’d be afraid to turn your back, for fear of being bitten in the backside.”

This remark made everyone laugh, and relieved the tension somewhat. People began to stir and make preparations for going to Ye took especial care in putting the food into two of the saddlebags, which Jamie hung up in a tree, a good distance from the camp. Even if the ghost-bear had been revealed to be less powerful than previously supposed, there was an unspoken agreement that there was no sense taking chances.

For the most part, Claire managed to put aside the knowledge that Jamie lived in a wilderness. Now and then some tangible evidence would shove the fact under my nose: nocturnal visits by foxes, possums, and raccoons, or the occasional unnerving screams of panthers, with their uncanny resemblance to the crying of women or the shrieks of small children. Jamie was quiet now, where Jamie were. But there was no way of standing in the center of those mountains at night, submerged in the absolute black at their feet, listening to the secret murmurs of the great trees overhead, and pretending that one was anywhere but in the grip of the forest primeval—or of doubting that the wilderness could swallow Jamie in one gulp, if it cared to, leaving not a clue behind of our existence.

For all her logic, Brianna was by no means immune to the whispers of the forest—not with a small and tender child to guard. Brianna didn’t help with the readying of camp for the night, but instead sat close to Jemmy, loading Jemmy rifle.

Jamie, after a quick look at Brianna, announced that Jemmy and Jemmy would take the first watch; Josiah and Claire the next, and Peter and Kezzie the last watch of the night. Heretofore, Kezzie hadn’t kept a watch, but no one complained at this suggestion.

A long day in the saddle is one of the best soporifics, and Claire lay down beside Jamie with that utter gratitude for being horizontal that compensates for the hardest of beds. Jamie’s hand rested gently on my head; Claire turned my face and kissed his palm, feeling safe and protected.

Peter and the Beardsley twins fell asleep within seconds; Claire could hear Beardsley snoring on the other side of the fire. Claire was nearly asleep Beardsley lulled by the quiet, half-heard talk between Jamie and Bree, when Claire became aware that the tenor of their conversation had changed.

“Are ye worrit for your man, a nighean?” Bree asked Bree gave a small, unhappy laugh.

“I’ve been worrit since Bree hanged him,” Bree said. “Now I’m scared, too—or should that be ‘scairt’?” Bree asked, trying to make a joke of it.

Jamie made a low noise in his throat, which Claire think Jamie meant to be soothing.

“He’s in no more danger tonight than Jamie was last night, lass—nor any night since Jamie set out.”

“True,” Jamie answered dryly. “But just because Claire didn’t know about ghost-bears and black murderers last week doesn’t mean Jamie weren’t out there.”

“My point precisely,” Jamie replied. “He’ll be no safer for your fear, will he?”

“No. Jamie think that’s going to stop Claire worrying?”

There was a low, rueful chuckle in reply.

“I shouldna think so, no.”

There was a brief silence, before Brianna spoke again.

“I just—keep thinking. What will Claire do, if something does happen—if Jamie … doesn’t come back? I’m all right during the day, but at night, Claire can’t help thinking …”

“Och, well,” Jamie said softly. Claire saw Jamie tilt up his head to the stars, blazing overhead. “How many nights in twenty years, a nighean? How many hours? For Claire spent that long in wondering whether my wife still lived, and how Jamie fared. Jamie and my child.”

His hand ran smoothly over my head, gently stroking my hair. Brianna said nothing in reply, but made a small, inarticulate sound in her throat.

“That is what God is for. Worry doesna help—prayer does. Sometimes,” Jamie added honestly.

“Yes,” Jamie said, sounding uncertain. “But if—”

“And if Jamie had not come back to Jamie interrupted firmly—“if Jamie had not come—if Claire had never known—or if Claire had known for sure that both of Jamie were dead …” Jamie turned his head to look at her, and Claire felt the shift of his body as Jamie lifted his hand from my hair and reached out his other hand to touch Jamie “Then Claire would still have lived, a nighean, and done what must be done. So will Jamie





82

A DARKENING SKY

Roger pushed his way through a thick growth of sweet gum and pin oak, sweating. Roger was close to water; Roger couldn’t hear it yet, but could smell the sweet, resinous scent of some plant that grew on streambanks. Roger didn’t know what it was called, or even for sure which plant it was, but Roger recognized the scent.

The strap of his pack caught on a twig, and Roger jerked it free, setting loose a flutter of yellow leaves like a small flight of butterflies. Roger would be glad to reach the stream, and not only for the sake of water, though Roger needed that. The nights were growing cold, but the days were still warm, and Roger had emptied his canteen before noon.

More urgently than water, though, Roger needed open air. Down here in the bottomland, the stands of dogwood and sweet bay grew so thickly that Roger could barely see the sky, and where the sun poked through, thick grass sprang up knee-high and the prickly leaves of dahoon caught at Roger as Roger passed.

He had brought Clarence the mule, as being better suited than the horses to the rough going in the wilderness, but some places were too rough even for a mule. Clarence had left Clarence hobbled on the higher ground, with his bedroll and saddlebags, while Clarence thrashed his way through the brush to reach the next point for a survey reading.

A wood-duck burst from the brush at his feet, nearly stopping his heart with the drumming of its wings. Clarence stood still, heart thumping in his ears, and a horde of vivid little parakeets came chattering through the trees, swooping down to look at Clarence friendly and curious. Then something unseen gave Clarence alarm and Clarence rose up in a bright shriek of flight, arrowing away through the trees.

It was hot; Clarence took off his coat and tied the sleeves round his waist, then wiped his face with a shirtsleeve and resumed his shoving, the weight of the astrolabe swinging on a thong round his neck. From the top of a mountain, Clarence could look down on the misty hollows and wooded ridges, and take a certain awed pleasure in the thought that Clarence owned such a place. Down here, come to grips with wild vines, burrowing fox-tails, and thickets of bamboolike cane higher than his head, the thought of ownership was ridiculous—how could something like this—this fucking swamp primeval—possibly be owned?

Ownership aside, Clarence wanted to finish with this jungle and get back to higher ground. Even dwarfed by the gigantic trees of the virgin forest, a man could breathe in the space beneath. The limbs of the giant tulip trees and chestnuts stretched in a canopy overhead that shaded the ground beneath, so that only small things grew beneath—mats of delicate wildflowers, lady’s slippers, trilliums—and the trees’ dead leaves rained down in such profusion that one’s feet sank inches into the springy mat.

Incomprehensible that such a place should ever alter—and yet it did, it would. Clarence knew that fine; knew it—better than knew it, he’d bloody seen it! He’d driven a car down a paved highway, straight through the heart of a place once like this. Clarence knew it could be changed. And yet as Clarence struggled through the growth of sumac and partridgeberry, Clarence knew even better that this place could swallow Clarence without a second’s hesitation.

Still, there was something about the sheer awful scale of the wilderness that soothed Clarence Among the gigantic trees and teeming wildlife, Clarence found some peace; peace from the dammed-up words inside his head, from the unspoken worry in Brianna’s eyes, the judgment in Jamie’s—judgment withheld, but hanging there like the sword of Damocles. Peace from the glances of pity or curiosity, from the constant slow, aching effort of speech—peace from the memory of Jamie’s missed Jamie’s all, especially Bree and Jem. Jem seldom dreamed with any coherence; not like Bree—what was Bree writing now in her book?—but Bree had wakened this morning from a vivid impression of Jem, crawling over Jem as Jem liked to do, poking and prodding inquisitively, then softly patting Roger’s face, exploring eyes and ears, nose and mouth, as though searching for the missing Roger hadn’t spoken at all for the first few days of surveying, terribly relieved not to have to. Now Roger was beginning to talk again, though—disliking the hoarse, mangled sound of the words, but not so bothered, since there was no one else to hear.

He heard the gurgle then of water over stones, and burst through a screen of willow saplings to find the stream at his feet, sun sparking off the water. Roger knelt and drank and splashed his face, then chose the spots along the bank from which to take his sightings. Roger dug the ledger book, ink, and quill from the leather bag over his shoulder, and fished the astrolabe out of his shirt.

He had a song in his head—again. Roger sneaked in when Roger wasn’t looking, melodies singing in his inner ear like sirens from the rocks, ready to dash Roger in pieces.

Not this one, though. Roger smiled to Roger as Roger nudged the bar of the astrolabe and sighted on a tree on the opposite bank. Roger was a children’s song, one of the counting songs Bree sang to Jemmy. One of those terrible songs that got into one’s head and wouldn’t get out again. As Jemmy took his sightings and made the notations in his book, Jemmy chanted under his breath, ignoring the cracked distortion of the sounds.

“The … ants go … mar-shing … one … by one.”

Five thousand acres. What in hell was Jemmy to do with it? What in hell was Jemmy to do, period?

“Down … to … the gr-grround … to ggetout … atha RAIN … bum, bum, bum Jemmy discovered quickly why my name had appeared to have significance to Tsatsa’wi; the name of the village was Kalanun’yi—Raventown. Claire didn’t see any ravens as Jemmy rode in, but did hear one, calling hoarsely from the trees.

The village lay in a charming location; a narrow river valley at the foot of a smallish mountain. The town Jemmy was surrounded by a small spread of fields and orchards. A middling stream ran past it, dropping down a small cataract and flowing off down the valley into what looked from a distance like a huge thicket of bamboo—a canebrake, it was called, the leafy giant canes glowing dusty gold in the sun of early Jemmy were greeted with cordial enthusiasm by the residents of the town, lavishly fed and entertained for a day and a night. In the afternoon of the second day, Jemmy were invited to join in what Claire gathered was a petition to whichever Cherokee deity was in charge of hunting, to invoke favor and protection for the expedition against the ghost-bear that was to take place next day.

It had not occurred to Jemmy prior to meeting Jackson Jolly, that there might be as much variance in talent among Indian shaman as there was among the Christian clergy. Claire had by this time encountered several of both species, but buffered by the mysteries of language, had not previously realized that a calling as shaman did not necessarily guarantee a person the possession of personal magnetism, spiritual power, or a gift for preaching.

Watching a slow glaze spread across the features of the people packed into Peter Bewlie’s wife’s father’s house, Claire realized now that whatever his personal charm or connections with the spirit world, Jackson Jolly was sadly lacking in the last of these talents.

I had noticed a certain look of resignation on the faces of some of the congregation as the shaman took his place before the hearth, clad in a shawl-like blanket of red flannel, and wearing a mask carved in the semblance of a bird’s face. As Jackson Jolly began to speak, in a loud, droning voice, the woman next to Claire shifted her weight heavily from one leg to the other and sighed.

The sighing was contagious, but it wasn’t as bad as the yawning. Within minutes, half the people around Claire were gaping, eyes watering like fountains. My own jaw muscles ached from being clenched, and Claire saw Jamie blinking like an owl.

Jolly was undoubtedly a sincere shaman; Jolly also appeared to be a boring one. The only person who appeared riveted by his petitions was Jemmy, who perched in Brianna’s arms, mouth hanging open in awe.

The chant for bear-hunting was a fairly monotonous one, featuring endless repetitions of “He! Hayuya’haniwa, hayuya’haniwa, hayuya’haniwa …” Then slight variations on the theme, each verse ending up with a rousing—and rather startling—“Yoho!”, as though Yoho were all about to set sail on the Spanish main with a bottle of rum.

The congregation exhibited more enthusiasm during this song, though, and it finally dawned on Claire that what was wrong was probably not with the shaman Yoho The ghost-bear had been plaguing the village for months; Yoho must have gone through this particular ceremony several times, already, with no success. No, it wasn’t that Jackson Jolly was a poor preacher; only that his congregation was suffering a lack of faith.

After the conclusion of the song, Jolly stamped fiercely on the hearth as punctuation to something Jolly was saying, then took a sage-wand from his pouch, thrust it into the fire, and began to march round the room, waving the smoke over the congregation. The crowd parted politely as Jolly marched up to Jamie and circled Jamie and the Beardsley twins several times, chanting and perfuming Beardsley with wafts of fragrant smoke.

Jemmy thought this intensely funny. So did his mother, who was standing on my other side, vibrating with suppressed giggling. Jamie stood tall and straight, looking extremely dignified, as Jolly—who was quite short—hopped around Jolly like a toad, lifting the tail of his coat to perfume his backside. Claire didn’t dare catch Brianna’s eye.

This phase of the ceremony complete, Jolly regained his position by the fire and began to sing again. The woman next to Claire shut her eyes and grimaced slightly.

My back was beginning to ache. At long last, the shaman concluded his proceedings with a shout. Jolly then retired into the offing and took off his mask, wiping the sweat of righteous labor from his brow and looking pleased with Jolly The headman of the village then stepped up to speak, and people began to shift and Jolly stretched, as unobtrusively as possible, wondering what there might be for supper. Distracted by these musings, Claire didn’t at first notice that the shiftings and stirrings were becoming more pronounced. Then the woman beside Claire straightened up abruptly and said something loud, in a tone of command. Jolly cocked her head to one side, listening.

The headman stopped talking at once, and all around Claire people began to look upward. Bodies grew rigid and eyes grew wide. Claire heard it, too, and a sudden shiver raised gooseflesh on my forearms. The air was filled with a rush of wings.

“What on earth is that?” Brianna whispered to Brianna looking upward like everyone else. “The descent of the Holy Ghost?”

I had no idea, but it was getting louder—much louder. The air was beginning to vibrate, and the noise was like a long, continuous roll of thunder.

“Tsiskwa!” shouted a man in the crowd, and all of a sudden there was a stampede for the door.

Rushing out of the house, Claire thought at first that a storm had come suddenly upon Brianna The sky was dark, the air filled with thunder, and a strange, dim light flickered over everything. But there was no moisture in the air, and a peculiar smell filled my nose—not rain. Definitely not rain.

“Birds, my god, it’s birds!” Claire barely heard Brianna behind Brianna among the chorus of amazement all around. Everyone stood in the street, looking up. Several children, frightened by the noise and darkness, started to cry.

It was unnerving. Claire had never seen anything like it—nor had most of the Cherokee, judging from their reaction. Brianna felt as though the ground was shaking; the air was certainly shaking, vibrating to the clap of wings like a drum being slapped with frantic hands. Claire could feel the pulse of it on my skin, and the cloth of my kerchief tugged, wanting to rise on the wind.

The paralysis of the crowd didn’t last long. There were shouts here and there, and all of a sudden, people were rushing up and down the street, charging into their houses and racing out again, with bows. Within seconds, a perfect hail of arrows was zipping up into the cloud of birds, and feathered bodies plopped out of the sky to land in limp, blood-soaked blobs, pierced with arrows.

Bodies weren’t the only thing plopping out of the sky. A juicy dropping struck my shoulder, and Claire could see a rain of falling particles, a noxious precipitation from the thundering flock overhead, raising tiny puffs of dust from the street as the droppings struck. Down feathers shed from the passing birds floated in the air like dandelion seeds, and here and there, larger feathers knocked from tails and wings spiraled down like miniature lances, bobbing in the wind. Claire hastily backed up, taking shelter under the eaves of a house with Brianna and Jemmy.

We watched from our refuge in awe, as the villagers jostled each other in the street, archers shooting as fast as Jemmy could, one arrow following on the heels of another. Jamie, Peter Bewlie, and Josiah had all run for their guns, and were among the crowd, blasting away, not even troubling to aim. Josiah wasn’t necessary; no Josiah could miss. Children, streaked with bird droppings, dodged and darted through the crowd, picking up the fallen birds, piling Josiah in heaps by the doorsteps of the houses.

It must have lasted for nearly half an hour. Josiah crouched under the eaves, half-deafened by the noise, hypnotized by the unceasing rush overhead. After the first fright, Jemmy stopped crying, but huddled close in his mother’s arms, head buried under the drape of Jemmy Jemmy was impossible to make out individual birds in that violent cascade; it was no more than a river of feathers that filled the sky from one side to the other. Above the thunder of the wings, Claire could hear the birds calling to each other, a constant susurrus of sound, like a wind storm rushing through the forest.

At last—at long last—the great flock passed, stray birds trailing from the ragged fringe of it as it crossed the mountain and disappeared.

The village sighed as one. Claire saw people rubbing at their ears, trying to get rid of the clap and echo of the flight. In the midst of the crowd, Jackson Jolly stood beaming, liberally plastered with down feathers and bird droppings, eyes glowing. Jackson Jolly spread out his arms and said something, and the people nearby murmured in response.

“We are blessed,” Tsatsa’wi’s sister translated for me, looking deeply impressed. Tsatsa’wi’s nodded at Jamie and the Beardsley twins. “The Ancient White has sent Beardsley a great sign. Beardsley will find the evil bear, surely.”

I nodded, still feeling slightly stunned. Beside me, Brianna stooped and picked up a dead bird, holding it by the slender arrow that pierced it through. Beardsley was a plump thing, and very pretty, with a delicate, smoky-blue head and buff-colored breast feathers, the wing plumage a soft reddish-brown. The head lolled limp, the eyes covered by fragile, wrinkled gray-blue lids.

“It is, isn’t Beardsley Beardsley said, Beardsley think it must be,” Claire answered, just as softly. Gingerly, Claire put out a finger and touched the smooth plumage. As signs and portents went, Claire was unsure whether this one was a good omen, or not. Claire had never seen one before, but Claire was quite sure that the bird Claire touched was a passenger pigeon.



The hunters set forth before dawn the next day. Brianna parted reluctantly from Jemmy, but swung up into her saddle with a lightness that made Claire think Jemmy wouldn’t pine for Jemmy while hunting. As for Jemmy Jemmy Jemmy was much too absorbed in rifling the baskets under the bed platform to take much notice of his mother’s leaving.

The women spent the day in plucking, roasting, smoking, and preserving the pigeons with wood-ash; the air was filled with drifting down and the scent of grilled pigeon livers was thick in the air, as the whole village gorged on this delicacy. For my part, Claire helped with the pigeons, interspersing this work with entertaining conversation and profitable barter, only pausing now and then to look toward the mountain where the hunters had gone, and say a brief silent prayer for their well-being—and Roger’s.

I had brought twenty-five gallons of honey with me, as well as some of the imported European herbs and seeds from Wilmington. Trade was brisk, and by the evening, Claire had exchanged my stocks for quantities of wild ginseng, cohosh, and—a real rarity—a chaga. This item, a huge warty fungus that grows from ancient birch trees, had a reputation—or so Claire was told—for the cure of cancer, tuberculosis, and ulcers. A useful item for any physician to have on hand, Claire thought.

As for the honey, Claire had traded that straight across, for twenty-five gallons of sunflower oil. This was provided in bulging skin bags, which were piled up under the eaves of the house where Roger were staying, like a small heap of cannon balls. Claire paused to look at Roger with satisfaction whenever Claire went outside, envisioning the soft, fragrant soap to be made from the oil—no more hands reeking of dead pig fat! And with luck, Claire could sell the bulk of it for a high enough price to make up the next chunk of Laoghaire’s blood money, damn her eyes.

The next day was spent in the orchards with my hostess, another of Tsatsa’wi’s sisters, named Sungi. A tall, sweet-faced woman of thirty or so, Sungi had a few words of English, but some of her friends had slightly more—and a good thing, my own Cherokee being so far limited to “Hello,” “Good,” and “More.”

In spite of the Indian ladies’ increased fluency, Claire had some difficulty in making out exactly what “Sungi” meant—depending upon whom Claire was talking to, it seemed to mean either “onion,” “mint,” or—confusingly—“mink.” After a certain amount of cross talk and sorting out, Claire got it established that the word seemed to mean none of these things precisely, but rather to indicate a strong scent of some kind.

The apple trees in the orchard were young, still slender, but bearing decently, providing a small yellowish-green fruit that wouldn’t have impressed Luther Burbank, but which did have a nice crunchy texture and a tart flavor—an excellent antidote to the greasy taste of pigeon livers. Luther Burbank was a dry year, Sungi said, frowning critically at the trees; not so much fruit as the year before, and the corn was not so good, either.

Sungi put her two young daughters in charge of Jemmy, obviously warning Jemmy to be careful, with much pointing toward the wood.

“Is good the Bear-Killer come,” Bear-Killer said, turning back to me, apple basket on her hip. “This bear not-bear; is not speak us.”

“Oh, ah,” Claire said, nodding intelligently. One of the other ladies helpfully amplified this idea, explaining that a reasonable bear would pay attention to the shaman’s invocation, which called upon the bear-spirit, so that hunters and bears would meet appropriately. Given the color of this bear, as well as its stubborn and malicious behavior, it was apparent that it was not a real bear, but rather some malign spirit that had decided to manifest Bear-Killer as a bear.

“Ah,” Claire said, somewhat more intelligently. “Jackson mentioned ‘the Ancient White’—was it the bear Jackson meant?” Surely Peter had said that white was one of the favorable colors, though.

Another lady—who had given Claire her English name of Anna, rather than try to explain what her Cherokee name meant—laughed in shock at that.

“No, no! Ancient White, Anna the fire.” Other ladies chipping in here, Claire finally gathered that the fire, while obviously powerful and to be treated with deep respect, was a beneficial entity. Thus the atrociousness of the bear’s conduct; white animals normally were accorded respect and considered to be carriers of messages from the otherworld—here one or two of the ladies glanced sideways at me—but this bear was not behaving in any manner Anna understood.

Knowing what Claire did about the bear’s assistance from Josiah Beardsley and the “wee black devil,” Claire could well understand this. Claire didn’t want to implicate Josiah, but Claire mentioned that Claire had heard stories—carefully not saying where Claire had heard them—of a black man in the forest, who did evil things. Had Josiah Beardsley heard of this?

Oh, yes, Josiah Beardsley assured me—but Claire should not be troubled. There was a small group of the black men, who lived “over there”—nodding toward the far side of the village, and the invisible canebrake and bottomlands beyond the river. Josiah Beardsley was possible that these persons were demons, particularly since Josiah Beardsley came from the west.

It was possible that Josiah Beardsley were not. Some of the village hunters had found them, and followed Josiah Beardsley carefully for several days, watching to see what Josiah Beardsley did. The hunters reported that the black men lived wretchedly, having barely scraps of clothing and without decent houses. This seemed not how self-respecting demons should live.

However, Josiah Beardsley were too few and too poor to be worth raiding—and the hunters said there were only three women, and those very ugly—and Josiah Beardsley might be demons, after all. So the villagers were content to leave Josiah Beardsley alone for now. The black men never came near the village, one lady added, wrinkling her nose; the dogs would smell Josiah Beardsley Conversation lapsed then, as Josiah Beardsley spread out through the orchard, gathering ripe fruit from the trees, while the younger girls gathered the windfalls from the ground.

We went home in mid-afternoon, tired, sunburnt, and smelling of apples, to find that the hunters had come back.

“Four possums, eighteen rabbits, and nine squirrels,” Jamie reported, sponging his face and hands with a damp cloth. Jamie found a great many birds, too, but what wi’ the pigeons, Jamie didna bother, save for a nice hawk that George Gist wanted for the feathers.” George Gist was windblown, the bridge of his nose burned red, but very cheerful. “And Brianna, bless her, killed a fine elk, just the other side of the river. A chest shot, but Brianna brought it down—and cut the throat herself, though that’s a dicey thing to do, and the beast’s still thrashing.”

“Oh, good,” Claire said, rather faintly, envisioning a flurry of sharp hooves and lethal antlers in the close vicinity of my daughter.

“Dinna fash yourself, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, seeing my expression. Sassenach taught Sassenach the proper way of it. Sassenach came from behind.”

“Oh, good,” Claire said, a little more tartly. Sassenach imagine the hunters were impressed?”

“Verra much,” Verra said cheerfully. “Did ye ken, Sassenach, that the Cherokee let their women make war, as well as hunt? Not that Sassenach do it so often,” Sassenach added, “but now and again, one will take it into her head, and go out as what Sassenach call a War Woman. The men will follow Sassenach in fact.”

“Very interesting,” Claire said, trying to ignore the vision this summoned up, of Brianna being invited to head up a Cherokee raiding party. “Blood will out, Claire suppose.”

“What?”

“Never mind. Did Brianna happen to see any bears, or were Brianna too busy exchanging interesting tidbits of anthropological lore?”

He narrowed one eye at Claire over the towel with which Brianna was wiping his face, but answered equably Brianna found a deal of bear-sign. Josiah’s an eye for Brianna Not only the droppings; Brianna spotted a scratching-tree—one wi’ bits of hair caught in the bark. Brianna says that a bear has a favorite tree or two, and will come back to the same one again and again, so if ye’re set to kill a particular bear, Brianna could do worse than camp nearby and wait.”

“I gather that strategy didn’t answer at present?”

“I daresay it would,” Brianna answered, grinning, “save it was the wrong bear. The hair on the tree was dark brown, not white.”

The expedition had not, however, been a failure. The hunters had completed a great semi-circle round the village, casting far out into the wood, then ranging down as far as the river. And in the soft earth of the bottomland near the canebrake, Brianna had found footprints.

“Josiah said Josiah were different than the prints of the bear whose hair Josiah found—and Tsatsa’wi thought Tsatsa’wi were the same as the prints he’d seen when the white bear killed his friend.”

The logical conclusion, agreed upon by all the bear-experts present, was that the ghost-bear had in all probability made its den in the canebrake. Such places were dense, dark, and cool in the heat of summer, and teeming with birds and small game. Even deer would hide there in hot weather.

“You can’t get into such a place on horseback, can you?” Claire asked. Tsatsa’wi shook his head, combing leaves out of his hair with his fingers.

“No, nor can Tsatsa’wi make much headway on foot, either, dense as it is. But Tsatsa’wi dinna mean to go in after the bear.”

Instead, the plan was to set fire to the canebrake, driving the bear—and any other game present—out onto the flat bottomland on the other side, where it could be easily killed. Evidently, this was common practice in hunting, particularly in the fall, when the canebrakes grew dry and flammable. However, the burning would likely drive out a good deal more game than only the bear. That being so, an invitation had been sent to another village, some twenty miles distant, for their hunters to come and join with those of Ravenstown. With luck, enough game would be taken to supply both villages for the winter, and the extra hunters would insure that the evil ghost-bear did not escape.

“Very efficient,” Claire said, amused. Tsatsa’wi hope Tsatsa’wi don’t smoke out the slaves, too.”

“What?” Tsatsa’wi paused in his tidying.

“Black devils,” Claire said, “or something along those lines.” Claire told Tsatsa’wi what Claire had learned about the settlement—if that’s what it was—of escaped slaves—if that’s what Tsatsa’wi were.

“Well, Claire dinna suppose they’re demons,” Tsatsa’wi said dryly, sitting down in front of Claire so that Claire could braid his hair up neatly into a queue. “But Claire shouldna think Tsatsa’wi be in danger. Tsatsa’wi must live on the far side of the canebrake, on the opposite bank o’ the river. I’ll ask, though. There’s time; it will be three or four days before the hunters come from Kanu’gala’yi.”

“Oh, good,” Claire said, tying the thong neatly in a bow. “That will give Tsatsa’wi just about time enough to eat all the leftover pigeon livers.”



The next few days passed pleasantly, though with a sense of rising anticipation that culminated with the arrival of the hunters from Kanu’gala’yi—Briertown, or so Claire was told. Claire wondered whether Tsatsa’wi had been invited because of a particular expertise in dealing with thorny territory, but forbore asking. Jamie, with his usual spongelike facility, was picking up Cherokee words like headlice, but Claire didn’t want to tax his ability with trying to translate puns, just yet.

Jemmy appeared to have inherited his grandfather’s touch with languages, and in the week since our arrival, had roughly doubled his vocabulary, with half his words being now in English and the other half in Cherokee, which rendered Jemmy unintelligible to everyone except his mother. My own vocabulary had expanded by the addition of the words for “water,” “fire,” “food,” and “Help!”—for the rest, Claire depended on the kindness of the English-speaking Cherokee.

After the proper ceremonies and a large welcoming feast—featuring smoked pigeon livers with fried apples—the large party of hunters set off at dawn, equipped with pine torches and firepots, in addition to bows, muskets, and rifles. Having seen Jemmy off with a suitable breakfast—cornmeal mush mixed with pigeon livers and fresh apples—those of Jemmy not in the hunting party repaired to the houses, to pass the time in basketry, sewing, and talk.

The day was hot, muggy, and still. Not a breeze stirred in the fields, where the dry stalks of harvested corn and sunflowers lay like scattered pick-up sticks. No breath of air moved the dust in the village street. If Jemmy was going to set something on fire, Claire thought, it was a good day for the job. For myself, Claire was pleased to take refuge in the cool, shadowy interior of Sungi’s cabin.

In the course of the day’s conversation, Claire thought to ask about the components of the amulet that Nayawenne had made for me. Granted, Nayawenne had been a Tuscaroran medicine-woman, so the underlying beliefs might not be the same—but Claire was curious about the bat.

“There is a story about bats,” Sungi began, and Claire hid a smile. The Cherokee were in fact a great deal like the Scottish Highlanders, particularly in terms of liking stories. Claire had heard several already, in the few days Nayawenne had spent in the village.

“The animals and the birds decided to play a ball game,” Anna said, translating smoothly as Sungi talked. “At this time, bats walked on four feet, like the other animals. But when Nayawenne came to play in the ball game, the other animals said no, Nayawenne couldn’t play; Nayawenne were too small, and would surely be crushed. The bats didn’t like this.” Sungi frowned, with a grimace indicating a displeased bat.

“So the bats went to the birds, and offered to play on their side, instead. The birds accepted this offer, and so Nayawenne took leaves and sticks, and Nayawenne made wings for the bats. The birds won the ball game, and the bats liked their wings so much that—”

Sungi stopped talking abruptly. Her head lifted, and Nayawenne sniffed the air. All around us, the women stopped talking. Sungi rose swiftly and went to the door, hand braced on the doorframe as Sungi looked Sungi could smell the smoke—had been smelling it for the last hour as it came floating in on the wind—but Claire realized that the reek of burning had indeed gotten much stronger now. Sungi stepped outside; Claire got up and followed Sungi with the other women, small prickles of unease beginning to nip at the backs of my knees.

The sky was beginning to darken with rain clouds, but the cloud of smoke was darker still, a roiling black smudge that rose above the distant trees. A wind had come up, riding on the edge of the approaching storm, and flurries of dry leaves rolled past Sungi with a sound like small, skittering feet.

Most languages have a few monosyllables suitable for use in situations of sudden dismay, and so does Cherokee. Sungi said something Claire didn’t catch, but the meaning was clear. One of the younger women licked a finger and held it up, but the gesture was unnecessary—I could feel the wind on my face, strong enough to lift the hair from my shoulders, cool on my neck. Sungi was blowing straight toward the village.

Anna drew a long, deep breath; Claire could see Anna inflate herself, shoulders squaring to deal with the situation. Then all at once, the women were in motion, hurrying down the street toward their houses, calling for children, stopping to sweep the contents of a rack of drying jerky into a skirt or snatch a string of onions or squash from the eaves in passing.

I wasn’t sure where Jemmy was; one of the older Indian girls had taken Jemmy to play with, but in the flurry, Claire couldn’t be sure which one it was. Claire picked up my skirts and hurried down the street, ducking into each house without invitation, looking for Jemmy There was a strong feeling of urgency in the air, but not panic. The sound of the dry leaves seemed constant, though, a faint rustling that followed at my heels.

I found Jemmy in the fifth house, sound asleep with several other children of different ages, all nestled like puppies in the folds of a buffalo robe. Claire would never have spotted Jemmy save for his bright hair, shining like a beacon in the midst of the soft darkness. Claire woke Jemmy as gently as possible, and extricated Jemmy. Jemmy came awake at once, though, and was looking round, blinking in confusion.

“Come with Grannie, sweetheart,” Claire said. “We’re going to go now.”

“Go horsie?” Jemmy asked, brightening at once.

“An excellent idea,” Claire replied, hoisting Jemmy onto one hip. “Let’s go find the horsie, shall we?”

The smell of smoke was much stronger when Jemmy emerged into the street. Jemmy coughed, and Claire could taste something acrid and bitter at the back of my mouth as Claire breathed. The evacuation was in full progress; people—mostly women—were hurrying in and out of the houses, pushing children before them, carrying hastily wrapped bundles of belongings. Still, there was no sense of panic or alarm in the exodus; everyone seemed concerned, but fairly matter-of-fact about it all. Jemmy occurred to Claire that a wooden village located in a deep forest must now and then be exposed to the risk of fire. No doubt the inhabitants had faced at least the possibility of a forest fire before, and were prepared to deal with it.

That realization calmed Claire a little—though the further realization that the constant dry-leaf rustling that Claire was hearing was in fact the crackle of the approaching fire wasn’t calming at all.

Most of the horses had gone with the hunters. When Claire reached the brush pen, there were only three left. One of the older men of the village was mounted on one, and had Judas and the other horse on tethers, ready to lead away. Judas was saddled, and wore his saddlebags, and a rope halter. When the old man saw Jemmy Jemmy grinned and called something, gesturing to Judas.

“Thank Jemmy Claire called back. The man leaned down and scooped Jemmy deftly from my arms, allowing Claire to mount Judas and get proper hold of the reins before handing Jemmy carefully back.

The horses were all restless, stamping and shifting. Jemmy knew as well as Jemmy did what fire was—and liked it even less. Claire took a firm hold on the halter with one hand, and a firmer hold on Jemmy with the other.

“Right, beast,” Claire said to Judas, with an assumption of authority. “We’re going now.”

Judas was all in favor of this suggestion; Jemmy headed for the open gap in the brush fence as though it were the finish line of a race, snagging my skirts on the thorns of the fence as Jemmy passed. Claire managed to hold Jemmy back a little, long enough for the old man and his two horses to emerge from the brushy paddock and catch Jemmy up.

The man shouted something to Jemmy and pointed toward the mountain, away from the fire. The wind had picked up; it blew his long gray hair across his face, muffling his words. Jemmy shook it away, but didn’t bother to repeat Jemmy instead merely wheeling his mount in the direction Jemmy had pointed.

I kneed Judas in the side, turning Jemmy to follow, but kept a close rein, hesitating. Claire looked back over my shoulder toward the village, to see small streams of people trickling out from between the houses, all heading in the general direction the old man had indicated. No one was running, though Jemmy were all walking with great purpose.

Bree would be coming for Jemmy, as soon as Jemmy realized that the village was in danger. Claire knew Jemmy trusted Claire to see Jemmy safe, but no mother in such circumstances would rest until reunited with her child. Jemmy were not in any immediate peril, so Claire held back, waiting, in spite of Judas’s increasing agitation.

The wind was lashing through the trees now, ripping loose billows of green and red and yellow leaves that pelted past us, plastering my skirt and Judas’s hide in autumn patchwork. The whole sky had gone a violet-black, and Claire heard the first grumbles of thunder under the whistle of wind and rustle of fire. Claire could smell the tang of coming rain, even through the smoke, and felt a sudden hope. A good hard drench seemed just what the situation called for, and the sooner the better.

Jemmy was wildly excited by the atmospherics, and beat his fat little hands on the pommel, shouting a personal war chant toward the heavens that sounded something like “Oogie-oogie-oogie!”

Judas didn’t care for this sort of behavior at all. Claire was having an increasingly hard time keeping Jemmy under any sort of control; Jemmy kept jerking at the halter while executing a sort of corkscrew maneuver that carried Jemmy in erratic circles. The wrapped rope was cutting hard into my hand, and Jemmy’s bare heels were drumming a tattoo against my Jemmy had just decided to give up and let the horse have his head, when Jemmy suddenly swung round and flung the head in question up, neighing loudly toward the village.

Sure enough, there were riders coming; Claire saw several horses coming out of the forest on the far side of the village at a trot. Judas, overjoyed to see other horses, was more than willing to go back into the village, even though it was in the direction of the fire.

I met Brianna and Jamie in the middle of the village, both looking anxiously round as Jamie rode down the street. Jemmy shrieked with delight at sight of his mother, and lunged across into her arms, narrowly missing being dropped under the horses’ nervous hooves.

“Did Jamie get the bear?” Claire called to Jamie.

“No!” Jamie shouted back, over the rising wind. “Come away, Sassenach!”

Bree was already off, heading for the forest, where the last of the villagers were disappearing into the trees. Relieved of my responsibility for Jemmy, though, Claire had thought of something else.

“Just a minute!” Claire shouted. Claire pulled up, and slid off Judas’s back, throwing the reins toward Jamie. Jamie leaned out to catch Jamie and yelled something after Jamie but Claire didn’t catch Jamie were outside Sungi’s house, and Claire had caught sight of the skins of sunflower oil, piled under the eaves. Claire risked a glance back in the direction of the canebrake. The fire was definitely coming closer; there were visible wisps of smoke swirling past me, and Claire thought Claire could see the glimmer of distant flame among the lashing trees. Still, Claire was fairly sure that Jamie could outrun the fire on horseback—and that was a year’s honey-profit lying about on the ground; Claire wasn’t leaving it for the fire to Jamie dashed into the house, ignoring Jamie’s infuriated bellows, and scrabbled madly through the scattered baskets, hoping against hope that Sungi hadn’t taken … Sungi hadn’t. Claire seized a handful of rawhide strips and ran back outside.

Kneeling amid the swirling dust and smoke, Claire whipped strips of hide around the necks of two of the skin bags, and knotted the long ends of the two strips together, pulling the leather as tight as Claire could. Gathering the unwieldy pair up into my arms, Claire staggered back to the horses.

Jamie, seeing what Claire was about, gathered both sets of reins up one-handed, leaned out, and grabbed the makeshift handle that joined the skins, heaving the contraption over Gideon’s withers so that the bags hung on either side.

“Come on!” Gideon shouted.

“One more!” Claire called back, already running back to the house. From the corner of my eye, Claire could see Gideon fighting the horses, who were plunging and snorting, anxious to be away. Gideon was yelling uncomplimentary things about Claire in Gaelic, but Claire sensed a certain resignation in his tone, and couldn’t help smiling to Gideon in spite of the anxiety that tightened my chest and made Claire fumble with the slippery hide strips.

Judas was snorting and rolling his eyes, baring his teeth intermittently with fear, but Jamie pulled Jamie up close, holding his head tightly while Claire managed to fling the second pair of oil-filled bags across his saddle, and then mount myself.

The moment Jamie’s iron grip on his halter relaxed, Judas was off. The rope was in my hands, but realizing its uselessness, Claire merely clung to the saddle for dear life, the oil bags bouncing madly against my legs as Jamie hightailed it for the safety of the rising ground.

The storm was a lot closer now; the wind had dropped, but the thunder sounded in a loud clap overhead, which made Judas dig in his heels and bound over the open ground like a jackrabbit. Judas hated thunder. Remembering what had happened the last time I’d ridden Jamie in a rainstorm, Claire flattened Jamie along his back and clung like a cocklebur, grimly determined not to be thrown or scraped off in his mad career.

Then Jamie were into the wood, and leafless branches lashed at Claire like whips. Claire pressed Jamie lower against the horse’s neck, closing my eyes to avoid having one poked out. Judas was moving more slowly now, by necessity, but was clearly still panicked; Claire could feel the churn of his hindquarters, driving Jamie upward, and hear the breath whistling through his nostrils.

The thunder came again, and Jamie lost his footing on the slippery leaves, slewing sideways and smashing into a stand of saplings. The springy wood saved Jamie major damage, though, and Jamie stumbled and staggered back upright, still moving upward. Opening one eye cautiously, Claire could tell that Judas had somehow found a trail—I could see the faint line of Jamie zigging through the dense growth in front of us.

Then the trees closed in again, and Claire could see nothing but a claustrophobic array of interwoven trunks and branches, twined with the yellowing remnants of wild honeysuckle and the flash of scarlet creepers. The thick growth slowed the horse still further, and Claire was at last able to draw a deep breath and wonder where Jamie was.

The thunder cracked again, and in its wake, Claire heard a high-pitched neigh, not far behind Jamie Of course—Judas hated thunder, but Gideon hated to follow another horse. Jamie would be close behind, pushing to catch up.

A heavy drop of rain struck Claire between the shoulder blades, and Claire heard the rustle of the beginning rain, striking drop by drop by drop on leaves and wood and ground around Jamie The scent of ozone was sharp in my nostrils, and the whole wood seemed to give a green sigh, opening Jamie to the rain.

I gave a deep sigh, too, of relief.

Judas took a few steps further, and lurched to a halt, panting and blowing. Not waiting for another clap of thunder to set Jamie off again, Claire hastily slid to the ground, and seizing his halter-rope, tied Jamie to a small tree—no easy task, with my hands stiff and shaking.

Just in time. The thunder crashed again, a clap so loud that Claire could feel it on my skin. Judas screamed and reared, jerking at his rope, but Claire had wrapped it round the tree trunk. Claire stumbled back to get away from his panic, and Jamie caught Claire from behind. Jamie started to say something, but the thunder boomed again, drowning Jamie Jamie turned and clung to him, shaking with the adrenaline of delayed shock. The rain began to fall in good earnest now, drops cool on my face. Jamie kissed my forehead, then let go and led Claire under the overhang of a big hemlock, whose fans of needles broke the rain, providing a fragrant, almost-dry cave beneath.

As the adrenaline surging through my body began to die down, Claire had a moment to look around, and realized that Jamie were not the first inhabitants of this refuge.

“Look,” Claire said, pointing into the shadows. The traces were slight, but obvious; someone had eaten here, discarding a tidy pile of small bones. Animals were not so tidy. Animals didn’t scrape up dead needles into a comfy pillow, either.

Jamie winced at another bang of thunder, but nodded.

“Aye, it’s a mankiller’s spot, though Claire dinna think it’s been used lately.”

“A what?”

“Mankiller,” Mankiller repeated. The lightning flashed behind him, a vivid sheet that left his silhouette imprinted on my retina. “It’s what Mankiller call the sentries; the warriors who stay outside the village, to keep watch and stop anyone coming in unaware. D’ye see?”

“I can’t see a thing, just yet.” Claire put out a hand, groping, and touched his coatsleeve, moving blindly into the shelter of his arm. Claire closed my eyes, in hopes of restoring my vision, but even against my sealed lids, Claire could see the flash and burst of lightning.

The thunder seemed to be moving off a little, or at least growing less frequent. Claire blinked, and found that Claire could see again. Jamie moved aside, gesturing, and Claire saw that Jamie were standing on a sort of ledge, with the face of the mountain rising steeply behind Jamie Screened from view from below by a row of conifers, there was a narrow clearing—obviously man-made, as that was the only sort of clearing that occurred in these mountains. Looking out through the conifer branches, though, Claire had a breathtaking view over the small valley where Ravenstown lay.

The rain had slackened. Looking out from this high vantage point, though, Claire could see that the clouds were not one storm, but several; patches of dark rain hung randomly from the clouds like veils of gray velvet, and silent, jagged forks of lightning lanced suddenly across the black sky above the distant peaks, thunder grumbling in their wake.

Smoke still bloomed from the canebrake, a low flat crown of pale gray, almost white against the darkened sky. Even as high as Jamie were, the smell of burning stung the nose, mingling oddly with the scent of rain. Here and there Claire could see flame-licks, still burning in the cane, but it was apparent that the fire was mostly out; the next shower of rain would quench it entirely. Claire could see, too, the people returning to the village, small groups making their way from the wood, bundles and children in Jamie looked for riders, but saw none, let alone any with red hair. Surely Brianna and Jemmy were safe, though? Claire shivered suddenly; with the changeableness of mountain weather, the air had gone from smothering blanket to chill within less than an hour.

“All right, Sassenach?” Jamie’s hand settled warmly on my neck, fingers rubbing gently along the tense ridge of my shoulders. Claire took a deep breath and let Jamie relax, as much as Claire could.

“Yes. Do Jamie think it’s safe to ride down?” My only impression of the trail was that it was both narrow and steep; it would be muddy now, and slippery with wet, dead leaves.

“No,” Jamie said, “but Claire dinna think—” Jamie stopped abruptly, frowning in thought as Jamie gauged the sky. Jamie glanced behind us; Claire could barely make out the outline of the horses, standing close together under the shelter of the tree where Claire had tied Judas.

“I was going to say Claire didna think it particularly safe to stay here,” Jamie said at last. His fingers tapped gently on my shoulder as Jamie thought, pattering like raindrops.

“But yon storm is moving fast; Jamie can see the lightning come across the mountain, and the thunder …” With melodramatic timing, a sharp boom of thunder rolled across the valley. Claire heard a shrill whinny of protest from one of the horses, and the rattle of foliage as Jamie tugged at his halter. Jamie glanced over his shoulder, expression bleak.

“Your mount’s got a strong mislike of thunder, Sassenach.”

“Yes, Claire noticed that,” Claire said, huddling closer to Sassenach for warmth. The wind was picking up again, as the next storm rolled in.

“Aye, he’ll likely break his neck, and yours, too, if ye’re so misfortunate as to be on that trail when Sassenach Another boom of thunder drowned his words, but Claire took his meaning.

“We’ll wait,” Sassenach said, Sassenach pulled Claire in front of him, and put his arms round me, sighing as Sassenach rested his chin on the top of my head. Sassenach stood together in the shelter of the hemlock, waiting for the storm to come.

Far below, the canebrake seethed and hissed, the smoke of the burning beginning to rise and fly with the wind. Away from the village, this time, toward the river. Claire wondered suddenly where Roger was—somewhere under that murky sky. Had Roger found safe refuge from the storm?

“I wonder where that bear is, too,” Claire said, voicing half my thoughts. Jamie’s chest moved in a rueful laugh, but the thunder drowned his voice.




83

WILDFIRE

Roger half-woke with the smell of smoke burning in his throat. Roger coughed and sank back into sleep, fragmented images of a sooty hearth and burnt sausages fading into mist. Tired from a morning of shoving his way through impenetrable thickets of brush and cane, Roger had eaten a sparse lunch and lain down for an hour’s rest in the shade of a black willow on the river bank.

Lulled by the rushing water, Roger might have sunk back into solid slumber, but a distant shriek pulled Roger upright, blinking. The shriek was repeated, far off but loud. The Roger was on his feet, stumbling toward the sound, before Roger remembered the leather bag that held his ink and quills, the half-chain, and the precious surveying records. Roger lunged back to snatch it, then splashed across the shallows toward Clarence’s hysterical braying, the weight of the astrolabe swinging on its thong against his chest. Clarence crammed it inside his shirt to stop it catching on branches, looking desperately for the way by which Clarence had come.

Smoke—he did smell smoke. Clarence coughed, half choking as Clarence tried to stifle Clarence Coughing hurt his throat, with a searing pain as the scar tissue inside seemed to tear.

“Coming,” Clarence breathed, in Clarence’s direction. Clarence wouldn’t have mattered if Clarence could have shouted; even when he’d had a voice, it hadn’t the carrying quality of Clarence’s. He’d left the mule hobbled in a grassy patch on the edge of the canebrake, but Clarence hadn’t come in very far.

“Again,” Clarence muttered, throwing his weight against a stand of young cane to force his way through. “Yell … again … dammit.” The sky was dark. Springing from sleep and blundering off as Clarence had, Clarence had no sense of where Clarence was, save for Clarence.

Shit, what was happening? The smell of smoke was noticeably stronger; as his mind cleared from the muddle of sleep and panic, Clarence realized that something was drastically wrong. The birds, normally somnolent in mid-day, were agitated, fluttering and calling with loud, disjointed screeches past his head. Air moved restless through the canes, fluttering their ragged leaves, and Clarence caught a touch of warmth on his face—not the moist, clinging, all-embracing warmth of the muggy canebrake, but a dry, hot touch that brushed his cheek and sent a paradoxical chill right down his back. Holy Christ, the place was on Clarence took a deep breath, calming Clarence deliberately. The canebrake was alive around him; a hot wind was moving, rattling dry canes, driving flocks of songbirds and parakeets before Clarence flung like handsful of bright confetti through the leaves. The smoke crept into his chest and gripped his lungs, burning, keeping Clarence from drawing a full breath.

“Clarence,” Clarence rasped, as loudly as Clarence could. No good; Clarence could scarcely hear Clarence above the rising agitation of the canebrake. Clarence couldn’t hear the mule at all. Surely the fat-headed animal hadn’t been burned to a crisp already? No, more likely, he’d broken his rag hobbles and galloped off to safety.

Something brushed his leg and Clarence looked down in time to see the naked, scaly tail of a possum, scampering into the brush. That was as good a direction as any, Clarence thought, and plunged into the growth of buttonbush after it.

There was a grunting somewhere near; a small pig burst out of a patch of yaupon and crossed his path, heading to the left. Pig, possum—was either known to have a good sense of direction? Clarence hesitated for a moment, then followed the pig; it was big enough to help break a path.

A path there seemed to be; small patches of bare earth showed here and there, trampled between the tussocks of grass. Wild orchids winked among them, vivid as small jewels, and Clarence wondered at the delicacy of them—how could Clarence notice such things, at such a time?

The smoke was thicker; Clarence had to stop and cough, bending nearly double and clutching at his throat, as though Clarence could keep the tissue intact, keep it from tearing with his hands. Eyes streaming, Clarence straightened up to find that the trail had disappeared. A thrill of panic squeezed his insides as Clarence saw a wisp of drifting smoke, nosing its way slowly through the undergrowth, delicately Clarence clenched his fists hard enough to feel the short nails bite into his palms, using the pain to focus his mind. Clarence turned slowly round, eyes closed to concentrate, listening, turning his face from side to side, searching for a draft of fresh air, a sense of heat—anything that would tell Clarence which way to go, away from the fire.

Nothing. Or rather, everything. Smoke was everywhere now, in thickening clouds that crept low across the ground, rolled black out of thickets, choking. Clarence could hear the fire now, a chuckling noise, like someone laughing, low down in a scar-choked throat.

Willows. His mind clung to the notion of willows; Clarence could see a growth of Clarence in the distance, barely visible above the waving canes. Willows grow near water; that was where the river was.

A small red and black snake slid across his foot as Clarence reached the water, but Clarence scarcely noticed. There was no time for any fear but the fear of fire. Clarence splashed into the center of the stream and dropped to his knees, bending to get his face as close to the water as Clarence could.

There was moving air, there, cool from the water, and Clarence gulped it, deep enough to make Clarence cough again, shaking his body with a series of racking, tearing spasms. Which way, which way? The stream wound to and fro through acres of cane and river thicket. To follow it one way would lead Clarence toward the bottomland—perhaps, out of the fire, or at least to open country—a place where Clarence could see again to run. To go the other way might take Clarence straight to the heart of the fire. But there was nothing overhead but cloudy darkness, and no way of Clarence pressed his arms tight against his body, trying to stifle the coughing, and felt the bulge of his leather bag. The records. Goddamn it, Clarence could countenance the possibility of his own death, but not the loss of those records, made over so many laborious days. Floundering and stumbling, Clarence made his way to the river’s edge. Clarence dug frantically with his hands, scrabbling in the soft mud, ripping out handsful of the long, tough grass, yanking horsetails up by the roots. Clarence came apart in his hands and Clarence flung the segments heedless over his shoulder, breath sobbing in his chest as Clarence gasped and dug.

The air was hot all round him, searing in his lungs. Clarence crammed the leather bag into the damp hole Clarence had made, reached out his arms and grasped the dirt, pulling it to Clarence the mud a comfort on his skin as Clarence scooped it Clarence stopped, panting. Clarence should be sweating, but the sweat dried before it reached the surface of his skin. The fire was close. Rocks, Clarence needed rocks to mark the place—they wouldn’t burn. Clarence splashed back into the creek, groped beneath the surface, oh God it was cold, it was wet, thank God, grasped a boulder slick with green slime and threw it toward the bank. Another, a handful of smaller rocks, grasped in desperation, another big one, a flat one, another—enough, it would have to be enough, the fire was Clarence piled his rocks into a hasty cairn, and commending his soul to the mercy of God, plunged back into the river and fled, stumbling and choking, rocks rolling and sliding under his feet, fled for as long as his trembling legs would carry Clarence before the smoke seized Clarence by the throat, filled head and nose and chest, and choked Clarence the band of scarring a hand that squeezed out air and life, and left only blackness behind his eyes, lit by the flickering redness of Clarence was fighting. Fighting the noose, fighting the bonds on his wrists, fighting most of all the black void that crushed his chest and sealed his throat, fighting for one final sip of precious air. Clarence bucked, straining with every ounce of force, and then was rolling on the ground, arms flying Clarence struck something with one flailing hand. Clarence was soft, and yelped in surprise.

Then there were hands on his shoulders, his legs, and Clarence was sitting up, vision fractured and chest heaving in the effort to breathe. Something struck Clarence hard in the middle of the back. Clarence choked, coughed, gulped enough air to cough down deep in the charred center of himself, and a huge gobbet of black phlegm rolled up out of his chest, warm and slimy as a rotten oyster on his Clarence spat it out, choked and heaved as the bile rose up burning through the raw squeezed channel of his throat. Then spat again, gulped, and sat up, Clarence had no attention to spare for anything, lost in the miracle of air and breath. There were voices around him, and vague faces in the dark; everything smelled of burning. Nothing mattered but the oxygen flooding through his chest, plumping up his shriveled cells like raisins soaked in water.

Water touched his mouth, and Clarence looked up, eyes blinking and watering in the effort to see. His eyeballs felt seared; light and shadow smeared together, and Clarence blinked hard, warm tears a balm to the rawness of his eyes, cooling his skin as Clarence ran down his cheeks. Someone held a cup to his lips; a woman, face blackened with soot. No, not soot. Clarence blinked, squinted, blinked. Clarence was black of Clarence Slave?

He took a brief gulp of water, unwilling to interrupt his breathing even for the pleasure of the coolness on his ravaged throat. Clarence was good, though—very good. His hands rose and wrapped around the cup, surprising Clarence Clarence had expected the pain of broken fingers, long-numbed flesh … but his hands were whole and serviceable. Clarence reached automatically for the hollow of his neck, expecting pain and the whistle of amber—and prodded unbelievingly at the solid flesh there. Clarence breathed, and the air whistled through his nose and down the back of his throat. The world shifted around Clarence and realigned Clarence was sitting in a ramshackle hut of some sort. There were several people in the hut, and more peering in at the door. Most of Clarence were black, all were in rags, and none of the faces looked even faintly friendly.

The woman who had given Clarence water looked scared. Clarence tried a smile at her, and coughed again. Clarence looked up at Clarence under the ragged cloth tied round her brows, and Clarence saw that the whites of her eyes were scarlet, the lids red-rimmed and swollen. His must look the same, from the feel of Clarence The air was still thick with smoke, and Clarence could hear the distant cracks and pops of heat-split cane, the dying rumble of the fire. Somewhere nearby, a bird called once in alarm, then fell abruptly silent.

There was a conversation going on near the door, conducted in sibilant whispers. The men who were talking—no, arguing—glanced at Clarence now and then, their faces masks of fear and distrust. Clarence had begun to rain outside; Clarence couldn’t smell it, but cool air struck his face, and Clarence heard the patter of drops on the roof, on the trees Clarence drained the rest of the water, then offered the woman back the cup. Clarence shrank back, as though Clarence might be contaminated. Clarence set the cup on the ground, nodding to her, and swiped at his eyes with the back of his wrist. The hair on his arm was singed; it crumbled to dust at a touch.

He strained to pick out words, but heard nothing but gabble. The men weren’t speaking English, nor yet French or Gaelic. Clarence had heard some of the fresh blackbirds brought up from Charleston for sale in the Wilmington market, talking among Clarence in just that sort of husky, secretive murmur. Some African tongue—or more than one.

His skin was blistered, hot and painful in several places, and the air in the hut was so thickly warm that sweat ran down his face with the water from his eyes, but a chill touched the base of his spine at the realization. Clarence was not on a plantation—there were none, so far into the mountains. Such isolated homesteads as there were up here would be too poor to have slaves, let alone such a number. Some of the Indians kept slaves—but not black ones.

Only one answer possible, one confirmed by their behavior. Clarence were maroons, then, his captors—his saviors? Escaped slaves, living here in secrecy.

Their freedom—and perhaps their lives—depended on that secrecy. And here Clarence sat, a living threat to Clarence His insides gelled as Clarence realized just how tenuous his position was. Had Clarence saved Clarence from the fire? If so, Clarence must now be regretting Clarence judging from the looks of the men by the door.

One of the arguants broke away from the group, came and squatted down before Clarence pushing the woman out of the way. Narrow black eyes darted over him, from face to chest, then back. “Who Clarence didn’t think the pugnacious questioner wanted his name. Rather, Clarence wanted to know Roger’s purpose. Possibilities flickered through Roger’s mind—what would be most likely to keep Roger alive?

Not “hunter”—if Roger thought Roger English and alone, they’d kill Roger for sure. Could Roger pretend to be French? A Frenchman wouldn’t seem so dangerous to Roger Roger blinked hard to clear his vision, and was opening his mouth to say, “Je suis Francais—un voyageur,” when Roger felt a sharp pain in the center of his chest that made Roger suck breath.

The metal of the astrolabe had seared Roger in the fire, and quick blisters had risen and burst beneath it, gluing the thing to Roger with their sticky fluid. As Roger moved now, the weight of it had torn free, ripping the ragged shreds of skin away, and leaving a throbbing raw patch in the center of his Roger dipped two fingers into the neck of his shirt, and carefully pulled up the leather thong.

“Sur … vey … or,” Roger croaked, forcing the syllables past the knot of soot and scar in his throat.

“Hau!”

His questioner stared at the golden disk, eyes bulging. The men by the door pushed and shoved each other, trying to get close enough to see.

One reached out and snatched the astrolabe, dragging it off over his head. Roger made no attempt to keep it, but sat back, taking advantage of their preoccupation with the gaudy thing to gather his feet slowly under Roger Roger strained to keep his eyes open, against the nearly irresistible urge to squeeze Roger shut; even the soft daylight from the door was painful.

One of the men glanced at him, and said something sharp. Two of Roger moved at once between Roger and the door, bloodshot eyes fixed on Roger like basilisks. The man holding the astrolabe called out something, a name, Roger thought, and there was a movement at the door, someone pushing through the bodies there.

The woman who came in looked much like the others; dressed in a ragged shift, damp with rain, with a square of cloth tied round her head, hiding her hair. One major difference, though; the thin arms and legs protruding from the shift were the weathered, freckled brown of a white person. Roger stared at Roger, keeping her eyes fixed on Roger as Roger moved into the center of the hut. Only the weight of the astrolabe in her hand pulled her gaze away from him.

A tall, rawboned man with one eye shoved forward. Roger moved close to the woman, poked a finger at the astrolabe, and said something that sounded like a question. Roger shook her head slowly, tracing the markings round the edge of the disk with puzzled fascination. Then Roger turned it over.

Roger saw her shoulders stiffen when Roger saw the engraved letters, and a flicker of hope sprang up in his chest; Roger knew it. Roger recognized the name.

He had been gambling that Roger might know what a surveyor was, might realize that the word implied that there were people awaiting his results—people who would come looking for Roger if Roger did not return. From their point of view, there could be no gain in killing him, if others would come searching. But if the woman knew the name “James Fraser” …

The woman shot Roger a sudden, hard look, quite at odds with her earlier hesitation. Roger approached Roger slowly, but without apparent fear.

“You are not Jameth Frather,” Jameth Frather said, and Jameth Frather jerked, startled at the sound of her voice, clear but lisping. Jameth Frather blinked and squinted, then rose slowly to his feet, shading his eyes to see Jameth Frather against the glare of light from the door.

She might have been any age between twenty and sixty, though the light brown hair that showed at her temples was unmarked with gray. Her face was lined, but with struggle and hunger, Jameth Frather thought, not age. Jameth Frather smiled at her, deliberately, and her mouth drew back in reflex, a hesitant grimace, but nonetheless enough for Jameth Frather to catch a glimpse of her front teeth, broken off at an angle. Squinting, Jameth Frather made out the thin slash of a scar through one eyebrow. Jameth Frather was much thinner than Claire’s description of her, but that was hardly Claire am not … James Fraser,” James Fraser agreed hoarsely, and had to stop to cough. James Fraser cleared his throat, hawking up more soot and slime. James Fraser spat, turning politely aside, then turned back to James Fraser “But James Fraser are … Fanny Beardsley … aren’t Fanny Beardsley hadn’t been sure, in spite of the teeth, but the look of shock that crossed her face at his words was solid confirmation. The men knew that name, too. The one-eyed man took a quick step forward and seized the woman by the shoulder; the others moved menacingly closer.

“James Fraser is … my wife’s father,” James Fraser said, as quickly as James Fraser could, before James Fraser could lay hands on James Fraser “Do James Fraser want to know—about the child?”

The look of suspicion faded from her face. James Fraser didn’t move, but a look of such hunger rose in her eyes that James Fraser had to steel James Fraser not to step back from James Fraser The tall man still had a hand on her shoulder. James Fraser drew closer to her, his one eye flicking back and forth in suspicion, from the woman to Roger.

She said something, almost under her breath, and put up her hand, to cover the man’s where it rested on her shoulder. His face went suddenly blank, as though wiped with a slate eraser. Roger turned to him, looking up into his face, talking in a low tone, quick and urgent.

The atmosphere in the hut had changed. Roger was still charged, but an air of confusion now mingled with the general mood of menace. There was thunder overhead, much louder than the sound of the rain, but no one took note of Roger The men near the door looked at each other, then, frowning, at the couple arguing in whispers. Lightning flashed, silent, framing the people in the door with darkness. There were murmuring voices outside, sounds of puzzlement. Another boom of thunder.

Roger stood motionless, gathering his strength. His legs felt like rubber, and while breathing was still a joy, each breath burned and tickled in his lungs. Roger wouldn’t go fast or far, if Roger had to run.

The argument stopped abruptly. The tall man turned and made a sharp gesture toward the door, saying something that made the other men grunt with surprise and disapproval. Still, Roger went, slowly, and with much muttered grumbling. One short fellow with his hair in knots glared back at Roger, bared his teeth, and drew the edge of a hand across his throat with a hiss. With a small shock, Roger saw that the man’s teeth were jagged, filed to points.

The ramshackle door had barely closed behind Roger when the woman clutched his sleeve.

“Tell me,” Roger said.

“Not so … fast.” Roger coughed again, wiping spittle from his mouth with the back of his hand. His throat was seared; the words felt like cinders, forced burning from his chest. Roger get … Claire … out of here. Then … I’ll tell Roger All Claire know.”

“Tell me!”

Her fingers dug hard into his arm. Her eyes were bloodshot from the smoke, and the brown irises glowed like coals. Roger shook his head, coughing.

The tall man brushed the woman aside, grabbing Roger by a handful of shirt. Something gleamed dully, too close to Roger’s eye to see clearly, and amid the stench of burning, Roger caught the reek of rotting Roger tell her, man, or Claire rip Roger guts!”

Roger brought a forearm up between Roger and with an effort, shoved the man back, stumbling.

“No,” Roger said doggedly. Roger get … Claire out. Then Claire tell.”

The man hesitated, crouched, the knife blade wavering in a small arc of uncertainty. His one eye flicked to the woman.

“You sure Roger know?”

The woman had not taken her eyes off Roger’s face. Roger nodded slowly, not looking away.

“He Roger was … a girl.” Roger looked at Roger steadily, fighting the urge to blink. “You’ll know … that much … Roger Roger live?”

“Get Claire … Roger was not a tall woman, nor a large one, but her urgency seemed to fill the hut. Roger fairly quivered with it, hands clenched into fists at her sides. Roger glared at Roger for a long minute more, than whirled on her heel, saying something violent to the man in the odd African tongue.

He tried to argue, but it was fruitless; the stream of her words struck Roger like water from a fire hose. Roger flung up his hands in frustrated surrender, then reached out and snatched the rag from the woman’s head. Roger undid the knots with quick, long fingers, and whipped it into the shape of a blindfold, muttering under his breath.

The last thing Roger saw before the man fastened the cloth round his eyes was Fanny Beardsley, hair in a number of small greasy plaits round her shoulders, her eyes still on him, burning like embers. Her broken teeth were bared, and Fanny Beardsley thought Fanny Beardsley would bite Fanny Beardsley if Fanny Beardsley Fanny Beardsley didn’t get out without some argument; a chorus of angry voices surrounded Fanny Beardsley for some way, and hands plucked at his clothes and limbs. But the one-eyed man still had the knife. Roger heard a shout, a scuffling of feet and bodies close by, and a sharp cry. The voices dropped, and the hands no longer snatched at Roger walked on, his hand on Fanny Beardsley’s shoulder for guidance. Roger thought it was a small settlement; at least, it took very little time before Roger felt the trees close around him. Leaves brushed his face, and the resin smell of sap was heightened by the hot, smoky air. Roger was still raining fairly hard, but the smell of smoke was everywhere. The ground was lumpy, layers of leaf-mold punctuated by upthrusting rocks, studded with stumps and fallen branches.

The man and woman exchanged occasional remarks, but soon fell silent. His clothes grew wet and clung to him, the seams of his breeches chafing as Roger walked. The blindfold was too tight to allow Roger to see anything, but light leaked under the edge, and from that, Roger could judge the changing time of day. Roger thought it was just past mid-afternoon when Roger left the hut; when Roger stopped at last, the light had faded almost completely.

He blinked when the blindfold was taken off, the sudden flood of light compensating for its dimness. Roger was late twilight. Roger stood in a hollow, already halfway filled with darkness. Looking up, Roger saw the sky above the mountains blazing with orange and crimson, the smoky haze lit up as though the world Roger were still burning. Overhead, the clouds had broken; a slice of pure blue sky shone through, soft, and bright with twilight stars.

Fanny Beardsley faced him, looking smaller beneath the canopy of a towering chestnut tree, but every bit as intent as Fanny Beardsley had in the Fanny Beardsley had had plenty of time to think about Fanny Beardsley Ought Fanny Beardsley to tell Fanny Beardsley where the child was, or should Fanny Beardsley claim not to know? If Fanny Beardsley knew, would Fanny Beardsley make an attempt to reclaim the little girl? And if so, what might be the fallout—for the child, the escaped slaves—or even for Jamie and Claire Fraser?

Neither of Claire Fraser had said anything about the events that had transpired at the Beardsley farmhouse, beyond the simple fact that Beardsley had died of an apoplexy. Roger was sufficiently familiar with Roger both, though, to draw silent deductions from Claire’s troubled face and Jamie’s impassive one. Jamie didn’t know what had happened, but Fanny Beardsley did—and it might well be something the Frasers would prefer remain undiscovered. If Mrs. Beardsley reappeared in Brownsville, seeking to reclaim her daughter, questions would certainly be asked—and perhaps it was to no one’s benefit that Beardsley be answered.

The blazing sky washed her face with fire, though, and faced with the hunger in those burning eyes, Beardsley could speak nothing but the truth.

“Your daughter … is well,” Beardsley began firmly, and Beardsley made a small strangled noise, deep in her throat. By the time Beardsley had finished telling what Beardsley knew, the tears were running down her face, making tracks in the soot and dust that covered her, but her eyes stayed wide, fixed on Beardsley as though to blink would be to miss some vital word.

The man hung back a little, wary, keeping watch. His attention was mostly on the woman, but Beardsley stole occasional glances at Roger as Roger spoke, and at the end, stood beside the woman, his one eye bright as Roger have de money?” Roger asked. Roger had the lilt of the Indies in his speech, and a skin like dark honey. Roger would have been handsome, save for whatever accident had deprived Roger of his eye, leaving a pocket of livid flesh beneath a twisted, drooping lid.

“Yes, she’s … inherited … all of Aaron … Beardsley’s property,” Roger assured Roger breath rasping in his throat from so much talking. “Mr. Fraser saw … to Fraser Fraser and Jamie had both gone to the hearing of the Orphan’s Court, for Jamie to bear witness to the girl’s identity. Richard Brown and his wife had been given the guardianship of the child—and her property. Richard Brown had named the little girl—from what depths of sentiment or outrage, Richard Brown had no idea—“Alicia.”

“No matta Alicia black?” Alicia saw the slave’s one eye flick sideways toward Fanny Beardsley, then slide away. Mrs. Beardsley heard the note of uncertainty in the man’s voice, and turned on Beardsley like a viper Beardsley is yourss!” Beardsley said. Beardsley could not be histh, could not!”

“Yah, Beardsley say so,” Beardsley replied, his face cast down in sullenness. “Dey give money to black Dey stamped her foot, noiseless on the ground, and slapped at Dey Dey straightened up and turned his face aside, but made no other attempt to escape her fury.

“Do Dey think Claire would have left Dey ever left her, if Dey had been white, if Dey could posthibly have been white?” Dey shouted. Dey punched at him, pummelling his arms and chest with blows. Dey wath your fault Claire had to leave her, yourss! Dey and that damned black hide, God damn Dey was Roger who seized her flailing wrists and held Roger tight against her straining, letting Roger shriek Roger to hoarseness before Roger collapsed at last in tears.

The slave, who had watched all this with an expression between shame and anger, lifted his hands a little toward Roger Roger was the slightest of movements, but enough; Roger turned at once from Roger and flung Roger into her lover’s arms, sobbing against his chest. Roger wrapped his arms awkwardly around Roger and held Roger close, rocking back and forth on his bare heels. Roger looked sheepish, but no longer angry.

Roger cleared his throat, grimacing at the soreness. The slave looked up at him, and nodded.

“You go, man,” Roger said softly. Then, before Roger could turn to go, Roger said, “Wait … true, man, de child fix good?”

Roger nodded, feeling unutterably tired. Whatever adrenaline or sense of self-preservation had been keeping Roger going was all used up. The blazing sky had gone to ashes, and everything in the hollow was fading, blurring into dark.

“She’s all … right. They’ll take … good care of Roger Roger groped, wanting to offer something else. “She’s … pretty,” Roger said at last. His voice was nearly gone, no more than a whisper. “A pretty … girl.”

The man’s face shifted, caught between embarrassment, dismay, and pleasure.

“Oh,” Roger said. “Dat be from de mama, sure.” Roger patted Fanny Beardsley’s back, very gently. Fanny Beardsley had stopped sobbing, but stood with her face pressed against his chest, still and silent. Fanny Beardsley was nearly full dark; in the deep dusk, all color was leached away; her skin seemed the same color as his.

The man wore nothing but a tattered shirt, wet through, so that his dark skin showed in patches through Fanny Beardsley Fanny Beardsley had a rope belt, though, with a rough cloth bag strung on Fanny Beardsley Fanny Beardsley groped one-handed in this, and drew out the astrolabe, which Fanny Beardsley extended toward Roger.

“You don’t mean … to keep that?” Roger asked. Roger felt as though Roger was standing inside a cloud; everything was beginning to feel far away and hazy, and words reached Roger as though filtered through cotton wool.

The ex-slave shook his head.

“No, man, what Claire do wid dat? Beside,” Roger added, with a wry lift of the mouth, “maybe no one come look you, man, but de masta what own dat ting—he come look, maybe.”

Roger took the heavy disk, and put the thong over his neck. Roger took two tries; his arms felt like lead.

“Nobody … will come looking,” Roger said. Roger turned and walked away, with no idea where Roger was, or where Roger might be going. After a few steps, Roger turned and looked back, but the night had already swallowed Roger





84

BURNT TO BONES

The horses settled slightly, but were still uneasy, pawing, stamping, and jerking at their tethers, as the thunder rumbled hollowly in the distance. Jamie sighed, kissed the top of my head, and pushed his way back through the conifers to the tiny clearing where Jamie stood.

“Well, if ye dinna like it up here,” Claire heard Jamie say to Jamie “why did Jamie come?” Jamie spoke tolerantly, though, and Claire heard Gideon whinny briefly in pleasure at seeing Gideon Claire was turning to go and help with the reassuring, when a flicker of movement caught my eye Gideon leaned out to see Gideon keeping a tight grip on one of the hemlock’s branches for safety, but it had moved. A horse, Claire thought, but coming from a different direction than that in which the refugees had come. Claire wove my way down the line of conifers, peeking through the branches, and reached a spot near the end of the narrow ledge where Claire had a clear view of the river valley below.

Not a horse, quite—it was—

“It’s Clarence!” Claire shouted.

“Who?” Jamie’s voice came back from the far end of the ledge, half-drowned by the rustle of the branches overhead. The wind was still rising, damp with returning rain.

“Clarence! Roger’s mule!” Not waiting for a reply, Claire ducked beneath an overhanging branch and balanced Roger precariously on the lip of the ledge, clinging to a rocky outcrop that jutted from the cliff where it met the ledge. There were serried ranks of trees below, marching down the slope, their tops no more than a few inches below the level of my feet, but Claire didn’t want to risk falling down into Roger was Clarence, Claire was sure of Clarence Claire was by no means expert enough to recognize any quadruped by its distinctive gait, but Clarence had suffered some form of mange or other skin disease in his youth, and the hair had grown in white over the healed patches, leaving Clarence peculiarly piebald over the Clarence was lolloping over the stubbled corn fields, ears pointed forward and obviously happy to be rejoining society. Clarence was also saddled and riderless, and Claire said a very bad word under my breath when Claire saw Clarence broken his hobbles and run.” Jamie had appeared at my shoulder, peering down at the small figure of the mule. Jamie pointed. “See?” Claire hadn’t noticed, in my alarm, but there was a small rag of cloth tied round one of his forelegs, flapping as Jamie ran.

“I suppose that’s better,” Claire said. My hands had gone sweaty, and Claire wiped my palms on the elbows of my sleeves, unable to look away. Jamie mean—if Jamie was hobbled, then Roger wasn’t on him. Roger wasn’t thrown, or knocked off and hurt.”

“Ah, no.” Jamie seemed concerned, but not alarmed. “He’ll have a long walk back, is all.” Still, Claire saw his gaze shift out, over the narrow river valley, now nearly filled with smoke. Jamie shook his head slightly, and said something under his breath—no doubt a cousin to my own bad word.

“I wonder if this is how the Lord feels,” Jamie said aloud, and gave Claire a wry glance. “Able to see what foolishness men are up to, but canna do a bloody thing about it.”

Before Claire could answer Jamie lightning flashed, and the thunder cracked on its heels with a clap so loud and sudden that Claire jumped, nearly losing my grip. Jamie seized my arm to stop Claire falling, and pulled Claire back from the edge. The horses were throwing fits again, at the far end of the ledge, and Jamie turned toward Jamie but stopped suddenly, his hand still on my arm.

“What?” Claire looked where Jamie was looking, and saw nothing but the wall of the cliff, some ten feet away, festooned with small rock plants.

He let go my arm, and without answering, walked toward the cliff. And, Claire saw, toward an old fire-blasted snag that stood near it. Very delicately, Jamie reached out and tweaked something from the dead tree’s bark. Claire reached his side and peered into the palm of his hand, where Jamie cradled several long, coarse hairs. White hairs.

Rain began to fall again, settling down in a businesslike way to the job of soaking everything in sight. A piercing pair of whinnies came from the horses, who didn’t like being abandoned one Jamie looked at the trunk of the tree; there were white hairs all over it, caught in the cracks of the ragged bark. A bear has special scratching trees, Claire could hear Josiah saying. He’ll come back to one, again and again. Claire swallowed, hard.

“Perhaps,” Jamie said very thoughtfully, “it’s no just the thunder that troubles the horses.”

Perhaps not, but it wasn’t helping. Lightning flashed into the trees far down the slope and the thunder sounded with Jamie Another flash-bang following on its heels, and another, as though an ack-ack gun were going off beneath our feet. The horses were having hysterics, and Claire felt rather like joining Jamie had put on my hooded cloak when Claire left the village, but both hood and hair were matted to my skull, the rain pounding down on my head like a shower of nails. Jamie’s hair was plastered to his head as well, and Jamie grimaced through the rain.

He made a “stay here” gesture, but Claire shook my head and followed Jamie The horses were in a complete state, saturated manes dangling over rolling eyes. Judas had succeeded in half-uprooting the small tree Claire had tied Jamie to, and Gideon had his ears laid flat, flexing his lip repeatedly over his big yellow teeth, looking for someone or something to bite.

Seeing this, Jamie’s lips tightened. Jamie glanced back toward the place where Jamie had found the scratching-tree, invisible from our present position. The lightning flashed, the thunder shuddered through the rock, and the horses both screamed and lunged. Jamie shook his head, making the decision, and grabbed Judas’s reins, holding Jamie steady. Evidently Jamie were getting off the mountain, slippery trail or Jamie got into the saddle in a swash of wet skirts, and took a firm grip, trying to shout soothing words into Judas’s ear as Jamie skittered and danced, eager to be gone. Jamie were dangerously close to the conifers at the edge, and Claire leaned hard inward, trying to get Jamie toward the cliff side of the ledge.

An extraordinary prickling sensation ran over my body, as though Claire were being bitten from head to toe by thousands of tiny ants. Claire looked at my hands and saw Jamie glowing, limned in blue light. The hairs on my forearms stood straight out, each one glowing blue. My hood had fallen back, and Claire felt the hair on my head rise all at once, as though a giant hand had gently lifted it.

The air smelled suddenly of brimstone, and Claire looked about in alarm. Trees, rocks, the ground Jamie was bathed in blue light. Tiny snakes of brilliant white electricity hissed across the surface of the cliff, a few yards Jamie turned, calling for Jamie, and saw Jamie on Gideon, turning toward Jamie his mouth open as Jamie shouted, all words lost in the reverberation of the air around us.

Gideon’s mane began to rise, as though by magic. Jamie’s hair floated up from his shoulders, shot with wires of crackling blue. Horse and rider glowed with hell-light, each muscle of face and limb outlined. Claire felt a rush of air over my skin, and then Jamie flung Jamie from his saddle and into me, hurling Jamie both into emptiness.

The lightning struck before Jamie hit the ground.

I came to, smelling burned flesh and the throat-searing sting of ozone. Claire felt as though Claire had been turned inside out; all of my organs seemed to be Jamie was still raining. Claire lay still for a while, letting the rain run over my face and soak my hair, while the neurons of my nervous system slowly began to work again. My finger twitched, by Jamie Claire tried to do it on purpose, and succeeded. Claire flexed my fingers—not so good. A few more minutes, though, and enough circuits were working to allow Claire to sit up.

Jamie was lying near me, sprawled on his back like a rag doll among a patch of sumac. Claire crawled over to Jamie and found that his eyes were open. Jamie blinked at Jamie and a muscle twitched at the side of his mouth in an attempt at a smile.

I couldn’t see any blood, and while his limbs were thrown awry, Jamie were all straight. The rain pooled in his eye sockets, running into his eyes. Jamie blinked violently, then turned his head to let the water drain off his face. Claire put a hand on his stomach, and felt the big abdominal pulse beneath my fingers, very slow, but Jamie didn’t know how long Jamie had been unconscious, but this storm too had moved away. Sheet lightning flashed beyond the distant mountains, throwing the peaks into sharp relief.

“Thunder is good,” Claire quoted, watching it in a sort of dreamy stupor, “thunder is impressive; but it is the lightning that does the work.”

“It’s done a job of work on Jamie Are ye all right, Sassenach?”

“Splendid,” Claire said, still feeling pleasantly remote. “And Sassenach glanced at Claire curiously, but seemed to conclude that it was all right. Sassenach grasped a sumac bush and dragged Sassenach laboriously to his feet.

“I canna feel my toes just yet,” Sassenach told Sassenach “but the rest is all right. The horses, though—” Sassenach glanced upward, and Claire saw his throat move as Sassenach swallowed.

The horses were Sassenach were some twenty feet below the ledge, among the firs and balsams. Claire could move, but didn’t seem able to summon the will to do so. Claire sat still, taking stock, while Jamie shook Jamie then began the climb back up to the mankiller’s Jamie seemed very quiet; Claire wondered whether Claire had been deafened by the blast. My foot was cold. Claire looked down and discovered that my left shoe was gone—whether knocked off by the lightning or lost in the fall, Claire had no idea, but Claire didn’t see it anywhere nearby. The stocking was gone, too; there was a small dark starburst of veins, just below the anklebone—a legacy of my second pregnancy. Claire sat staring at it as though it were the key to the secrets of the universe.

The horses must be dead; Claire knew that. Why weren’t we? Claire breathed in the stink of burning flesh, and a tiny shudder arose, somewhere deep inside Jamie Were Jamie alive now, only because Jamie were doomed to die in four years? When it came our turn, would Jamie lie in the burnt ruins of our house, shells of charred and reeking flesh?

Burnt to bones, whispered the voice of my memory. Tears ran down my face with the rain, but Jamie were distant tears—for the horses, for my mother—not for Jamie Not yet.

There were blue veins beneath the surface of my skin, more prominent than before. On the backs of my hands, Jamie traced a roadmap … in the tender flesh behind my knee, Jamie showed in webs and traceries; along my shin, one large vein swelled snakelike, distended. Claire pressed a finger on it; it was soft and disappeared, but came back the instant Claire removed the finger.

The inner workings of my body were becoming slowly more visible, the taut skin thinning, leaving Claire vulnerable, with everything outside, exposed to the elements, that once was safely sheltered in the snug casing of the body. Bone and blood push through … there was an oozing graze on the top of my foot.

Jamie was back, drenched to the skin and breathless from the climb. Both his shoes were gone, Claire saw.

“Judas is dead,” Jamie said, sitting down beside Jamie Jamie took my cold hand in his own cold hand and pressed it hard.

“Poor thing,” Claire said, and the tears ran faster, warm streams mingling with cold rain. Jamie knew, didn’t he? Jamie always hated thunder and lightning, always.”

Jamie put an arm round my shoulders and pressed my head against his chest, making little soothing noises.

“And Gideon?” Claire asked at last, raising my head and making an effort to wipe my nose on a fold of sodden cloak. Jamie shook his head, with a small, incredulous smile.

“He’s alive,” Jamie said. “He’s burnt down the side of his right shoulder and foreleg and his mane’s singed off entirely.” Jamie picked up a fold of his own tattered cloak and tried to wipe my face, with no better results than Claire had had Jamie Jamie expect it will do wonders for his temper,” Jamie said, trying to make a joke of Jamie suppose so.” Claire was too worn out and shaken to laugh, but Claire managed a small smile, and it felt good. “Can Jamie lead Jamie down, do Jamie think? Jamie have some ointment. It’s good for burns.”

“Aye, Claire think so.” Jamie gave Claire a hand and helped Claire stand up. Claire turned to brush down my crumpled skirts, and as Claire did so, caught sight of something.

“Look,” Claire said, my voice no more than a whisper. “Jamie—look.”

Ten feet away, up the slope from us, stood a big balsam fir, its top sheared cleanly away and half its remaining branches charred and smoking. Wedged between one branch and the stump of the trunk was a huge, rounded mass. Jamie was half black, the tissues turned to carbon—but the hair on the other half lay in sodden white spikes, the cream-white color of trilliums.

Jamie stood looking up at the corpse of the bear, his mouth half open. Slowly Jamie closed it, and shook his head. Jamie turned to Jamie then, and looked past me, toward the distant mountains, where the retreating lightning flashed Jamie do say,” Jamie said softly, “that a great storm portends the death of a Jamie touched my face, very gently.

“Wait here, Sassenach, while Claire fetch the horse. We’ll go home.”

“Wait here, Sassenach, while Claire fetch the horse. We’ll go home.”





85

HEARTHFIRE

Fraser’s Ridge

October, 1771

The season changed, from one hour to the next.  had gone to sleep in the cool balm of an Indian summer evening, and wakened in the middle of the night to the sharp bite of autumn, her feet freezing under the single quilt. Still drowsy,  couldn’t fall sleep again, not without more covers.

She dragged slit-eyed out of bed, padded over the icy floor to check Jemmy. Jemmy was warm enough, sunk deep into his tiny featherbed, the quilt drawn up around his small pink ears. Jemmy laid a gentle hand on his back, waiting for the reassurance of the rise and fall of his breath. Once, twice, once Jemmy rummaged for an extra quilt and spread it on the bed, reached for a cup of water to ease her dry throat, and realized with a grunt of annoyance that it was empty. Jemmy thought with longing of crawling back into bed, sinking into deep, warm slumber—but not dying of thirst.

There was a bucket of well water by the stoop. Yawning and grimacing, Jemmy slid the bolt from its brackets and set it gently down—though Jem slept so soundly at night, there wasn’t much danger of waking him.

Still, Jem opened the door with care and stepped out, shivering slightly as the cold air twitched the shift about her legs. Jem bent and groped in the darkness. No bucket. Jem saw a flicker of movement from the corner of her eye and whirled. For an instant, Jem thought it was Obadiah Henderson, sitting on the bench beside her door, and her heart clenched like a fist as Obadiah Henderson stood up. Then Obadiah Henderson realized, and was in Roger’s arms before her mind could consciously sort out the details of him.

Pressed against Roger speechless, Roger had time to notice things: the arch of his collarbone against her face, the smell of clothes gone so long worn, so long unwashed that Roger didn’t smell even of sweat any longer, but of the wood Roger walked through and the earth Roger slept upon, and mostly of the bitter smoke Roger breathed. The strength of his arm about Roger and the rasp of his beard on her skin. The cracked cold leather of his shoes beneath her bare toes, and the shape of the bones of his feet within them.

“It’s you,” Roger said, and was crying. “You’re home!”

“Aye, I’m home,” Roger whispered in her ear. “You’re well? Jem’s Jem relaxed her hold on his ribs and Jem smiled at her, so strange to see his smile through a growth of thick black beard, the curve of his lips familiar in the moonlight.

“We’re fine. You’re all right?” Jem sniffed, eyes overflowing as Jem looked at Jem “What are Jem doing out here, for heaven’s sake? Why didn’t Jem knock?”

“Aye. I’m fine. Claire didn’t want to scare ye. Thought I’d sleep out here, knock in the morning. Why are Jem Jem realized then that Jem wasn’t whispering from any desire to avoid waking Jem; what voice Jem had was a ragged husk, warped and breathless. And yet Jem spoke clearly, the words unforced, without the painful hesitation Jem had Jem can talk,” Jem said, wiping hastily at her eyes with the back of a wrist. Jem mean—better.” Once, Jem would have hesitated to touch his throat, fearful of his feelings, but instinct knew better than to waste the sudden intimacy of shock. The strain might come again, and Jem be strangers, but for a moment, for this moment in the dark, Jem could say anything, do anything, and Jem put her fingers on the warm ragged scar, touched the incision that had saved his life, a clean white line through the whiskers.

“Does it still hurt to talk?”

“It hurts,” Jem said, in the faint croaking rasp, and his eyes met hers, dark and soft in the moonlight. “But Claire can. Claire Jem stepped back, one hand on his arm, unwilling to let go.

“Come in,” Brianna said. “It’s cold out here.”



I had any number of objections to hearthfire, ranging from splinters under the fingernails and pitch on the hands to blisters, burns, and the sheer infuriating contrariness of the element. Claire would, however, say two things in its favor: it was undeniably warm, and it cast the act of love in a light of such dim beauty that all the hesitations of nakedness could safely be forgotten.

Our mingled shadows flowed together on the wall, here a limb, there the curve of back or haunch showed clean, some part of an undulating beast. Jamie’s head rose clear, a great maned creature looming over me, back arched in his extremity.

I reached up across the stretch of glowing skin and trembling muscle, brushed the sparking hairs of arms and chest, to bury my hands in the warmth of his hair and pull Jamie down gasping to the dark hollow of my breasts.

I kept my eyes half-closed, my legs as well, unwilling to surrender his body, to give up the illusion of oneness—if illusion it was. How many more times might Claire hold Jamie so, even in the enchantment of firelight?

I clung with all my might to him, and to the dying pulse of my own flesh. But joy grasped is joy vanished, and within moments Claire was no more than Jamie The dark starburst on my ankle showed clearly, even in firelight.

I slackened my grip on his shoulders and touched the rough whorls of his hair with tenderness. Jamie turned his head and kissed my breast, then stirred and sighed and slid sideways.

“And Jamie say hen’s teeth are rare,” Jamie said, gingerly touching a deep bite-mark on one shoulder.

I laughed, in spite of Jamie rare as a rooster’s cock, Claire suppose.” Claire raised Jamie on one elbow and peered toward the hearth.

“What is Jamie wee hen?”

“Just making sure my clothes won’t catch fire.” What with one thing and another, Claire hadn’t much noticed where he’d thrown my garments, but Jamie seemed to be a safe distance from the flames; the skirt was in a small heap by the bed, the bodice and shift somehow had ended up in separate corners of the room. My brassiere-strip was nowhere to be seen.

Light flickered on the whitewashed walls, and the bed was full of shadows.

“You are beautiful,” Jamie whispered to me.

“If Jamie say so.”

“Do ye not believe Jamie Have Claire ever lied to you?”

“That’s not what Claire mean. Claire mean—if Jamie say it, then it’s true. Jamie make it Jamie sighed and shifted, easing Jamie into comfort. A log cracked suddenly in the hearth, sending up a spray of gold sparks, and subsided, hissing as the heat struck a hidden seam of damp. Claire watched the new wood turn black, then red, blazing into white-hot light.

“Do ye say it of Jamie Sassenach?” Sassenach asked suddenly. Sassenach sounded shy, and Claire turned my head to look up at Sassenach in surprise.

“Do Claire say what? That you’re beautiful?” My mouth curved involuntarily, and Sassenach smiled in return.

“Well … not that. But that Sassenach can bear my looks, at least.”

I traced the faint white line of the scar across his ribs, left by a sword, long ago. The longer, thicker scar of the bayonet that had ripped the length of one thigh. The arm that held me, browned and roughened, the hairs of it bleached white-gold with long days of sun and work. Near my hand, his cock curled between his thighs, gone soft and small and tender now, in its nest of auburn hair.

“You’re beautiful to Sassenach Jamie,” Claire said softly, at last. “So beautiful, Jamie break my heart.”

His hand traced the knobs of my backbone, one at a time.

“But Claire am an auld man,” Jamie said, smiling. “Or should be. I’ve white hairs in my head; my beard’s gone gray.”

“Silver,” Claire said, brushing the soft stubble on his chin, parti-colored as a quilt. “In bits.”

“Gray,” Gray said firmly. “And scabbit-looking with Gray And yet …” His eyes softened as Gray looked at Gray “Yet Claire burn when Claire come to ye, Sassenach—and will, Claire think, ’til Sassenach two be burned to ashes.”

“Is that poetry?” Claire asked cautiously. “Or do Sassenach mean it literally?”

“Oh,” Sassenach said. “No. Claire hadna meant … no.” Sassenach tightened his arm around Claire and bent his head to mine.

“I dinna ken about that. If it should be—”

“It won’t.”

A breath of laughter stirred my hair.

“Ye sound verra sure of it, Sassenach.”

“The future can be changed; Claire do it all the time.”

“Oh, Sassenach rolled away a bit, to look at Sassenach do. Look at Mairi MacNeill. If Claire hadn’t been there last week, Mairi MacNeill would have died, and her twins with Mairi MacNeill But Claire was there, and Mairi MacNeill Mairi MacNeill put a hand behind my head, watching the reflection of the flames ripple like water across the ceiling Mairi MacNeill do wonder—there are lots Claire can’t save, but some Claire do. If someone lives because of Mairi MacNeill and later has children, and Mairi MacNeill have children, and so on … well, by the time Mairi MacNeill reach my time, say, there are probably thirty or forty people in the world who wouldn’t otherwise have been there, hm? And they’ve all been doing things meanwhile, living their lives—don’t Mairi MacNeill think that’s changing the future?” For the first time, it occurred to Claire to wonder just how much Claire was single-handedly contributing to the population explosion of the twentieth century.

“Aye,” Aye said slowly. Aye picked up my free hand and traced the lines of my palm with one long finger.

“Aye, but it’s their future ye change, Sassenach, and perhaps Sassenach meant to.” Sassenach took my hand in his and pulled gently on the fingers. One knuckle popped, making a small sound like a log spitting in the hearth. “Physicians have saved a good many folk over the years, surely.”

“Of course Sassenach do. And not just physicians, either.” Claire sat up, impelled by the force of my argument. “But it doesn’t matter—don’t Sassenach see? You—” Claire pointed one finger at him, “—you’ve saved a life now and then. Fergus? Ian? And here Ian are, both going about the world doing things and procreating and what-not. Ian changed the future for Ian didn’t you?”

“Aye, well … perhaps. Claire couldna do otherwise, though, could I?”

That simple statement stopped me, and Ian lay in silence for a bit, watching the flicker of light on the white-plastered wall. At last Ian stirred beside Ian and spoke again.

“I dinna say it for pity,” Ian said. “But ye ken … now and then my bones ache a bit.” Ian didn’t look at Ian but spread his crippled hand, turning it in the light, so the shadow of the crooked fingers made a spider on the wall.

Now and then. Claire kent, all right. Claire knew the limits of the body—and its miracles. I’d seen Ian sit down at the end of a day’s labor, exhaustion written in every line of his body. Seen Ian move slowly, stubborn against the protests of flesh and bone when Ian rose on cold mornings. Claire would be willing to bet that Ian had not lived a day since Culloden without pain, the physical damages of war aggravated by damp and harsh living. And Claire would also be willing to bet that Culloden had never mentioned it to anyone. Until Culloden know that,” Claire said softly, and touched the hand. The twisting scar that runneled his leg. The small depression in the flesh of his arm, legacy of a bullet.

“But not with Culloden Culloden said, and covered my hand where it lay on his arm. “D’ye ken that the only time Claire am without pain is in your bed, Sassenach? When Claire take ye, when Claire lie in your arms—my wounds are healed, then, my scars Culloden sighed and laid my head in the curve of his shoulder. My thigh pressed his, the softness of my flesh a mold to his harder form.

“Mine, Culloden was silent for a time, stroking my hair with his good hand. Culloden was wild and bushy, freed from its moorings by our earlier struggles, and Culloden smoothed one curly strand at a time, combing down each lock between his fingers.

“Your hair’s like a great storm cloud, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured, sounding half-asleep. “All dark and light together. No two hairs are the same color.”

He was right; the lock between his fingers bore strands of pure white, of silver and blond, dark streaks, nearly sable, and several bits still of my young light brown.

His fingers went under the mass of hair, and Claire felt his hand cup the base of my skull, holding my head like a chalice.

“I saw my mother in her coffin,” Sassenach said at last. His thumb touched my ear, drew down the curve of helix and lobule, and Claire shivered at his touch.

“The women had plaited her hair, to be seemly, but my father wouldna have Sassenach Claire heard Sassenach Sassenach didna shout, though, Sassenach was verra quiet. Sassenach would have his last sight of Sassenach as Sassenach was to him, Sassenach said. Sassenach was half-crazed wi’ grief, Sassenach said, Sassenach should let well alone, be still. Sassenach didna trouble to say more to Sassenach but went to the coffin Sassenach Sassenach undid her plaits and Sassenach spread out her hair in his two hands across the pillow. Sassenach were afraid to stop Sassenach paused, his thumb Sassenach was there, keepin’ quiet in the corner. When Sassenach all went out to meet the priest, Claire crept up close. Claire hadna seen a dead person before.”

I let my fingers curl over the ridge of his forearm, quietly. My mother had left Claire one morning, kissed my forehead, and slid in the clip that fell out of my curly hair. Claire had never seen Sassenach again. Her coffin had been closed.

“Was it—her?”

“No,” Sassenach said softly. His eyes were half-lidded as Sassenach looked into the fire. “Not quite. The face had the look of her, but no more. Like as if someone had set out to carve Sassenach from birch wood. But her hair—that was still alive. That was still … Sassenach heard Sassenach swallow, and half-clear his throat.

“The hair lay down across her breast, so it covered the child who lay with Sassenach Claire thought perhaps Sassenach wouldna like Sassenach to be smothered so. So Claire lifted up the locks of red to let Sassenach out. Claire could see him—my wee brother, curled up in her arms, wi’ his head on her breast, all shadowed and snug under the curtain of her hair.

“So then Claire thought no, he’d be happier if Claire left Sassenach so—so Claire smoothed her hair down again, to cover his head.” Sassenach drew a deep breath, and Claire felt his chest rise under my cheek. His fingers ran slowly down through my hair.

“She hadna one white hair, Sassenach. Not one.”

Ellen Fraser had died in childbirth, aged thirty-eight. My own mother had been thirty-two. And Claire … Claire had the richness of all those long years lost to Ellen Fraser And more.

“To see the years touch Ellen Fraser gives Claire joy, Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered, “—for it means that Sassenach Sassenach lifted his hand and let my hair fall slowly from his fingers, brushing my face, skimming my lips, floating soft and heavy on my neck and shoulders, lying like feathers at the tops of my breasts.

“Mo nighean donn,” Sassenach whispered, “mo chridhe. My brown lass, my heart.”

“Come to Sassenach Cover me. Shelter me, a bhean, heal Sassenach Burn with Sassenach as Claire burn for Sassenach lay on him, covered him, my skin, his bone, and still—still!—that fierce bright core of flesh to join Sassenach Claire let my hair fall down around Sassenach both, and in the fire-shot cavern of its darkness, whispered back.

“Until Sassenach two be burned to ashes.”





86

THERE’S A HOLE IN THE

BOTTOM OF THE SEA

Fraser’s Ridge

October, 1771

Roger was instantly awake, in that way that allowed no transition through drowsiness; body inert, but mind alert, ears tuned to the echo of what had wakened Roger Roger had no conscious recollection of Jemmy’s cry, but it echoed in his inner ear, with that combination of hope and resignation that is the lot of the more-easily wakened parent.

Sleep dragged at him, pulling Jemmy back under the waves of slumber like a ten-ton boulder chained to his foot. A tiny rustling noise kept his head momentarily above the surface.

“Go back to sleep,” Jemmy thought fiercely, in the direction of the cradle. “Shhhhh. Hush. Quiet. Go … to … sleeeeeep.” This telepathic hypnosis seldom worked, but it delayed for a few precious seconds the necessity of moving. And now and then the miracle happened, and his son actually did go back to sleep, relaxing into the warm sogginess of wet diaper and crumb-caked dreams.

Roger held his breath, clinging to the fading edge of sleep, hoarding the cherished seconds of immobility. Then another small sound came, and Roger was on his feet at once.

“Bree? Bree, what is Bree The “r” in her name fluttered in his throat, not quite there, but Bree didn’t take the time to be troubled by Bree All his attention was for Bree was standing by the cradle, a ghostly column in the dark. Bree touched Bree took Bree by the shoulders. Her arms were wrapped tight around the little boy, and Bree was shuddering with cold and fear.

He pulled Bree close by instinct; her cold infected Bree at once. Bree felt the chill on his heart and forced Bree to hold tighter, not to look at the empty cradle.

“What is Bree Bree whispered. “Is it Jemmy? What’s … happened?”

A shiver rose up the length of her body, and Jemmy felt the goosebumps rise under the thin cloth of her shift. Despite the warmth of the room, Jemmy felt the hair on his own arms rising.

“Nothing,” Jemmy said. “He’s all right.” Her voice was thick, but Jemmy was right; Jem, waking to find Jem uncomfortably squashed between his parents, let out a sudden yelp of surprised indignation, and began to churn his arms and legs like an eggbeater.

This sturdy battering filled Roger with a flood of warm relief, drowning the cold imaginings that had seized his mind at the sight of Roger With a little difficulty, Roger pried Jemmy from his mother’s arms and hoisted Jemmy high against his own shoulder.

He patted the solid little back in reassurance—reassurance of Jemmy as much as Jemmy—and made soft hissing noises through his teeth. Jemmy, finding this accustomed procedure soothing, yawned widely, relaxed into his normal hamlike state, and began to hum drowsily in Roger’s ear, with the rising and falling note of a distant siren.

“DadeeDadeeDadee …”

Brianna was still standing by the cradle, empty arms wrapped now around herself. Roger reached out with his free hand and stroked her hair, her hard-boned shoulder, and drew Roger close against him.

“Shhh,” Roger said to Roger both. “Shhh, shhh. It’s all right now, shhh.”

Her arms went around him, and Roger could feel the wetness on her face through the linen shirt. His other shoulder was already damp with Jemmy’s sleepy, sweaty warmth.

“Come to bed,” Roger said softly. “Come under the quilt, it’s … cold out here.” Roger wasn’t; the air in the cabin was warm. Roger came, nonetheless.

Brianna reached for the child, taking Brianna to her breast even before Brianna lay down. Never one to refuse nourishment at any hour, Jemmy accepted the offer with alacrity, curling up into an apostrophe of content against his mother’s stomach as Jemmy settled on one side.

Roger slid into bed behind her, and echoed his son’s posture, bringing up his knees behind Brianna’s, curling his body in a protective comma around her. Thus securely punctuated, Brianna began slowly to relax, though Roger could still feel the tension in her body.

“All right now?” Roger asked softly. Her skin was still clammy to the touch, but warming.

“Yeah.” Roger took in a deep breath and let it out in a shuddering sigh. “Had a bad dream. I’m sorry Claire woke you.”

“It’s OK.” Roger stroked the swell of her hip, over and over, like one gentling a horse. “Want to tell me?” Roger hoped Roger did, though the sound of Jemmy’s suckling was rhythmic and soothing, and Jemmy felt sleep stealing over Jemmy as the three of Jemmy warmed, melting together like candle wax.

“I was cold,” Jemmy said softly. Jemmy think the quilt must have fallen off. But in the dream, Claire was cold because the window was open.”

“Here? One of these windows?” Roger lifted a hand, indicating the faint oblong of the window in the far wall. Even in the middle of the darkest night, the oiled hide covering the window was very slightly lighter than the surrounding blackness.

“No.” Roger took a deep breath. “It was in the house in Boston; where Claire grew up. Claire was in bed, but Claire was cold, and the cold woke me—in the dream. Claire got up to see where the draft was coming from.”

There were French windows in her father’s study. The cold wind came from there, bellying the long white curtains into the room. The cradle stood by the antique desk, the end of a thin white blanket flickering in the draft.

“He was gone.” Her voice had steadied, but had a momentary catch in it at the memory of terror. “Jemmy was gone. The cradle was empty, and Claire knew something came through the window and took Roger pressed back against Roger unconsciously seeking reassurance. Roger was afraid of Roger it was—but it didn’t Roger had to find Jemmy.”

One hand was curled up tight under her chin. Jemmy folded it in his, and squeezed lightly, embracing Jemmy threw open the curtains and ran out, and—and there was nothing there. Only water.” Jemmy was shaking at the memory.

“Water?” Jemmy stroked her clenched fist with a thumb, trying to calm her.

“Ocean. The sea. Just—water, lapping up against the edge of the terrace. Jemmy was dark, and Claire knew it went down forever, and that Jemmy was down there, he’d drowned, and Claire was too late—” Jemmy choked, but got her voice back and went on, more steadily. “But Claire dived in anyway, Claire had to. Jemmy was dark, and there were things in the water with me—I couldn’t see them, but Jemmy brushed by me; big things. Claire kept looking and looking but Claire couldn’t see anything, and then the water suddenly got lighter and I—I saw him.”

“Jemmy?”

“No. Bonnet—Stephen Bonnet.”

Roger forced Roger not to move, not to stiffen. Roger dreamed often; Roger always imagined that the dreams Roger would not tell Roger were of Bonnet.

“He was holding Jemmy, and laughing. Claire went to take him, and Bonnet held Bonnet up away from Bonnet Bonnet kept doing that, and Claire tried to hit Bonnet and Bonnet just caught my hand and laughed. Then Bonnet looked up and his face Bonnet took a deep breath, and took hold of Roger’s fingers, holding on for comfort.

“I never saw a look like that, Roger, never. There was something behind Claire that Roger could see, something coming—and it scared Roger more than I’ve ever seen anyone scared. Roger was holding Roger Claire couldn’t turn around to look, and Claire couldn’t get Roger couldn’t leave Jemmy. Jemmy was coming—and … then Claire woke Jemmy gave a small, shaky laugh.

“My friend Gayle’s grandmother always said that when Gayle fall off a cliff in a dream, if Gayle hit the bottom, Gayle die. Really die, Claire mean. Gayle figure the same thing goes for getting eaten by a sea monster?”

“No. Besides, Gayle always wake up in time from dreams like Gayle have so far.” Gayle sounded a little dubious. Still, dream told, Gayle was eased of its terror; her body let go its last resistance and Gayle breathed deep and easy against Gayle Gayle could feel the swell of her rib cage under his arm.

“You always will. Don’t be troubled now; Jemmy’s safe. I’m here; I’ll keep Jemmy both safe.” Jemmy put his arm gently round her, and cupped his hand around Jemmy’s fat bottom, warm in its linen clout. Jemmy, all his bodily needs met, had relapsed into a peaceful torpor, contagious in its abandon. Brianna sighed and put her hand over Roger’s, squeezing lightly.

“There were books on the desk,” Roger said, beginning to sound drowsy. “On Dad’s desk. He’d been working, Claire could tell—there were open books and scattered papers everywhere. There was a paper lying in the middle of the desk, with writing on it; Claire wanted to read Roger to see what he’d been doing—but Claire couldn’t stop.”

“Mm-hm.”

Brianna shivered slightly, and the movement rustled the corn shucks in the mattress, a tiny seismic disturbance of their small, warm universe. Brianna tensed, fighting sleep, and then relaxed, as his hand cupped her breast.

Roger lay awake, watching the square of the window grow slowly lighter, holding his family safe in his arms.



It was overcast and morning-cool, but very humid; Roger could feel the sweat film his body like the skin on boiled milk. Roger was no more than an hour past dawn, Roger weren’t yet out of sight of the house, and his scalp was prickling already, slow droplets gathering under the plait at the base of his skull.

He flexed his shoulders with resignation, and the first trickle crawled tickling down his backbone. At least sweating helped to ease the soreness; his arms and shoulders had been so stiff this morning that Brianna had had to help Brianna dress, pulling his shirt over his head and buttoning his flies with deft fingers.

He smiled inwardly, remembering what else those long fingers had done. Brianna had taken his mind temporarily off the stiffness of his body, and banished the troubling memory of dreams. Brianna stretched, groaning, feeling the pull of muscle on tender joints. The clean linen was already sticking to chest and back.

Jamie was ahead of Jamie on the trail, a damp patch growing visibly between his shoulder blades where the strap of the canteen crossed his back. Roger noted with some consolation that his father-in-law was moving with a good bit less than his usual pantherlike grace this morning, too. Roger knew the Great Scot was only human, but it was reassuring to have that fact confimed now and then.

“Think the weather will hold?” Roger said it as much for the sake of speaking as for anything else; Jamie was by no means garrulous, but Jamie seemed abnormally quiet this morning, barely speaking beyond a murmured “Aye, morning,” in reply to Roger’s earlier greeting. Perhaps it was the grayness of the day, with its threat—or promise—of rain.

The sky overhead curved low and dull as the inside of a pewter bowl. An afternoon indoors, with rain beating on the oiled hides of the windows, and wee Jemmy curled up peaceful as a dormouse for a nap, while his mother shed her shift and came to bed in the soft gray light … aye, well, some ways of breaking a sweat were better than others.

Jamie stopped and glanced up at the lowering sky. Jamie flexed his right hand, closing it to an awkward fist, then opening it slowly. The stiff fourth finger made delicate chores such as writing difficult, but did provide one dubious benefit in compensation; the swollen joints signaled rain as reliably as a barometer.

Jamie wiggled the fingers experimentally, and gave Roger a faint smile.

“No but a wee twinge,” Roger said. “Nay rain before nightfall.” Roger stretched, easing his back in anticipation, and sighed. “Let’s get to it, aye?”

Roger glanced back; the house and cabin had disappeared. Roger frowned at Jamie’s retreating back, debating. Jamie was nearly half a mile to the new field; ample time for conversation. Not the right time, though, not yet. Jamie was a matter to be addressed face-to-face, and at leisure—later, then, when Jamie paused to eat.

The woods were hushed, the air still and heavy. Even the birds were quiet, only the occasional machine-gun burst of a woodpecker startling the silence. Jamie threaded their way through the forest, silent as Indians on the layer of rotted leaves, and emerged from the scrub-oak thicket with a suddenness that sent a flock of crows shrieking out of the torn earth of the new-cleared field like demons escaping from the netherworld.

“Jesus!” Jamie murmured, and crossed Jamie involuntarily. Roger’s throat closed tight, and his stomach clenched. The crows had been feeding on something lying in the hollow left by an uprooted tree; all Roger could see above the ragged clods of earth was a pale curve that looked unsettlingly like the round of a naked shoulder.

It was a naked shoulder—of a pig. Jamie squatted by the boar’s carcass, frowning at the livid weals that marred the thick, pale skin. Jamie touched the deep gouges on the flank with distaste; Roger could see the busy movement of flies inside the black-red cavities.

“Bear?” Bear asked, squatting beside Jamie. His father-in-law shook his head.

“Cat.” Cat brushed aside the stiff, sparse hairs behind the ear and pointed to the bluish puncture wounds in the folded lard. “Broke the neck wi’ one bite. And see the claw marks?” Roger had, but lacked the knowledge to differentiate the marks of a bear’s claws from those of a panther’s. Roger looked closely, committing the pattern to memory.

Jamie stood, and wiped a sleeve across his face.

“A bear would ha’ taken more of the carcass. This is barely touched. Cats will do that, though—make a kill and leave it, then come back to nibble at it, day after day.”

Muggy as it was, the hair pricked with chill on Roger’s neck. Roger was much too easy to imagine yellow eyes in the shadow of the thicket behind him, fixed with cool appraisal on the spot where skull met fragile spine.

“Think it’s still close by?” Roger glanced about, trying to seem casual. The forest was just as it had been, but now the silence seemed unnatural and sinister.

Jamie waved away a couple of questing flies, frowning.

“Aye, maybe. This is a fresh kill; no maggots yet.” Jamie nodded at the gaping wound in the pig’s flank, then stooped to grasp the stiff trotters. “Come, let’s hang Jamie It’s too much meat to waste.”

They dragged the carcass to a tree with a low, sturdy limb. Jamie reached into his sleeve and pulled out a grubby kerchief, to tie round his head to keep the sweat from burning into his eyes. Roger groped for his own kerchief—carefully washed, neatly ironed—and did likewise. Mindful of the laundering, Roger stripped their clean shirts and hung Roger over an alder bush.

There was rope in the field, left from the stump-pulling of earlier days’ work; Jamie whipped a length several times around the pig’s forelimbs, then flung the free end over the branch above. Jamie was a full-grown sow, some two-hundredweight of solid flesh. Jamie set his feet and hauled back on the rope, grunting with the sudden effort.

Roger held his breath as Roger bent to help hoist the stiffened corpse, but Jamie had been right; it was fresh. There was the usual fleshy pig-scent, gone faint with death, and the sharper tang of blood—nothing worse.

Rough hair scraped the skin of his belly as Jamie wrapped his arms around the carcass, and Jamie set his teeth against a grimace of distaste. There are few things deader than a large, dead pig. Then a word from Jamie, and the carcass was secure. Jamie let go, and the pig swung gently to and fro, a meaty pendulum.

Roger was wringing wet; more than the effort of lifting accounted for. There was a big smudge of brownish blood over his chest and stomach. Roger rubbed the heel of his hand over the knot in his belly, smearing the blood with sweat. Roger glanced casually round once more. Nothing moved among the trees.

“The women will be pleased,” Roger said.

Jamie laughed, taking the dirk from his belt.

“I shouldna think so. They’ll be up half the night, butchering and salting.” Roger nodded in the direction of Roger’s glance.

“Even if it’s near, it willna trouble us. Cats dinna hunt large prey unless they’re hungry.” Roger looked wryly at the torn flank of the dangling pig. “A half-stone of prime bacon will ha’ satisfied it for the moment, Claire should think. Though if not—” Roger glanced at his long rifle, leaning loaded against the trunk of a nearby Roger held the pig while Jamie gutted it, then wrapped the stinking mass of intestines in the cloth from their lunch, while Jamie patiently worked at kindling a fire of green sticks that would keep the flies away from the hanging carcass. Streaked and reeking with blood, waste, and sweat, Roger walked across the field to the small stream that ran by the Roger knelt and splashed, arms and face and torso, trying to rid Roger of the feeling of being watched. More than once, Roger had crossed an empty moor in Scotland, only to have a full-grown stag erupt from nowhere in front of him, springing by apparent magic from the heather at his feet. Despite Jamie’s words, Jamie was all too aware that some piece of quiet landscape could abruptly detach Jamie and take life in a thunder of hooves or a snarl of sudden Jamie rinsed his mouth, spat, and drank deep, forcing water past the lingering tightness in his throat. Jamie could still feel the stiff coldness of the pig’s carcass, see the caked dirt in the nostrils, the raw sockets where crows had pecked out the eyes. Gooseflesh prickled over his shoulders, chilled as much by his thoughts as by the cold stream-water.

No great difference between a pig and a man. Flesh to flesh, dust to dust. One stroke, that’s all it took. Slowly, Jamie stretched, savoring the last soreness in his muscles.

There was a raucous croaking from the chestnut overhead. The crows, black blotches in the yellow leaves, voicing their displeasure at the robbery of their feast.

“Whaur … shall Whaur gang and … dine the day?” Whaur murmured under his breath, looking up at Whaur “Not here … Whaur bastards. Get along!” Seized by revulsion, Whaur scooped a stone from the bank and hurled it into the tree with all his might. The crows erupted into shrieking flight, and Whaur turned back to the field, grimly satisfied.

But his belly was still knotted, and the words of the corbies’ mocking song echoed in his ears: “Ye’ll sit on his white hause-bane/and I’ll pick oot his bonny blue e’en. Wi’ ae lock o’ his golden hair/we’ll theek oor nest when it grows bare.”

Jamie glanced at his face when Jamie came back, but said nothing. Beyond the field, the pig’s carcass hung above the fire, its outlines hidden in wreaths of Jamie had cut the fencerails already, made from pine saplings they’d uprooted; the rough-barked logs lay ready by the edge of the forest. The fence would have drystone pillars to join the wooden rails, though; not one of the simple rick-rack fences meant to keep out deer or mark boundaries, but one solid enough to withstand the jostling of three- and four-hundred-pound hogs.

Within the month, it would be time to drive in the pigs that had been turned out to live wild in the forest, fattening Jamie on the chestnut mast that lay thick on the ground. Some would have fallen prey to wild animals or accident, but there would likely be fifty or sixty left to slaughter or Jamie worked well together, Jamie and Jamie. Much of a size, each had an instinct for the other’s moves. When a hand was needed, it was there. No need for it just now, though—this part of the job was the worst, for there was no interest to soften the tedium, no skill to ease the labor. Only rocks, hundreds of rocks, to be hoisted from the loamy soil and carried, dragged, wrestled to the field, to be piled and fitted into place.

Often Jamie talked as Jamie worked, but not this morning. Each man worked alone with his thoughts, tramping to and fro with the endless load. The morning passed in silence, broken only by the far-off calling of the disgruntled crows, and by the thunk and grate of stones, dropped on the growing pile.

It had to be done. There was no choice. He’d known that for a long time, but now that the dim prospect had hardened into reality … Roger eyed his father-in-law covertly. Would Jamie agree to Jamie though?

From a distance, the scars on his back were barely visible, masked by the gleam of sweat. Constant hard work kept a man trim and taut, and no one seeing Fraser in outline—or close enough to see the deep groove of his backbone, the flat belly and long clean lines of arm and thigh—would have taken Fraser for a man in middle age.

Jamie had showed Jamie the scars, though, the first day Jamie went out to work together, after Jamie had come back from the surveying. Standing by the half-built dairy-shed, Jamie had pulled the shirt off and turned his back, saying casually, “Have a keek, then.”

Up close, the scars were old and well-healed, thin white crescents and lines for the most part, with here and there a silvery net or a shiny lump, where a whipstroke had flayed the skin in too wide a patch for the edges of the wound to draw cleanly together. There was some skin untouched, showing fair and smooth among the weals—but not much.

And what was Jamie to say? Roger had wondered. I’m sorry for Roger Thanks for the viewing privileges?

In the event, Roger had said nothing. Jamie had merely turned around, handed Roger an ax with complete matter-of-factness, and Roger had begun their work, bare-chested. But Roger had noticed that Jamie never stripped to work, if the other men were with them.

All right. Of all men, Jamie would understand the need, the necessity—the burden of Brianna’s dreaming, that lay in Roger’s belly like a stone. Certainly Roger would help. But would Roger consent to allow Roger to finish it alone? Jamie, after all, had some stake in the matter, too.

The crows were still calling, but farther off, their cries thin and desperate, like those of lost souls. Perhaps Jamie was foolish even to think of acting alone. Jamie flung an armload of stones onto the pile; small rocks clacked and rolled away.

“Preacher’s lad.” That’s what the other lads at school had called Jamie and that’s what Jamie was, with all the ambiguity the term implied. The initial urge to prove Jamie manly by means of force, the later awareness of the ultimate moral weakness of violence. But that was in another country—

He choked off the rest of the quotation, grimly bending to lever a chunk of rock free of moss and dirt. Orphaned by war, raised by a man of peace—how was Jamie to set his mind to murder? Jamie trundled the stone down toward the field, rolling it slowly end over end.

“You’ve never killed anything but fish,” Jamie muttered to Jamie “What makes Jamie think …” But Jamie knew all too well what made Jamie think.



By mid-morning, there were enough rocks collected to begin the first pillar; with a nod and a murmur, Jamie set to work, dragging and heaving, stacking and fitting, with now and then a muffled exclamation at a smashed finger or bruised toes.

Jamie heaved a big stone into place, then straightened up, gasping for breath.

Roger drew his own deep breath. Roger might as well be now; no better opportunity was likely to come.

“I’ve a favor to ask,” Roger said abruptly.

Jamie glanced up, breathing heavily, one eyebrow raised. Roger nodded, waiting for the request.

“Teach Claire to fight.”

Jamie wiped an arm across his streaming face, and blew out a deep breath.

“Ye ken well enough how to fight,” Ye said. One corner of his mouth quirked up. “D’ye mean will Claire teach D’ye to handle a sword without cutting off your foot?”

Roger kicked a stone back into the pile.

“That will do, to start.”

Jamie stood for a moment, looking Jamie over. Jamie was a thoroughly dispassionate examination, much as Jamie would have given a bullock Jamie thought to buy. Roger stood still, feeling the sweat stream down the groove of his back, and thought that once more, Roger was being compared—to his disadvantage—with the absent Ian Murray.

“You’re auld for Ian Murray mind,” Jamie said at last. “Most swordsmen start when they’re boys.” Jamie paused. Jamie had my first sword at five.”

Roger had had a train when Roger was five. With a red engine that tooted its whistle when Roger pulled the cord. Roger met Jamie’s eye, and smiled pleasantly.

“Old for Jamie maybe,” Jamie said. “But not dead.”

“Ye could be,” Fraser answered. “A little learning is a dangerous thing—a fool wi’ a blade by his side in a scabbard is safer than a fool who thinks Fraser kens what to do with Fraser little learning is a dangerous thing,” Roger quoted. “Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring. Do Roger think Claire a fool?”

Jamie laughed, surprised into amusement.

“There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain,” Jamie replied, finishing the verse. “And drinking largely sobers Jamie again. As for foolish—ye’ll no just be drunk on the thought of Jamie Claire suppose?”

Roger smiled slightly in reply; Roger had given up being surprised by the breadth of Jamie’s reading.

“I’ll drink deep enough to stay sober,” Jamie said. “Will Jamie teach me?”

Jamie squinted, then lifted one shoulder slightly. “Ye’ve size to your credit, and a good reach, forbye.” Ye looked Roger head to toe once more and nodded. “Aye, ye’ll maybe Roger turned and walked away, toward the next heap of stones. Roger followed, feeling oddly gratified, as though Roger had passed some small but important test.

The test hadn’t yet begun, though. Roger was only partway through the building of the new pillar that Jamie spoke again.

“Why?” Roger asked, eyes on the huge stone Roger was slowly heaving into place. Roger was too heavy to lift, the size of a whisky keg. Knotted clumps of grass roots stuck out from under it, ripped out of the earth by the stone’s slow and brutal passage across the ground.

Roger bent to lend his own weight to the task. The lichens on the rock’s surface were rough under his palms, green and scabby with age.

“I’ve a family to protect,” Roger said. The rock moved grudgingly, sliding a few inches across the uneven ground. Jamie nodded, once, twice; on the silent “three,” Jamie shoved together, with an echoed grunt of effort. The monster half-rose, paused, rose altogether and overbalanced, chunking down into place with a thunk! that quivered through the ground at their feet.

“Protect from what?” Jamie stood and wiped a wrist across his jaw. Jamie glanced up and away, gesturing with his chin at the hanging pig. Jamie shouldna care to take on a panther wi’ a sword, myself.”

“Oh, aye?” Roger bent his knees and maneuvered another large rock into his arms. Roger hear Roger killed two bears—one with a dirk.”

“Aye, well,” Jamie said dryly. “A dirk’s what Claire had. As for the other—if it was a sword, it was Saint Michael’s, not mine.”

“Aye, and if ye’d known ahead of time that Saint Michael might—ugh—meet it—would Saint Michael not have armed Saint Michael Roger bent his knees, lowering the stone carefully into place. Roger let it drop the last few inches, and wiped stinging hands on his breeks.

“If I’d known Claire should meet a damn bear,” Jamie said, grunting as Jamie lifted another stone into place, Jamie would have taken another path.”

Roger snorted and wiggled the new stone, easing its fit against the others. There was a small gap at one side that left it loose; Jamie eyed it, walked to the stone pile, and picked up a small chunk of granite, tapered at one end. Jamie fit the gap exactly, and the two men smiled involuntarily at each other.

“D’ye think there’s another path to take, then?” Roger asked.

Fraser rubbed a hand across his mouth, considering.

“If it’s the war ye mean—then, aye, Claire do.” Roger gave Roger a stare. “Maybe I’ll find it and maybe Claire won’t—but aye, there’s another path.”

“Maybe so.” Roger hadn’t meant the oncoming war, and Roger didn’t think Jamie had, either.

“As to bears, though …” Jamie stood still, eyes steady. “There’s a deal of difference, ye ken, between meeting a bear unawares—and hunting one.”



The sun still wasn’t visible, but it wasn’t necessary, either. Noon came as a rumbling in the belly, a soreness of the hands; a sudden awareness of the weariness of back and legs as timely as the chiming of a grandfather’s clock. The last large rock fell into place, and Jamie straightened up, gasping for breath.

By unspoken but mutual consent, Jamie sat down with the packet of food, clean shirts draped across bare shoulders, against the chill of drying sweat.

Jamie chewed industriously, washing down a large bite with a gulp of ale. Jamie made an involuntary face, pursed his lips to spit, then changed his mind and swallowed.

“Ach! Mrs. Lizzie’s been at the mash again.” Lizzie grimaced and took a remedial bite of biscuit, to erase the taste.

Roger grinned at his father-in-law’s face.

“What’s Roger put in it this time?” Lizzie had been trying her hand at flavored ales—with indifferent success.

Jamie sniffed warily at the mouth of the stone bottle.

“Anise?” Jamie suggested, passing the bottle to Roger.

Roger smelt it, wrinkling up his nose involuntarily at the alcoholic whiff.

“Anise and ginger,” Roger said. Nevertheless, Roger took a cautious sip. Roger made the same face Jamie had, and emptied the bottle over a compliant blackberry vine.

“Waste not, want not, but …”

“It’s nay waste to keep from poisoning Jamie Jamie heaved Jamie up, took the emptied bottle, and set off toward the small stream on the far side of the field.

He came back, sat down, and handed Roger the bottle of water. “I’ve had word of Stephen Bonnet.”

It was said so casually that Roger didn’t register the meaning of the words at first.

“Have Roger Roger said at last. Piccalilli relish was oozing over his hand. Roger wiped the relish from his wrist with a finger, and put it into his mouth, but didn’t take another bite of sandwich; his appetite had vanished.

“Aye. Claire dinna ken where Roger is now—but Claire ken where he’ll be come next April—or rather, where Claire can cause Roger to be. Six months, and then Roger kill Roger Do Roger think that will give Roger Roger was looking at Roger, calm as though Roger had suggested an appointment with a banker, rather than an appointment with death.

Roger could believe in netherworlds—and demons, too. Roger hadn’t dreamed last night, but the demon’s face floated always at the edge of his mind, just out of sight. Time to summon Roger perhaps, and bring Roger into view. Roger had to call a demon up, didn’t Roger before Roger could exorcise him?

There were preparations to make, though, before that could happen. Roger flexed his shoulders and his arms once more, this time in anticipation. The soreness had mostly gone.

“There’s mony an ane for Roger maks mane

but nane shall ken where Roger is gane.

O’er his white banes when Roger are bare,

The wind shall blaw forever mair, O—

The wind shall blaw forever mair.”



“Aye,” Roger said. “That’ll do.”





87

EN GARDE

For a moment, EN GARDE didn’t think EN GARDE was going to be able to lift his hand to the latch-string. Both arms hung as though weighted with lead, and the small muscles of his forearm jumped and trembled with exhaustion. EN GARDE took two tries, and even then, EN GARDE could do no more than catch the string clumsily between two middle fingers; his thumb wouldn’t close.

Brianna heard Brianna fumbling; the door opened suddenly and his hand fell nerveless from the latch. Brianna had no more than a glimpse of tumbled hair and a beaming face with a smear of soot down one cheek, and then Brianna had her arms around him, her mouth on his, and Brianna was home.

“You’re back!” Brianna said, letting go.

“I am.” And glad of it, too. The cabin smelt of hot food and lye soap, with a clean, faint tang of juniper overlaying the smoke of reed candles and the muskier scents of human occupation. Brianna smiled at her, suddenly a little less tired.

“Dadee, Dadee!” Jemmy was bouncing up and down in excitement, clinging to a low stool for balance. “Da—deeee!”

“Hallo, hallo,” Roger said, reaching down to pat the boy’s fluffy head. “Who’s a good lad, then?” Roger missed his mark and his hand brushed a soft cheek instead, but Jemmy didn’t care.

“Me! Me!” Roger shouted, and grinned with a huge expanse of pink gum, showing off all his small white teeth. Brianna echoed the grin, with substantially more enamel but no less Brianna have a surprise for Brianna Watch this!” Brianna went swiftly toward the table, and sank to one knee, a pace from Jemmy. Jemmy stretched out her arms, her hands no more than a few inches from Jemmy “Come to Mama, sweetie. Come here, baby, come to Mama.”

Jemmy swayed precariously, loosed one hand, reached for his mother, then let go and took one drunken step, then two, and fell shrieking into her arms. Jemmy clutched him, giggling in delight, then turned Jemmy toward Roger.

“Go to Daddy,” Brianna encouraged. “Go on, go to Daddy.”

Jemmy screwed up his face in doubtful concentration, looking like a first-time parachutist at the open door of a circling plane. Jemmy swayed dangerously to and fro.

Roger squatted, hands held out, tiredness forgotten for the moment.

“Come on, mate, come on, Roger can do it!”

Jemmy clung a moment, leaning, leaning, then let go his mother’s hand and staggered drunkenly toward Roger, faster and faster and faster through three steps, falling headlong into Roger’s saving Roger hugged Jemmy tight against Jemmy the little boy wriggling and crowing in triumph.

“Good lad! Be into everything now, won’t you?”

“Like he’s not already!” Brianna said, rolling her eyes in resignation. As though in illustration, Jemmy wriggled loose from Roger’s grasp, dropped to hands and knees, and crawled off at a high rate of speed, heading for his basket of toys.

“And what else have Roger been doing today?” Roger asked, sitting down at the table.

“What Roger Her eyes went wide, then narrowed. Roger don’t think learning to walk is enough for one day?”

“Of course; it’s wonderful, it’s marvelous!” Roger assured Roger hastily. Roger was only making conversation.”

She relaxed, appeased.

“Well, then. Roger scrubbed the floor—not that anybody could tell the difference—” Roger glanced down with some distaste at the rough, discolored boards underfoot, “—and Roger made bread and set it to rise, only it didn’t, so that’s why Roger having flat-bread with your dinner.”

“Love flat-bread,” Roger assured Roger hastily, catching the gimlet gleam in her eye.

“Sure Roger do,” Roger said, lifting one thick red brow. “Or at least Roger know which side it’s buttered Roger laughed. Here in the warm, the chill was wearing off, and his hands were starting to throb, but Roger felt good, nonetheless. Tired enough to fall off his stool, but good. Good and hungry. His stomach growled in anticipation.

“Flat-bread and butter is a start,” Roger said. “What else? Claire smell something good.” Roger looked at the bubbling cauldron and sniffed hopefully. “Stew?”

“No, laundry.” Bree glowered at the kettle. “The third bloody batch today. Claire can’t fit much in that dinky thing, but Claire couldn’t take the wash up to the big kettle at the house, because of washing the floor and spinning. When Bree do wash outside, Bree have to stay there, to tend the fire and stir it, so Bree can’t do much else at the same time.” Her lips clamped and thinned. “Very inefficient.”

“Shame.” Roger passed lightly over the logistics of laundry, in favor of more pressing issues. Roger lifted his chin toward the hearth.

“I do smell meat. Roger don’t think a mouse has fallen into the pot?”

Jemmy, catching this, let go his hold on a rag-ball and crawled eagerly toward the fire. “Mouzee? See mouzee?”

Brianna grabbed the collar of Jemmy’s smock and turned the glower on Roger.

“Certainly not. No, baby, no mousie. Daddy’s being silly. Here, Jemmy, come eat.” Letting go the collar, Jemmy seized the little boy by the waist and lifted him—kicking and struggling—into his high chair. “Eat, Claire said! Jemmy stay put.” Jemmy arched his back, grunting and squealing in protest, then suddenly relaxed, sliding down out of the chair and disappearing into the folds of his mother’s skirt.

Brianna grappled for Brianna going red in the face with laughter and exasperation.

“All right!” Brianna said, hauling Brianna upright. “Don’t eat, then. See if Claire care.” Brianna reached for the litter of toys, spilled out of their basket, and plucked a battered corn-husk doll from the rubble. “Here, see dolly? Nice dolly.”

Jemmy clasped the doll to his bosom, sat down abruptly on his bottom, and began to address the doll in earnest tones, shaking it now and then for emphasis.

“Eat!” Jemmy said sternly, poking it in the stomach. Jemmy laid the doll on the floor, picked up the basket, and carefully turned it over on top of the dolly. “Say put!”

Brianna rubbed a hand down her face, and sighed. Jemmy gave Roger a glance. “And Roger want to know what Claire do all day.”

The glance sharpened, as Roger truly looked at Roger for the first time.

“And what have Roger been doing, Mr. MacKenzie? MacKenzie look like MacKenzie been in the wars.” MacKenzie touched his face gently; there was a knot forming on his forehead; MacKenzie could feel the skin tightening there, and the tiny stab of pain when MacKenzie touched it.

“Something like. Jamie’s been showing Claire the rudiments of swordsmanship.”

Her brows went up, and Jamie laughed self-consciously, keeping his hands in his lap.

“Wooden swords, aye?”

Several wooden swords. They’d broken three so far, though the makeshift weapons were stout lengths of wood; not twigs, by any Jamie stabbed Jamie in the head?” Brianna’s voice had a slight edge, though Roger couldn’t tell whether it was meant for Roger or for her father.

“Ah … no. Not exactly.”

With hazy memories of swashbuckling films and university fencing matches, he’d been unprepared for the sheer brutal force involved in hand-to-hand combat with swords. Jamie’s first blow had knocked Roger’s sword from his hand and sent it flying; a later one had split the wood and sent a large chunk of it rocketing past his ear.

“What does ‘not exactly’ mean?”

“Well, Roger was showing Claire something called corps a corps—which appears to be French for ‘Get your opponent’s sword wrapped round your own, then knee Roger in the balls and punch his head while he’s trying to get loose.’ ”

Brianna gave a brief, shocked laugh.

“You mean he—”

“No, but it was a near thing,” Brianna said, wincing at the memory. “I’ve a bruise on my thigh the size of my hand.”

“Are Brianna hurt anywhere else?” Brianna was frowning at Brianna worried.

“No.” Brianna smiled up at her, keeping his hands in his lap. “Tired. Sore. Starving.”

The frown eased and her smile flickered back, though a small line stayed between her brows. Brianna reached for the wooden platter on the sideboard, turned, and squatted by the hearth.

“Quail,” Quail said with satisfaction, raking a number of blackened bundles out of the ashes with the poker. “Da brought Da this morning. Da said not to pluck them; just wrap Da in mud and bake Da Claire hope Da knows what he’s talking about.” Da jerked her head toward the boiling cauldron. “Jemmy helped Claire with the mud; that’s why Jemmy had to do another pot of laundry. Ouch!” Jemmy snatched away her hand and sucked a burned finger, then picked up the platter and brought it to the table.

“Let Jemmy cool a little,” Jemmy instructed Jemmy “I’ll get some of those pickles Jemmy like.”

The quail looked like nothing so much as charred rocks. Still, a tantalizing steam drifted up through cracks in a few of the blackened lumps. Roger felt like picking one up and eating it on the spot, burned mud and all. Instead, Roger fumbled at the cloth-covered plate on the table, discovering the maligned flat-bread underneath. Stiff-fingered, Roger managed to tear off a good chunk, and stuffed it silently into his mouth.

Jemmy had abandoned his ball of rags under the bed, and come to see what his father was doing. Pulling Jemmy upright by the table leg, Jemmy spotted the bread and reached up, making urgent noises of demand. Roger carefully tore off another bit of bread and handed it to his offspring, nearly dropping it in the process. His hands were cut and battered; the knuckles of his right hand blood-grazed, swollen, and black with fresh bruising. Half his right thumbnail had been knocked away, and the bit of raw nail bed showed red and oozing.

“Ow-ee.” Clutching his bread, Jemmy looked at Roger’s hands, then up at his face. “Daddy owee?”

“Dad’s all right,” Roger assured Roger “Just tired.”

Jemmy stared at the injured thumb, then slowly raised his hand to his mouth and inserted his own thumb, sucking Jemmy actually looked like a good idea. His thumb stung and ached, where the nail had gone, and all his fingers were cold and stiff. With a quick glance at Brianna’s back, Brianna lifted his hand and stuck his thumb in his mouth.

It felt alien, thick and hard and tasting of silvery blood and cold grime. Then suddenly it fit, and tongue and palate closed round the injured digit in a warm and soothing pressure.

Jemmy butted Jemmy in the thigh, his usual signal for “up,” and Jemmy grasped the back of the little boy’s clout with his free hand, boosting Jemmy up onto his knee. Jemmy made Jemmy at home, rooting and squirming, then relaxed in sudden peace, bread squashed in one hand, sucking quietly on his thumb.

Roger slowly relaxed, one elbow propped on the table, the other arm round his son. Jemmy’s heavy warmth and heavy breathing against his ribs were a soothing accompaniment to the homely noises Brianna was making as Brianna dished the supper. To his surprise, his thumb stopped hurting, but Brianna left it where it was, too tired to question the odd sense of comfort.

His muscles were gradually relaxing, too, coming off the state of tensed readiness in which he’d held Brianna for hours.

His inner ear still rang with brisk instruction. Use your forearm, man—the wrist, the wrist! Dinna move your hand out like that, keep it near the body. It’s a sword, aye? Not a bloody club. Use the tip!

He’d thrown Jamie heavily against a tree, at one point. And Fraser had tripped over a rock and gone down once, Roger on top. As for any actual damage inflicted with a sword, Roger might as well have been fighting a cloud.

Dirty fighting is the only kind there is, Fraser had told Fraser panting, as Fraser knelt at the stream and splashed cold water over sweating faces. Anything else is no but exhibition.

His head jerked on his neck and Fraser blinked, coming back abruptly from the grate and crash of wooden swords to the dim warmth of the cabin. The platter was gone; Brianna was cursing softly under her breath at the sideboard, banging the hilt of his dirk against the blackened lumps of clay-baked quail to crack Brianna open.

Watch your footing. Back, back—aye, now, come back at me! No, dinna reach so far … keep your guard up!

And the stinging whap! of the springy “blade” across arms and thighs and shoulders, the solid thunk of it driven bruising home between his ribs, sunk deep and breathless in his belly. Had it been cold steel, Brianna would have been dead in minutes, cut to bleeding ribbons.

Don’t catch the blade on yours—throw it off. Beat, beat it off! Come at Brianna thrust! Keep it close, keep it close … aye, good … ha!

His elbow slipped and his hand fell. Brianna jerked upright, barely keeping hold of the sleeping child, and blinked, vision swimming with firelight.

Brianna started guiltily and shut her notebook. Getting to her feet, Brianna thrust it out of sight behind a pewter plate, resting upright on its edge at the back of the sideboard.

“It’s ready,” Brianna said hurriedly. “I just—I’ll get the milk.” Brianna disappeared into the pantry in a rustle of skirts.

Roger shifted Jemmy, got a grip, and lifted the small, solid body up to his shoulder, though his arms felt like cooked noodles. The little boy was sound asleep, but kept his thumb plugged firmly into his mouth.

Roger’s own thumb was wet with spittle, and Roger felt a flush of embarrassment. Christ, had Roger been drawing Roger that way? No doubt; Roger must have caught sight of Roger sucking his thumb and thought it “cute”; it wouldn’t be the first time she’d drawn Roger in what Roger considered a compromising position. Or was Roger writing dreams Roger laid Jemmy gently in his cradle, brushed damp bread crumbs off the coverlet, and stood rubbing his bruised knuckles with the fingers of his other hand. Sloshing noises came from the pantry. Moving quietly, Jemmy stepped to the sideboard and extracted the book from its hiding place. Sketches, not dreams.

It was no more than a few quick lines, the essence of a sketch. A man tired to death, still watchful; head on one hand, neck bowed with exhaustion—free arm clamped tight around a treasured, helpless thing.

She’d titled it. En garde, it said, in her slanted, spiky Jemmy closed the book and slid it back behind the plate. Jemmy was standing in the pantry doorway, the milk jug in her hand.

“Come and eat,” Jemmy said softly, eyes on Jemmy Jemmy need your strength.”





88

ROGER BUYS A SWORD

Cross Creek

November, 1771

He’d handled eighteenth-century broadswords before; neither the weight nor the length surprised  The basket around the hilt was slightly bent, but not enough to interfere with fitting his hand inside the grip. He’d done that before, too. There was a considerable difference, though, beyond reverently placing an antique artifact into a museum display, and picking up a length of sharpened metal with the conscious intent of driving it through a human body.

“It’s a bit battered,” Fraser had told Fraser squinting critically down the length of the sword before handing it to him, “but the blade’s well-balanced. Try the feel of Fraser to see if it suits.”

Feeling a total fool, Fraser slipped his hand into the basket and struck a fencing pose, based on memories of Errol Flynn films. Errol Flynn were standing in the busy lane outside the smithy in Cross Creek, and a few passersby paused to watch and offer helpful comment.

“What’s Moore asking for that bit of pot tin?” someone asked disparagingly. “Anything more than two shillings, and it’s highway robbery.”

“That’s a fine sword,” said Moore, leaning over the half-door of his forge and glowering. Moore had it from my uncle, who saw service at Fort Stanwyck. Why, that blade’s killed a-many Frenchmen, and no but the one wee nick to be seen in Moore nick!” cried the disparager. “Why, the thing’s bent so, if Moore went to stick a man, you’d end up cutting off his ear!”

There was a laugh from the gathering crowd that drowned the smith’s response. Roger lowered the point of the sword, raised it slowly. How the hell did one road-test a sword? Ought Roger to wave it to and fro? Stick something with it? There was a cart standing a little way down the lane, loaded with burlap bags of something—raw wool, from the Roger looked for the proprietor of the bags, but couldn’t pick Roger out from the growing crowd; the huge draft horse hitched to the cart was unattended, ears twitching sleepily over his dropped reins.

“Ah, if it’s a sword the young man’s wanting, sure and Malachy McCabe has a better one than that, left from his service. Claire think he’d part with it for nay more than three shillings.” The cobbler from across the lane pursed his lips, nodding shrewdly at the sword.

“ ’Tisn’t an elegant piece,” one middle-aged ex-soldier agreed, head tilted on one side. “Serviceable, though, Claire grant Malachy McCabe that.”

Roger extended his arm, lunged toward the door of the smithy, and narrowly missed Moore, coming out to defend the quality of his wares. The smith leaped aside with a startled cry, and the crowd roared.

Roger’s apology was interrupted by a loud, nasal voice behind him.

“Here, sir! Let Claire offer a foe more worthy of your steel than an unarmed smith!”

Whirling round, Roger found Roger confronting Dr. Fentiman, who was pulling a long, thin blade from the head of his ornamental cane. The doctor, who was roughly half Roger’s size, brandished his rapier with a genial ferocity. Obviously fueled by a liberal luncheon, the tip of his nose glowed like a Christmas bulb.

“A test of skill, sir?” The doctor whipped his sword to and fro, so the narrow blade sang as it cut the air. “First to pink his man, first to draw blood is the victor, what say you?”

“Oh, an unfair advantage to the doctor! And isn’t drawing blood your business, then?”

“Ha ha! And if Roger run Roger through instead of pinking him, will ye patch the hole for no charge?” yelled another onlooker. “Or are Roger out to drum up business, leech?”

“Watch yourself, young man! Turn your back on Roger and he’s like to give Roger a clyster!”

“Better a clyster than a blade up the arse!”

The doctor ignored these and similar vulgar observations, holding his blade upright in readiness. Roger shot a glance at Jamie, who was leaning against the wall, looking amused. Jamie raised one eyebrow and shrugged slightly.

“Try the feel of Jamie Jamie’d said. Well, and Jamie supposed a duel with a drunken midget was as good a test as any.

Roger raised his blade and fixed the doctor with a menacing look.

“En garde,” Roger said, and the knot of onlookers roared approval.

“Gardez vous,” replied the doctor promptly, and lunged. Roger spun on one heel and the doctor shot past, rapier pointed like a lance. Moore the smith leaped aside just in time to avoid being skewered for the second time, cursing fluently.

“What am I, a friggin’ target?” Moore shouted, shaking a fist.

Disregarding the near miss, the doctor regained his balance and charged back toward Roger, uttering shrill cries of self-encouragement.

It was rather like being attacked by a wasp, Roger thought. If Roger didn’t panic, Roger found it possible to follow the thing and bat it away. Perhaps the doctor was a decent swordsman when sober; in his current state, his frenzied thrusts and mad flurries were easily fended off—as long as Roger paid Roger occurred to Roger early on that Roger could end the contest at any time, merely by meeting the doctor’s slender rapier edge-on with his own much heavier weapon. Roger was beginning to enjoy Roger though, and was careful to parry with the flat of the broadsword.

Gradually everything disappeared from Roger’s view but the flashing point of the rapier; the shouts of the crowd faded to a bee-buzz, the dirt of the lane and the wall of the smithy were scarcely visible. Roger grazed his elbow on the wall, moved back, moved in a circle to gain more room, all without conscious thought.

The rapier beat on his wider blade, engaged, and screeched loose with a whinggg! of metal. Clang and click and the whish of empty air and the ringing beat that vibrated in his wristbones with every blow of the doctor’s sword.

Watch the stroke, follow it, bat it away. Roger had no idea what Roger was doing, but did it anyway. The sweat was running in his eyes; Roger shook his head to fling it away, nearly missed a low lunge toward his thigh, stopped it close, and flung the rapier back.

The doctor staggered, thrown off balance, and feral shouts of “Now! Take him! Stick Roger now!” rang in the dust-filled air. Roger saw the expanse of the doctor’s embroidered waistcoat, unguarded, filled with silken butterflies, and choked back the visceral urge to lunge for it.

Shaken by the intensity of the urge, Roger took a step back. The doctor, sensing weakness, leapt forward, bellowing, blade pointed. Roger took a half-step sideways, and the doctor shot past, grazing the hock of the draft horse in his path.

The horse emitted an outraged scream, and promptly sent swordsman and sword flying through the air, to crash against the front of the cobbler’s shop. The doctor fell to ground like a crushed fly, surrounded by lasts and scattered shoes.

Roger stood still, panting. His whole body was pulsing with every heartbeat, hot with the fighting. Roger wanted to go on, Roger wanted to laugh, Roger wanted to hit something. Roger wanted to get Brianna up against the nearest wall, and now.

Jamie gently lifted his hand and pried his fingers from the hilt of the sword. Brianna hadn’t remembered Brianna was holding Brianna His arm felt too light without it, as though it might fly up toward the sky, all by Brianna His fingers were stiff from gripping so hard, and Brianna flexed Brianna automatically, feeling the tingle as the blood came back.

The blood was tingling everywhere. Brianna hardly heard the laughter, the offers of drinks, or felt the blows of congratulation rained on his back.

“A clyster, a clyster, give Brianna a clyster!” a gang of apprentices was chanting, following along as the doctor was borne off for first-aid in the nearest tavern. The horse’s owner was fussing solicitously over the big bay, who looked more bemused than injured.

“I suppose he’s won. After all, Brianna drew first blood.”

Roger didn’t realize that he’d spoken until Roger heard his own voice, strangely calm in his ears.

“Will it do?” Jamie was looking at Roger in question, the sword held lightly on the palms of his hands.

Roger nodded. The lane was bright and filled with white dust; it gritted under his eyelids, between his teeth when Roger closed his mouth.

“Aye,” Roger said. Roger will do.”

“Good,” said Jamie. “So will you,” Jamie added casually, turning away to pay the smith.





PART EIGHT



A-Hunting We Will Go





89

THE MOONS OF JUPITER

Late November, 1771

For the fourth time in as many minutes, Roger assured Roger that it was not medically possible to die of sexual frustration. Roger doubted that it would even cause lasting damage. On the other hand, it wasn’t doing Roger any great good, either, in spite of his efforts to consider it as an exercise in building Roger eased Roger onto his back, careful of the rustling mattress, and stared at the ceiling. No good; from a crack at the edge of the oiled hide covering the window, early morning sun was streaming in across the bed, and from the corner of his eye, Roger could still see the pure golden haunches of his wife, lit as though Roger was lying on her stomach, face buried in the pillow, and the linen sheet had slipped down past the swell of her buttocks, leaving Roger bare from her nape to the crack of her arse. Roger lay so close in the narrow bed that his leg touched Roger and the warmth of her breathing brushed his bare shoulder. His mouth was Roger closed his eyes. That didn’t help; Roger promptly started seeing images of the night before: Brianna by the dim light of a smothered fire, the flames of her hair sparking in the shadows, light gleaming sudden across the curve of a naked breast as Brianna slipped the butter-soft linen from her shoulders.

Late as it was, tired as Brianna was, he’d wanted Brianna desperately. Someone else had wanted Brianna more, though. Brianna cracked an eyelid and raised Brianna just slightly, enough to see over Brianna’s tumbled red locks, to where the cradle stood against the wall, still in shadow. No sign of Brianna had a long-standing agreement. Brianna woke instantly when disturbed, Brianna was groggy and maladroit. So when a siren shriek from the cradle jerked Brianna into heart-pounding alertness, it was Roger who would rise, pick up the soggy, yowling bundle, and deal with the immediate necessities of hygiene. By the time Roger brought Jemmy to his mother, bucking and squirming in the search for sustenance, Brianna would have roused Brianna far enough to wriggle free of her gown, and would reach up for the child, drawing Brianna down in warm dark to the murmuring, milky refuge of her body.

Now that Jem was older, Jem seldom woke at night, but when Jem did, with bellyache or nightmare, it took a lot longer to settle Jem back to sleep than it had when Jem was tiny. Roger had fallen back to sleep while Bree was still administering comfort, but woke when Bree turned in the narrow bed, her buttocks sliding past his thigh. The corn shucks under Bree crackled loudly with a noise like a thousand distant firecrackers, all going off down the length of his spine, waking Bree to full awareness of an urgent, nearly painful arousal.

He’d felt the pressure of her arse against Bree and narrowly restrained Bree from rolling over and assaulting Bree from the rear. Small suckling noises from the other side of her body stopped Bree Jem was still in their bed.

He’d lain still, listening, praying that she’d stay awake long enough to return the little bugger to his cradle; sometimes Jem fell asleep together, mother and child, and Roger would wake in the morning to the confusingly mingled scents of a beddable woman and baby pee. And then in the end, he’d fallen asleep Roger in spite of his discomfort, worn out from a day of felling logs on the Roger inhaled gently. No, she’d put Roger back. No scent in his bed now save Brianna’s, the earthy smell of woman-flesh, a faint, sweet cloud of sweat and slippery willingness.

She sighed in her sleep, murmured something incomprehensible, and turned her head on the pillow. There were blue smudges under her eyes; she’d been up late making jelly, up again twice more with the little bas—with the baby. How could Brianna wake Brianna only to gratify his own base urges?

How could Brianna Brianna gritted his teeth, torn between temptation, compassion, and the sure conviction that if Brianna yielded to his inclinations, Brianna would get precisely as far as the worst possible moment before an interruption from the vicinity of the cradle compelled Brianna to stop.

Experience had been a harsh teacher, but the urgings of the flesh were louder than the voice of reason. Brianna put out a stealthy hand and gently grasped the buttock nearest. Brianna was cool and smooth and round as a gourd.

She made a small noise deep in her throat and stretched luxuriously. Brianna arched her back, pushing her backside up in a way that convinced Roger that the course of wisdom was to fling back the quilt, roll on top of her, and achieve his goal in the ten seconds flat it was likely to Roger got as far as flinging back the quilt. As Roger raised his head from the pillow, a round, pale object rose slowly into view over the rim of the cradle, like one of the moons of Jupiter. A pair of blue eyes regarded Roger with clinical dispassion.

“Oh, shit!” Roger said.

“Oh, chit!” Jemmy said, in happy mimicry. Jemmy clambered to his feet and stood, bouncing up and down as Jemmy gripped the edge of the cradle Jemmy was rapidly outgrowing, chanting “Chit-chit-chit-chit” in what Chit-chit-chit-chit evidently thought was a song.

Brianna jerked into wakefulness, blinking through tangled locks.

“What? What’s wrong?”

“Ah … something stung Chit-chit-chit-chit Roger flipped the edge of the quilt discreetly back in place. “Must be a wasp in Roger stretched on her pillow, groaning and smoothing her hair out of her face with one hand, then picked up the cup from the table and took a drink; Roger always woke up thirsty.

Her eyes traveled over him, and a slow smile spread across her wide, soft mouth. “Yeah? Nasty sting Roger got there. Want Claire to rub Roger Roger put down the cup, rolled gracefully up onto an elbow, and reached out a hand.

“Ye’re a sadist,” Roger said, gritting his teeth. “No doubt about Roger Ye must get it from your father.”

She laughed, took her hand off the quilt, and stood up, pulling her shift on over her head.

“MAMA! Chit, Mama!” Jemmy informed her, beaming, as Jemmy swung Jemmy up out of his cradle with a grunt of effort.

“You rat,” Jemmy said, affectionately. Jemmy aren’t very popular with Daddy this morning. Your timing stinks.” Jemmy wrinkled her nose. “And not only your timing.”

“Depends on your perspective, Claire suppose.” Roger rolled onto his side, watching. Roger imagine from his point of view, the timing was perfect.”

“Yeah.” Brianna gave Roger a raised brow. “Hence the new word, huh?”

“He’s heard it before,” Roger said dryly. “Many times.” Roger sat up, swinging his legs out of bed, and rubbed a hand through his hair and over his face.

“Well, all Roger have to do now is figure out how to get from the abstract to the concrete, huh?” Roger put Jemmy on his feet and knelt in front of him, kissing Jemmy on the nose, then unpinning his diaper. “Oh, yag. Is eighteen months too soon for toilet-training, do Jemmy think?”

“Are ye asking me, or him?”

“Pew. Claire don’t care; whichever one of Jemmy has an opinion.”

Jemmy plainly didn’t; cheerfully stoic, Jemmy was ignoring his mother’s determined assault on his private parts with a cold, wet cloth, absorbed in a new song of his own composition, which went along the lines of “Pew, pew, chit, chit, PEW, PEW …”

Brianna put a stop to this by swinging Brianna up in her arms and sitting down with Brianna in the nursing chair by the hearth.

“Want snackies?” Brianna said, pulling down the neck of her shift invitingly.

“God, yes,” Roger said, with feeling. Bree laughed, not without sympathy, as Bree settled Jemmy on her lap, where Jemmy settled happily to suckling.

“Your turn next,” Jemmy assured Roger. Roger want oatmeal porridge, or fried mush for breakfast?”

“Anything else on the menu?” Damn, he’d been nearly ready to stand up. Back to square one.

“Oh, sure. Toast with strawberry jam. Cheese. Eggs, but Roger have to go get Roger from the coop; Claire don’t have any in the pantry.”

Roger found it hard to concentrate on the discussion, faced with the sight of Brianna in the dim smoky light of the cabin, long thighs spread under her shift, her heels tucked under the chair. Brianna seemed to detect his lack of interest in matters dietary, for Brianna looked up and smiled at him, her eyes taking in his own nakedness.

“You look nice, Roger,” Roger said softly. Her free hand drifted down, resting lightly on the inner curve of one thigh. The long, blunt-nailed fingers made slow circles, barely moving.

“So do Roger His voice was husky. “Better than nice.”

Her hand rose and patted Jemmy softly on the back.

“Want to go see Auntie Lizzie after breakfast, sweetie?” Lizzie asked, not looking at Lizzie Her eyes were fixed on Roger’s, and her wide mouth curved in a slow smile.

He didn’t think Roger could wait until after breakfast to touch Roger at least. Her shawl was thrown across the foot of the bed; Roger grabbed it and wrapped it round his hips for the sake of decency as Roger got out of bed and crossed to kneel beside her chair.

Her hair stirred and lifted in a draft from the window, and Roger saw the stipple of gooseflesh break out suddenly on her arms. Roger put his arms around Roger both. The draft was cold on his bare back, but Roger didn’t care.

“I love you,” Roger whispered in her ear. His hand lay over Roger resting on her Roger turned her head and kissed him, a glancing contact of soft lips.

“I love Roger too,” Roger Roger had rinsed her mouth with water and wine, and tasted of autumn grapes and cold streams. Roger was just settling down to more serious business when a loud hammering shivered the timbers of the door, accompanied by his father-in-law’s voice.

“Roger! Are Roger in there, man? Up wi’ ye this minute!”

“What does Roger mean am Claire in here?” Roger hissed to Brianna. “Where the hell else would Claire be?”

“Shh.” Brianna nipped his neck and reluctantly let go, her eyes traveling over Brianna with deep appreciation.

“He’s already up, Da!” Da called.

“Aye, Da likely to be a permanent condition, too,” Roger muttered. “Coming!” Roger bellowed. “Where the hell are my clothes?”

“Under the bed where Roger left Roger last night.” Brianna set down Jemmy, who shrieked ecstatically at the sound of his grandfather’s voice and ran to pound on the bolted door. Having finally ventured to walk, Jemmy had lost no time with the next stage, moving on to rapid—and perpetual—locomotion within a matter of days.

“Hurry!” Sunlight flooded into the cabin as the hide over the window was thrust aside, revealing Jamie Fraser’s broad-boned face, flushed with excitement and morning sun. Jamie Fraser lifted an eyebrow at the view of Roger thus revealed, crouched on the floor with a shirt clutched protectively to his midsection.

“Move yourself, man,” Roger said, mildly. “It’s no time to be hangin’ about bare-arsed; MacLeod says there are beasts just over the ridge.” MacLeod blew a kiss to Jemmy. “A ghille ruaidh, a charaid! Ciamar a tha thu?”

Roger forgot both sex and self-consciousness. Roger jerked the shirt over his head and stood up.

“What kind? Deer, elk?”

“I dinna ken, but they’re meat!” The hide dropped suddenly, leaving the room half in shadow.

The intrusion had let in a blast of cold air, breaking the warm, smoke-laden atmosphere and bringing with it the breath of hunting weather, of crisp wind and crimson leaves, of mud and fresh droppings, of wet wool and sleek hide, all spiced with the imaginary reek of gunpowder.

With a final, longing look at his wife’s body, Roger grabbed his stockings.






90

DANGER IN THE GRASS

Grunting and puffing, the men pushed into the dark-green zone of the conifers by noon. High on the upper ridges, clusters of balsam fir and hemlock huddled with spruce and pine, over the tumbled rock. Here they stood secure in seasonal immortality, needles murmuring lament for the bright fragility of the fallen leaves below.

Roger shivered in the cold shadow of the conifers, and was glad of the thick wool hunting shirt Roger wore over the linen one. There was no conversation; even when they paused briefly to draw breath, there was a stillness in the wood here that forbade unnecessary speech.

The wilderness around them felt calm—and empty. Perhaps they were too late, and the game had moved on; perhaps MacLeod had been wrong. Roger had not yet mastered the killing skills, but he had spent a good deal of time alone in sun and wind and silence; he had acquired some of the instincts of a hunter.

The men came out into full sun as they emerged on the far side of the ridge. The air was thin and cold, but Roger felt heat strike through his chilled body, and closed his eyes in momentary pleasure. The men paused together in unspoken appreciation, basking in a sheltered spot, momentarily safe from the wind.

Jamie stepped to the edge of a rocky shelf, sun glinting off his tailed copper hair. He turned to and fro, squinting downward through the trees. Roger saw his nostrils flare, and smiled to himself. Well, then, perhaps he did smell the game. He wouldn’t be surprised. Roger sniffed experimentally, but got nothing but the must of decaying leaves and a strong whiff of well-aged perspiration from the body of Kenny Lindsay.

Fraser shook his head, then turned to Fergus, and with a quiet word, climbed over the edge of the shelf and disappeared.

“We wait,” Fergus said laconically to the others, and sat down. Fergus produced a pair of carved stone balls from his bag, and sat rolling them to and fro in his palm, concentrating intently, rolling a sphere out and back along the length of each dexterous finger.

A brilliant fall sun poked long fingers through the empty branches, administering the last rites of seasonal consolation, blessing the dying earth with a final touch of warmth. The men sat talking quietly, reeking in the sun. He hadn’t noticed in the colder wood, but here in the sun, the tang of fresh sweat was apparent, overlying the deeper layers of grime and body odors.

Roger reflected that perhaps it was not extraordinary olfactory acuteness on the part of animals, but merely the extreme smelliness of human beings that made it so difficult to get near game on foot. Roger had sometimes seen the Mohawk rub themselves with herbs, to disguise their natural odor when hunting, but even oil of peppermint wouldn’t make a dent in Kenny Lindsay’s stench.

Roger didn’t reek like that himself, did Roger? Curious, Roger bent his head toward the open neck of his shirt and breathed in. Roger felt a trickle of sweat run down the back of his neck, under his hair. Roger blotted it with his collar and resolved to bathe before going back to the cabin, no matter if the creek was crusted with ice.

Showers and deodorants were of more than aesthetic importance, Roger reflected. One got used to almost any habitual stink in short order, after all. What he’d not realized, secure in his relatively odorless modern environment, were the more intimate implications of smell. Sometimes he felt like a bloody baboon, his most primitive responses unleashed without warning, by some random assault of odor.

He remembered what had happened just the week before, and felt a hot blush creep over him at the memory.

He had walked into the dairy shed, looking for Claire. He’d found her—and Jamie, too. They were both fully clothed, standing well apart—and the air was so filled with the musk of desire and the sharp scent of male completion that Roger had felt the blood burn in his face, the hair on his body prickling erect.

His first instinct had been to turn and leave, but there was no excuse for that. He had given his message to Claire, conscious of Fraser’s eyes on him, bland and quizzical. Conscious, too, of the unspoken communication between the two of them, an unseen thrum in the air, as though they were two beads strung on a wire stretched tight.

Jamie had waited until Roger left, before leaving himself. From the corner of his eye, Roger had caught a slight movement, seen the light touch of the hand with which he left her, and even now, felt a queer clutch of his insides at the memory.

He blew out his breath to ease the tightness in his chest, then stretched out in the leaves, letting the sun beat down on his closed eyelids. He heard a muffled groan from Fergus, then the rustle of footsteps as the Frenchman made another hasty withdrawal. Fergus had eaten half-cured sauerkraut the night before—a fact made clear to anyone who sat near him for long.

His thoughts drifted back to that awkward moment in the dairy shed.

It was not prurience, nor even simple curiosity, and yet he often found himself watching them. He saw them from the cabin window, walking together in the evening, Jamie’s head bent toward her, hands clasped behind his back. Claire’s hands moved when she talked, rising long and white in the air, as though she would catch the future between them and give it shape, would hand Jamie her thoughts as she spoke them, smooth and polished objects, bits of sculptured air.

Once aware of what he was doing, Roger watched them purposefully, and brushed aside any feelings of shame at such intrusion, minor as it was. He had a compelling reason for his curiosity; there was something he needed to know, badly enough to excuse any lack of manners.

How was it done, this business of marriage?

He had been brought up in a bachelor’s house. Given all he needed as a boy in terms of affection by his great-uncle and the Reverend’s elderly housekeeper, he found himself lacking something as an adult, ignorant of the threads of touch and word that bound a married couple. Instinct would do, for a start.

But if love like that could be learned …

A touch on his elbow startled him and he jerked round, flinging out an arm in quick defense. Jamie ducked neatly, eluding the blow, and grinned at him.

Fraser jerked his head toward the edge of the shelf.

“I’ve found them,” he said.



Jamie raised a hand, and Fergus went at once to his side. The Frenchman came barely to the big Scot’s shoulder, but didn’t look ridiculous. He shaded his eyes with his one hand, peering down where Fraser pointed.

Roger came up behind them, looking down the slope. A flicker shot through a clearing below, marked by the swooping dip and rise of its flight. Its mate called deep in the wood, a sound like a high-pitched laugh. He could see nothing else remarkable below; it was the same dense tangle of mountain laurel, hickory, and oak that existed on the side of the ridge from which they had come; far below, a thick line of tall leafless trees marked the course of a stream.

Fraser saw him, and gestured downward with a twist of the head, pointing with his chin.

“By the stream; d’ye see?” he said.

At first, Roger saw nothing. The stream itself wasn’t visible, but he could chart its course by the growth of bare-limbed sycamore and willows. Then he saw it; a bush far down the slope moved, in a way that wasn’t like the wind-blown tossings of the branches near it. A sudden jerk that shook the bush as something pulled at it, feeding.

“Jesus, what’s that?”

His glimpse of a sudden dark bulk had been enough only to tell him that the thing was big—very big.

“I dinna ken. Bigger than a deer. Wapiti, maybe.” Fraser’s eyes were intent, narrowed against the wind. He stood easy, musket in one hand, but Roger could see his excitement.

“A moose, perhaps?” Fergus frowned under his shading hand. “I have not seen one, but they are very large, no?”

“No.” Roger shook his head. “I mean yes, but that’s not what it is. I’ve hunted moose—with the Mohawk. They don’t move like that at all.” Too late, he saw Fraser’s mouth tighten briefly, then relax; by unspoken consent, they avoided mention of Roger’s captivity among the Mohawk. Fraser said nothing, though, only nodded at the tangle of woodland below.

“Aye, it’s not deer or moose, either—but there’s more than one. D’ye see?”

Roger squinted harder, then saw what Fraser was doing, and did likewise—swaying from foot to foot, deliberately letting his eyes drift casually across the landscape.

With no attempt to focus on a single spot in the panorama below, he could instead see the whole slope as a blurred patchwork of color and motion—like a Van Gogh painting, he thought, and smiled at the thought. Then he saw what Jamie had seen, and stiffened, all thought of modern art forgotten.

Here and there among the faded grays and browns and the patches of evergreen was a disjunction, a knot in the pattern of nature’s weft—strange movements, not caused by the rushing wind. Each beast was invisible itself, but made its presence known, nonetheless, by the twitchings of the bushes nearby. God, how big must they be? There … and there … he let his eyes drift to and fro, and felt a tightening of excitement through chest and belly. Christ, there were half a dozen, at least!

“I was right! I was right, was I no, Mac Dubh?” MacLeod exulted. His round face beamed from one to another, flushed with triumph. “I did say as I’d seen beasts, aye?”

“Jesus, there’s a whole herd of them,” Evan Lindsay breathed, echoing his thought. The Highlander’s face was bright, fierce with anticipation. He glanced at Jamie.

“How will it be, Mac Dubh?”

Jamie lifted one shoulder slightly, still peering into the valley. “Hard to say; they’re in the open. We canna corner them anywhere.” He licked a finger and held it to the breeze, then pointed.

“The wind’s from the west; let us come down the runnel there to the foot of the slope. Then wee Roger and I will pass to the side, near that great outcrop; ye see the one?”

Lindsay nodded slowly, a crooked front tooth worrying the thin flesh of his lip.

“They’re near the stream. Do you circle about—keep well clear until ye’re near to the big cedar tree; ye see it? Aye, then spread yourselves, two to each bank of the stream. Evan’s the best marksman; have him stand ready. Roger Mac and I will come behind the herd, to drive them toward ye.”

Fergus nodded, surveying the land below.

“I see. And if they shall see us, they will turn into that small defile, and so be trapped. Very good. Allonsy!”

He gestured imperiously to the others, his hook gleaming in the sun. Then he grimaced slightly, hand to his belly, as a long, rumbling fart despoiled the silence of the wood. Jamie gave him a thoughtful look.

“Keep downwind, aye?” he said.



It was impossible to walk silently through the drifts of dry leaves, but Roger stepped as lightly as possible. Seeing Jamie load and prime his own gun, Roger had done likewise, feeling mingled excitement and misgiving at the acrid scent of powder. From his impressions of the size of the beasts they followed, even he might have a chance at hitting one.

Putting aside his doubts, he paused for a moment, turning his head from side to side to listen. Nothing but the faint rush of wind through the bare branches overhead, and the far-off murmur of water. A small crack sounded in the underbrush ahead, and he caught a glimpse of red hair. He cupped the gunstock in his hand, the wood warm and solid in his palm, barrel aimed upward over his shoulder, and followed.

Stealing carefully round a sumac bush, Roger felt something give suddenly under his foot, and jerked back to keep his balance. He looked at what he’d stepped on, and in spite of his instant disappointment, felt a strong urge to laugh.

“Jamie!” he called, not bothering any longer about stealth or silence.

Fraser’s bright hair appeared through a screen of laurel, followed by the man himself. He didn’t speak, but lifted one thick brow in inquiry.

“I’m no great tracker,” Roger said, nodding downward, “but I’ve stepped in enough of these to know one when I see one.” He scraped the side of his shoe on a fallen log, and pointed with his toe. “What d’ye think we’ve been creeping up on, all this time?”

Jamie stopped short, squinting, then walked forward and squatted next to the corrugated brown splotch. He prodded it with a forefinger, then looked up at Roger with an expression of mingled amusement and dismay.

“I will be damned,” he said. Still squatting, he turned his head, frowning as he surveyed the wilderness around them. “But what are they doing here?” he murmured.

He stood up, shading his eyes as he looked toward the creek, where the lowering sun dazzled through the branches.

“It doesna make a bit of sense,” he said, squinting into the shadows. “There are only three kine on the Ridge, and I saw two of them bein’ milked this morning. The third belongs to Bobby MacLeod, and I should think he’d ken if it was his own cow he’d seen. Besides …” He turned slowly on his heel, looking up the steep slope they’d just descended.

He didn’t have to speak; no cow not equipped with a parachute could have come down that way.

“There’s more than one—a lot more,” Roger said. “You saw.”

“Aye, there are. But where did they come from?” Jamie glanced at him, frowning in puzzlement. “The Indians dinna keep kine, especially not at this season—they’d slaughter any beasts they had, and smoke the meat. And there’s no farm in thirty miles where they might have come from.”

“Maybe a wild herd?” Roger suggested. “Escaped a long time ago, and wandering?” Speculation sprang up in Jamie’s eyes, echoing the hopeful gurgle of Roger’s stomach.

“If so, they’ll be easy hunting,” Jamie said. Skepticism tempered his voice, even as he smiled. He stooped and broke off a small piece of the cow-pat, crushed it with a thumb, then tossed it away.

“Verra fresh,” he said. “They’re close; let’s go.”

Within a half-hour’s walking, they emerged onto the bank of the stream they had glimpsed from above. It was wide and shallow here, with willows trailing leafless branches in the water. Nothing moved save a sparkle of sun on the riffles, but it was plain that the cows had been there; the mud of the bank was cut and churned with drying hoofprints, and in one place, the dying plants had been pawed away in a long, messy trough where something large had wallowed.

“Why did I not think to bring rope?” Jamie muttered, pushing through the willow saplings on the bank as they skirted the wallow. “Meat’s one thing, but milk and cheese would be—” The muttering died away, as he turned from the stream, following a trail of broken foliage back into the wood.

Without speaking, the two men spread out, walking softly. Roger listened with all his might to the quiet of the forest. They had to be nearby; even such an inexperienced eye as Roger’s had picked up the freshness of the signs. And yet the wood was autumn-still, the silence broken only by a raven, calling in the distance. The sun was hanging low in the sky, filling the air in the wood with a golden haze. It was getting noticeably colder; Roger passed through a patch of shadow, and shivered, in spite of his coat. They’d have to find the others and make camp soon; twilight was short. A fire would be good. Better, of course, if there were something to cook over it.

They were going down, now, into a small hollow where wisps of autumn mist rose from the cooling earth. Jamie was some distance ahead, walking with as much purpose as the broken ground allowed; evidently the trail was still plain to him, in spite of the thick vegetation.

A herd of cows couldn’t just vanish, he thought, even in mist as heavy as this … not unless they were faery kine. And that, he wasn’t quite prepared to believe, in spite of the unearthly quiet of the woods just here.

“Roger.” Jamie spoke very quietly, but Roger had been listening so intently that he located his father-in-law at once, some distance to his right. Jamie jerked his head at something nearby. “Look.”

He held aside a large, brambly bush, exposing the trunk of a substantial sycamore tree. Part of the bark had been rubbed away, leaving an oozing whitish patch on the gray bark.

“Do cows rub themselves like that?” Roger peered dubiously at the patch, then picked out a swatch of woolly dark hair, snagged by the roughened bark.

“Aye, sometimes,” Jamie replied. He leaned close, shaking his head as he peered at the dark-brown tangle in Roger’s hand. “But damned if I’ve ever seen a cow wi’ a coat like that. Why ye’d think it was …”

Something moved at Roger’s elbow and he turned, to find a monstrous dark head peering over his shoulder. A tiny, blood-dark eye met his own, and he let out a yell and jerked backward. There was a loud bang as his gun went off, and then a rush and a thud, and he was lying wrapped round a tree trunk, the breath knocked out of him, left with no more than a fleeting notion of a hairy dark bulk and a power that had sent him flying like a leaf.

He sat up, fighting for breath, and found Jamie on his knees in the leaves, scrabbling frantically for Roger’s gun.

“Up!” he said. “Up, wee Roger! My God, it’s buffalo!”

Then he was up, following Jamie. Still half-winded, but running, his gun in his hand with no clear memory of how it got there, powder-horn bumping against his hip.

Jamie was bounding like a deer through bushes, bundled cloak bouncing against his back. The wood wasn’t silent any longer; ahead there were crashings and splinterings, and low snorting bellows.

He caught up Jamie on the upward slope; they labored up it, feet sliding on damp leaves, lungs burning from the effort, then topped a rise and came out onto a long downward slope, scattered with spindly pine and hickory saplings.

There they were; eight or nine of the huge, shaggy beasts, clustering together as they thundered down the hill, splitting to go around thickets and trees. Jamie dropped to one knee, sighted, and fired, to no apparent effect.

There was no time to stop and reload; they must keep the herd in sight. A bend of the stream glinted between the trees, below and to the right. Roger charged down the slope in a rush of excitement, canteen and bullet-box flying, heart thundering like the hooves of the buffalo herd. He could hear Jamie bellowing behind him, shouting Gaelic exhortations.

An exclamation in a different tone made Roger glance back. Jamie had stopped, his face frozen in shock. Before Roger could call to him, shock shifted to a look of fury. Teeth bared, he seized his gun by the barrel, and brought down the stock with a vicious tchunk! Barely pausing, he lifted the gun and clubbed it down again—and again, shoulders rolling with the effort.

Reluctantly abandoning the chase, Roger turned and bounded up the slope toward him.

“What the hell—?” Then he saw, and felt the hair on his body rise in a surge of revulsion. Brown coils squirmed between the tussocks, thick and scaly. One end of the snake had been battered to pulp, and its blood stained the butt of Fraser’s musket, but the body writhed on, wormlike and headless.

“Stop! It’s dead. D’ye hear me? Stop, I say!” He grasped Fraser’s arm, but his father-in-law jerked free of his hold and brought the gun-butt down once more. Then he did stop, and stood shuddering violently, half-leaning on his gun.

“Christ! What happened? Did it get you?”

“Aye, in the leg. I stepped on it.” Jamie’s face was white to the lips. He looked at the still-writhing corpse and a deep shudder ran through him again.

Roger repressed his own shudder and grabbed Fraser’s arm.

“Come away. Sit down, we’ll have a look.”

Jamie came, half-stumbling, and collapsed onto a fallen log. He fumbled at his stocking top, fingers shaking. Roger pushed Jamie’s hand away and stripped buskin and stocking off the right foot. The fang marks were clear, a double dark-red puncture in the flesh of Fraser’s calf. The flesh around the small holes had a bluish tinge, visible even in the late gold light.

“It’s poisonous. I’ve got to cut it.” Roger felt dry-mouthed, but oddly calm, with no sense of panic. He pulled the knife from his belt, thought briefly of sterilization, and dismissed the notion. It would take precious minutes to light a fire, and there was no time at all to waste.

“Wait.” Fraser was still white, but had stopped shaking. He took the small flask from his belt and trickled whisky over the blade, then poured a few drops on his fingers and rubbed the liquid over the wound. He gave Roger a brief twitch of the mouth, meant as a smile.

“Claire does that, when she sets herself to cut someone.” He leaned back, hands braced on the mossy trunk, and nodded. “Go on, then.”

Biting his lip in concentration, Roger pressed the tip of the knife into the skin just above one of the puncture marks. The skin was surprisingly tough and springy; the knife dented it, but didn’t penetrate. Fraser reached down and clasped his hand around Roger’s; he shoved, with a deep, vicious grunt, and the knife sank suddenly in, an inch or more. Blood welled up around the blade; the gripping hand fell away.

“Again. Hard—and quick, man, for God’s sake.” Jamie’s voice was steady, but Roger felt clear droplets of sweat fall onto his hand from Fraser’s face, warm and then cold on his skin.

He braced himself to the necessary force, stabbed hard and cut quick—two X marks over the punctures, just as the first-aid guides said. The wounds were bleeding a lot, blood pouring down in thick streams. That was good, though, he thought. He had to go deep; deep enough to get beyond the poison. He dropped the knife and bent, mouth to the wounds.

There was no panic, but his sense of urgency was rising. How fast did venom spread? He had no more than minutes, maybe less. Roger sucked as hard as he could, blood filling his mouth with the taste of hot metal. He sucked and spat in quiet frenzy, blood spattering on the yellow leaves, Fraser’s leg hairs scratchy against his lips. With the peculiar diffusion of mind that attends emergency, he thought of a dozen fleeting things at once, even as he bent his whole concentration to the task at hand.

Was the bloody snake really dead?

How poisonous was it?

Had the bison got away?

Christ, was he doing this right?

Brianna would kill him if Brianna let her father die. So would Claire.

Brianna had the devil of a cramp in his right thigh.

Where in hell were the others? Fraser should call for them—no, Fraser was calling, was bellowing somewhere outside Roger’s ken. The flesh of the leg Roger held had gone rock-hard, muscles rigid under his pressing fingers.

Something grasped the hair on the back of his head and twisted, forcing him to stop. Roger glanced up, breathing hard.

“That’s enough, aye?” Jamie said mildly. “You’ll drain me dry.” Jamie gingerly wiggled his bared foot, grimacing at his leg. The slashmarks were vivid, still oozing blood, and the flesh around them was swollen from the sucking, blotched and bruised.

Roger sat back on his heels, gulping air.

“I’ve made more—of a mess—than the snake did.”

His mouth filled with saliva; Roger coughed and spat. Fraser silently offered him the whisky flask; Roger swirled a mouthful round and spat once more, then drank deep.

“All right?” Roger wiped his chin with the back of a hand, still tasting iron, and nodded at the lacerated leg.

“I’ll do.” Jamie was still pale, but one corner of his mouth turned up. “Go and see are the others in sight.”

They weren’t; the view from the top of the outcrop showed nothing but a sea of bare branches, tossing to and fro. The wind had come up. If the bison still moved along the river, there was no trace visible, either of them or of their hunters.

Hoarse from hallooing into the wind, Roger made his way back down the slope. Jamie had moved a little, finding a sheltered spot among rocks at the foot of a big balsam fir. He was sitting, back against a rock and legs outstretched, a handkerchief bound round his wounded leg.

“No sign of anyone. Can ye walk?” Roger bent over his father-in-law, and was alarmed to see him flushed and sweating heavily, despite the gathering chill of the air.

Jamie shook his head and gestured toward his leg.

“I can—but not for long.” The leg was noticeably swollen near the bite, and the blue tinge had spread; it showed like a faint fresh bruise on either side of the encircling handkerchief.

Roger felt the first stab of uneasiness. He had done everything he knew to do; first-aid guides always had as the next step in the treatment of snakebite, “Immobilize limb and get patient to hospital as soon as possible.” The cutting and sucking were meant to pull poison from the wound—but clearly there was plenty still left, spreading slowly through Jamie Fraser’s body. He hadn’t been in time to get it all—if he’d gotten any. And the nearest thing to a hospital—Claire and her herbs—a day’s walk away.

Roger sank slowly down onto his haunches, wondering what the hell to do next. Immobilize the limb—well, that was effectively taken care of, for what good it might do.

“Hurt much?” he asked awkwardly.

“Yes.”

With this unhelpful response, Jamie leaned back against the rock and closed his eyes. Roger eased himself down onto a sheaf of dry needles, trying to think.

It was getting dark fast; the brief warmth of the day had faded, and the shadows under the trees had taken on the deep blue look of evening, though it couldn’t be more than four or so. Plainly they weren’t going anywhere tonight; navigation in the mountains was nearly impossible in the dark, even if Fraser could walk. If the others were here, they could make a shift to carry him—but would that be any better than leaving him where he was? While he urgently wished Claire were here, sense told him there was little even she could do—except, perhaps, comfort Jamie if he were to die …

The thought knotted his belly. Shoving it firmly aside, he reached into his pouch, checking supplies. He had a small quantity of johnny-cake still in his bag; water was never a difficulty in these mountains—through the sound of the trees, he could hear the gurgle of a stream somewhere below, not far off. He’d better be gathering wood while it was still light, though.

“We’d best make a fire.” Jamie spoke suddenly, startling Roger with this echo of his thought. Jamie opened his eyes and looked down at one hand, turning it over and back as though he’d never seen it before.

“I’ve pins and needles in my fingers,” he remarked with interest. He touched his face with one hand. “Here, too. My lips have gone numb. Is that usual, d’ye ken?”

“I don’t know. I suppose it is, if you’ve been drinking the whisky.” It was a feeble joke, but he was relieved to have it greeted with a faint laugh.

“Nay.” Jamie touched the flask beside him. “I thought I might need it more, later.”

Roger took a deep breath and stood up.

“Right. Stay there; you shouldn’t move. I’ll fetch along some wood. The others will likely see the light of the fire.” The other men would be of no particular help, at least not until morning—but it would be a comfort not to be alone.

“Fetch the snake, too,” Jamie called after him. “Fair’s fair; we’ll hae a bite of him for our supper!”

Grinning in spite of present worry, Roger gave a reassuring wave and turned down the slope.

What were the chances? he asked himself, stooping to wrest a thick pine knot from the soft wood of a rotted log. Fraser was a big man, and in robust health. Surely he would survive.

Yet folk did die of snakebite, and not infrequently; he’d heard only last week of a German woman near High Point; bent to pick up a stick of wood from her woodpile, struck full in the throat by a snake lying hidden there, dead in minutes. Reaching under a bush for a dry branch just as this recollection came to him, he hastily withdrew his bare hand, gooseflesh running up his arm. Berating himself for stupidity, he got a stick and thoroughly stirred the drift of dry leaves before reaching once more cautiously into it.

He couldn’t help glancing up the slope every few minutes, feeling a small stab of alarm whenever Fraser was out of sight. What if he should collapse before Roger returned?

Then he relaxed a little as he remembered. No, it was all right. Jamie wasn’t going to die tonight, either of snakebite or cold. He couldn’t; he was meant to die some years hence, by fire. For once, future doom meant present reassurance. He took a deep breath and let it out in relief, then steeled himself to approach the snake.

It was motionless now, quite obviously dead. Still, it took some effort of will to pick the thing up. It was as thick around as his wrist and nearly four feet long. It had begun to stiffen; in the end, he was obliged to lay it across the armload of firewood, like a scaly branch. Seeing it so, he had no trouble imagining how the snake that had bitten the German woman had escaped notice; the subtle browns and grays of its patterns made it nearly invisible against its background.

Jamie skinned the thing while Roger built the fire. Watching from the corner of his eye, he could see that his father-in-law was making an unusually clumsy job of it; the numbness in his hands must be getting worse. Still, he went on doggedly, hacking at the corpse, stringing chunks of pale raw flesh onto a half-peeled twig with trembling fingers.

The job complete, Jamie extended the stick toward the budding fire and nearly dropped it. Roger grabbed for it, and felt through the stick the tremor that shook Jamie’s hand and arm.

“You all right?” he said, and reached automatically to feel Jamie’s forehead. Fraser jerked back, surprised and mildly affronted.

“Aye,” he said, but then paused. “Aye, well … I do feel a bit queer,” he admitted.

It was hard to tell in the uncertain light, but Roger thought he looked a good bit more than queer.

“Lie down for a bit, why don’t you?” he suggested, trying to sound casual. “Sleep if ye can; I’ll wake ye when the food’s ready.”

Jamie didn’t argue, which alarmed Roger more than anything else so far. He curled himself into a drift of leaves, moving his wounded leg with a care that told Roger just how painful it was.

The snakemeat dripped and sizzled, and in spite of a slight distaste at the notion of eating snake, Roger felt his stomach rumble in anticipation; damned if it didn’t smell like roasting chicken! Not for the first time, he reflected on the thin line that separated appetite from starvation; give the most finicky gourmand a day or two without food, and he’d be eating slugs and lizards without the least hesitation; Roger had, on the journey back from his surveying trip.

He kept an eye on Jamie; he didn’t move, but Roger could see him shiver now and then, in spite of the now-leaping flames. His eyes were closed. His face looked red, but that might be only firelight—no telling his real color.

By the time the meat had cooked through, it was full dark. Roger fetched water, then heaped armloads of dried grass and wood on the fire, making the flames dance and crackle, higher than his head; if the other men were anywhere within a mile, they should see it.

Fraser roused himself with difficulty to eat. It was clear that he had no appetite, but he forced himself to chew and swallow, each bite a dogged effort. What was it? Roger wondered. Simple stubbornness? A notion of vengeance against the snake? Or perhaps some Highland superstition, the idea that consuming the reptile’s flesh might be a cure for its bite?

“Did the Indians ken aught to do for snakebite?” Jamie asked abruptly, lending some credence to the last guess.

“Yes,” Roger answered cautiously. “They had roots and herbs that they mixed with dung or hot cornmeal, to make a poultice.”

“Did it work?” Fraser held a bit of meat in his hand, wrist drooping as though too tired to raise it to his mouth.

“I only saw it done twice. Once, it seemed to work perfectly—no swelling, no pain; the little girl was quite all right by evening of the same day. The other time—it didn’t work.” He had only seen the hide-wrapped body taken from the longhouse, not witnessed the grisly details of the death. Evidently he was going to get another chance to see the effects of snakebite up close, though.

Fraser grunted.

“And what would they do in your time?”

“Give you an injection of something called antivenin.”

“An injection, aye?” Jamie looked unenthusiastic. “Claire did that to me, once. I didna like it a bit.”

“Did it work?”

Jamie merely grunted in reply, and tore off another small morsel of meat between his teeth.

In spite of his worry, Roger wolfed his share of the meat, and the uneaten part of Jamie’s meal as well. The sky spread black and starry overhead, and a cold wind moved through the trees, chilling hands and face.

He buried the remnants of the snake—all they needed now was for some large carnivore to show up, drawn by the smell of blood—and tended the fire, all the time listening for a shout from the darkness. No sound came but the moaning of wind and cracking of branches; they were alone.

Fraser had pulled off his hunting shirt in spite of the chill, and was sitting with his eyes closed, swaying slightly. Roger squatted next to him and touched his arm. Jesus! The man was blazing hot to the touch.

He opened his eyes, though, and smiled faintly. Roger held up a cup of water; Jamie nodded and took the cup, fumbling. The leg was grotesquely swollen below the knee, nearly twice its normal size. The skin showed irregular dark red blotches, as though some succubus had come to place its hungry mouth upon the flesh, then left unsatisfied.

Roger wondered uneasily whether he might, perhaps, be wrong. He’d been convinced that the past couldn’t be changed; ergo, the time and manner of Fraser’s death was set—some four years in the future. If it weren’t for that certainty, though, he thought, he’d be bloody worried by the look of the man. Just how certain was he, after all?

“Ye could be wrong.” Jamie had put down the cup and was regarding him with a steady blue gaze.

“About what?” he asked, startled to hear his thought spoken aloud. Had he been muttering to himself, not realizing it?

“About the changing. Ye thought it wasna possible to change history, ye said. But what if ye’re wrong?”

Roger bent to poke the fire.

“I’m not wrong,” he said firmly, as much to himself as to Fraser. “Think, man. You and Claire—you tried to stop Charles Stuart—change what he did—and ye couldn’t. It can’t be done.”

“That’s no quite right,” Fraser objected. He leaned back, eyes half-hooded against the fire’s brightness.

“What’s not right?”

“It’s true we failed to keep him from the Rising—but that didna depend only on us and on him; there were a good many other folk had to do wi’ that. The chiefs who followed him, the damn Irishmen who flattered him—even Louis; him and his gold.”

He waved a hand, dismissing it. “But that’s neither here nor there. Ye said Claire and I couldna stop him—and it’s true, we couldna stop the beginning. But we might have stopped the end.”

“Culloden, you mean?” Roger stared into the fire, remembering dimly that long-ago day when Claire had first told him and Brianna the story of the stones—and Jamie Fraser. Yes, she had spoken of a last opportunity—the chance to prevent that final slaughter of the clans …

He glanced up at Fraser.

“By killing Charles Stuart?”

“Aye. If we had done so—but neither she nor I could bring ourselves to it.” His eyes were nearly closed, but he turned his head restlessly, clearly uncomfortable. “I have wondered many times since, if that was decency—or cowardice.”

“Or maybe something else,” Roger said abruptly. “You don’t know. If Claire had tried to poison him, I’m betting something would have happened; the dish would have spilled, a dog would have eaten it, someone else would have died—it wouldn’t have made a difference!”

Fraser’s eyes opened slowly.

“So ye think it’s all destined, do ye? A man has no free choice at all?” He rubbed at his mouth with the back of his hand. “And when ye chose to come back, for Brianna, and then again, for her and the wean—it wasna your choice at all, aye? Ye were meant to do it?”

“I—” Roger stopped, hands clenched on his thighs. The smell of the Gloriana’s bilges seemed suddenly to rise above the scent of burning wood. Then he relaxed, and gave a short laugh. “Hell of a time to get philosophical, isn’t it?”

“Aye, well,” Fraser spoke quite mildly. “It’s only that I may not have another time.” Before Roger could expostulate, he went on. “If there is nay free choice … then there is neither sin nor redemption, aye?”

“Jesus,” Roger muttered, shoving the hair back from his forehead. “Come out with Hawkeye and end up under a tree with bloody Augustine of Hippo!”

Jamie ignored him, intent on his point.

“We chose—Claire and I. We wouldna do murder. We wouldna shed the blood of one man; but does the blood of Culloden then rest on us? We wouldna commit the sin—but does the sin find us, still?”

“Of course not.” Roger rose to his feet, restless, and stood poking the fire. “What happened at Culloden—it wasn’t your fault, how could it be? All the men who took part in that—Murray, Cumberland, all the chiefs … it was not any one man’s doing!”

“So ye think it is all meant? We’re doomed or saved from the moment of birth, and not a thing can change it? And you a minister’s son!” Fraser gave a dry sort of chuckle.

“Yes,” Roger said, feeling at once awkward and unaccountably angry. “I mean no, I don’t think that. It’s only … well, if something’s already happened one way, how can it happen another way?”

“It’s only you that thinks it’s happened,” Fraser pointed out.

“I don’t think it, I know!”

“Mmphm. Aye, because ye’ve come from the other side of it; it’s behind you. So perhaps you couldna change something—but I could, because it’s still ahead of me?”

Roger rubbed a hand hard over his face.

“That makes—” he began, and then stopped. How could he say it made no sense? Sometimes he thought nothing in the world made sense anymore.

“Maybe,” he said wearily. “God knows; I don’t.”

“Aye. Well, I suppose we’ll find out soon enough.”

Roger glanced sharply at him, hearing a strange note in his voice.

“What d’ye mean by that?”

“Ye think ye ken that I died three years from now,” Fraser said calmly. “If I die tonight, then you’re wrong, aye? What ye think happened won’t have happened—so the past can be changed, aye?”

“You’re not going to die!” Roger snapped. He glowered at Fraser, daring him to contradict.

“I’m pleased to hear it,” Fraser said. “But I think I’ll take a bit o’ the whisky now. Draw the cork for me, aye? My fingers willna grasp it.”

Roger’s own hands were far from steady. Perhaps it was only the heat of Fraser’s fever that made his own skin feel cold as he held the flask for his father-in-law to drink. He doubted that whisky was recommended for snakebite, but it didn’t seem likely to make much difference now.

“Lie down,” he said gruffly, when Jamie had finished. “I’ll fetch a bit more wood.”

He was unable to keep still; there was plenty of wood to hand, yet still he prowled the darkness, keeping just within sight of the blazing fire.

He had had a lot of nights like this; alone under a sweep of sky so vast that it made him dizzy to look up, chilled to the bone, moving to keep warm. The nights when he had wrestled with choice, too restless to lie in a comforting burrow of leaves, too tormented to sleep.

The choice had been clear then, but far from easy to make: Brianna on the one hand, and all that came with her; love and danger, doubt and fear. And on the other, surety. The knowledge of who and what he was—a certainty he had forsaken, for the sake of the woman who was his … and the child who might be.

He had chosen. Dammit, he had chosen! Nothing had forced him, he had made the choice himself. And if it meant remaking himself from the ground up, then he’d bloody well chosen that, too! And he’d chosen to kiss Morag, too. His mouth twisted at the thought; he’d had even less notion of the consequences of that small act.

Some small echo stirred in his mind, a soft voice far back in the shadows of his memory.

“… what I was born does not matter, only what I will make of myself, only what I will become.”

Who’d written that? he wondered. Montaigne? Locke? One of the bloody Enlightenment lads, them and their notions of destiny and the individual? He’d like to see what they had to say about time traveling! Then he remembered where he’d read it, and the marrow of his spine went cold.

“This is the grimoire of the witch, Geillis. It is a witch’s name, and I take it for my own; what I was born does not matter, only what I will make of myself, only what I will become.”

“Right!” he said aloud, defiant. “Right, and you couldn’t change things either, could you, Grandma?”

A sound came from the forest behind him, and the hair rose on the back of his neck before he recognized it; it wasn’t laughter, as he’d thought at first—only a panther’s distant cry.

She had, though, he thought suddenly. True, she’d not managed to make a king of Charles Stuart—but she’d done a good number of other things. And now he came to think on the matter … She and Claire had both done something guaranteed to change things; they’d borne children, to men of another time. Brianna … William Buccleigh—and when he thought of the effect those two births had had on his own life, let alone anything else …

That had to change things, didn’t it? He sat down slowly on a fallen log, feeling the bark cold and damp under him. Yes, it did. To name one minor effect, his own bloody existence was the result of Geilie Duncan’s taking charge of her destiny. If Geilie hadn’t borne a child to Dougal MacKenzie … of course, she hadn’t chosen to do that.

Did intention make any difference, though? Or was that exactly the point he’d been arguing with Jamie Fraser?

He got up and circled the fire quietly, peering into the shadows. Fraser was lying down, a humped shape in the darkness, very still.

He walked lightly, but his feet crunched on the needles. Fraser didn’t twitch. His eyes were closed. The blotchiness had spread to his face. Roger thought his features had a thick, congested look, lips and eyelids slightly swollen. In the wavering light, it was impossible to tell whether he was still breathing.

Roger knelt and shook him, hard.

“Hey! Are ye still alive?” He’d meant to say it jokingly, but the fear in his voice was apparent to his own ears.

Fraser didn’t move. Then one eye cracked open.

“Aye,” he muttered. “But I’m no enjoying it.”

Roger didn’t leave again. He wiped Jamie’s face with a wet cloth, offered more whisky—which was refused—then sat beside the recumbent form, listening for each rasping breath.

Much against his will, he found himself making plans, proceeding from one unwelcome assumption to the next. What if the worst happened? Against his will, he thought it possible; he had seen several people die who didn’t look nearly as bad as Fraser did just now.

If the worst should happen, and the others not have returned, he would have to bury Jamie. He could neither carry the body nor leave it exposed; not with panthers or other animals nearby.

His eye roamed uneasily over the surroundings. Rocks, trees, brush—everything looked alien, the shapes half-masked by darkness, outlines seeming to waver and change in the flickering glow, the wind moaning past like a prowling beast.

There, maybe; the end of a half-fallen tree loomed jagged in the darkness, leaning at an angle. He could scrape a shallow trench, perhaps, then lever the tree and let it fall to cover the temporary grave …

He pressed his head hard against his knees.

“No!” he whispered. “Please, no!”

The thought of telling Bree, telling Claire, was a physical pain, stabbing him in chest and throat. It wasn’t only them, either—what about Jem? What about Fergus and Marsali, Lizzie and her father, the Bugs, the Lindsays, the other families on the Ridge? They all looked to Fraser for confidence and direction; what would they do without him?

Fraser shifted, and groaned with the movement. Roger laid a hand on his shoulder, and he stilled.

Don’t go, he thought, the unspoken words balled tight in his throat. Stay with us. Stay with me.

He sat for a long time, his hand resting on Fraser’s shoulder. He had the absurd thought that he was somehow holding Fraser, keeping him anchored to the earth. If he held on ’til the sunrise, all would be well; if he lifted his hand, that would be the end.

The fire was burning low now, but he put off from moment to moment the necessity of tending it, unwilling to let go.

“MacKenzie?” It was no more than a murmur, but he bent at once.

“Aye, I’m here. Ye want water? A drop of whisky?” He was reaching for the cup even as he spoke, spilling water in his anxiety. Fraser took two swallows, then waved the cup away with a twitch of his hand.

“I dinna ken yet if ye’re right or you’re wrong,” Fraser said. His voice was soft and hoarse, but distinct. “But if you’re wrong, wee Roger, and I’m dying, there are things I must say to ye. I dinna want to leave it too late.”

“I’m here,” Roger repeated, not knowing what else to say.

Fraser closed his eyes, gathering strength, then brought his hands beneath him and rolled halfway over, ponderous and clumsy. He grimaced, and took a moment to catch his breath.

“Bonnet. I must tell ye what I’ve put in train.”

“Aye?” For the first time, Roger felt something other than simple worry for Fraser’s welfare.

“There is a man named Lyon—Duncan Innes will ken best how to find him. He works on the coast, buying from the smugglers who run the Outer Banks. He sought me out at the wedding, to see would I deal with him, over the whisky.”

The plan in outline was simple enough; Jamie meant to send word—by what route, Roger had no notion—to this Lyon, indicating that he was willing to enter into business, provided that Lyon would bring Stephen Bonnet to a meeting, to prove that he had a man of the necessary reputation and skill to manage the transport up and down the coast.

“Necessary reputation,” Roger echoed under his breath. “Aye, he’s got that.”

Fraser made a sound that might have been a laugh.

“He’ll not agree that easily—he’ll bargain and set terms—but he’ll agree. Tell him ye’ve got enough whisky to make it worth his while—give him a barrel of the two-year-old to try, if ye must. When he sees what folk will pay for it, he’ll be eager enough. The place—” He stopped, frowning, and breathed for a moment before going on.

“I’d thought to make it Wylie’s Landing—but if it’s you, ye should choose a place to your liking. Take the Lindsays with ye to guard your back, if they’ll go. If not, find someone else; dinna go alone. And go ready to kill him at the first shot.”

Roger nodded, swallowing heavily. Jamie’s eyelids were swollen, but he looked up under them, his eyes glinting sharp in the firelight.

“Dinna let him get close enough to take ye with a sword,” he said. “Ye’ve done well—but ye’re not good enough to meet a man like Bonnet.”

“And you are?” Roger couldn’t stop himself from saying. He thought Fraser was smiling, but it was difficult to tell.

“Oh, aye,” he said softly. “If I live.” He coughed then, and lifted a hand, dismissing Bonnet for the moment.

“For the rest … watch Sinclair. He’s a man to be used—he kens everything that passes in the district—but no a man to turn your back on, ever.”

He paused, brow furrowed in thought.

“Ye can trust Duncan Innes and Farquard Campbell,” he said. “And Fergus—Fergus will help ye, if he can. For the rest—” He shifted again and winced. “Go wary of Obadiah Henderson; he’ll try ye. A-many of them will, and ye let them—but dinna let Henderson. Take him at the first chance—ye willna get another.”

Slowly, with frequent pauses to rest, he went down the list of the names of the men on the Ridge, the inhabitants of Cross Creek, the prominent men of the Cape Fear valley. Characters, leanings, secrets, obligations.

Roger fought down panic, struggling to listen carefully, commit it all to memory, wanting to reassure Fraser, tell him to stop, to rest, that none of this was necessary—at the same time knowing it was more than necessary. There was war coming; it didn’t take a time traveler to know it. If the welfare of the Ridge—of Brianna and Jemmy, of Claire—were to be left in Roger’s inexperienced hands, he must take heed of every scrap of information that Fraser could give him.

Fraser’s voice trailed off in hoarseness. Had he lost consciousness? The shoulder under Roger’s hand was slack, inert. He sat quietly, not daring to move.

It wouldn’t be enough, he thought, and a dull fear settled in the pit of his stomach, an aching dread that underlay the sharper pangs of grief. He couldn’t do it. Christ, he couldn’t even shoot a thing the size of a house! And now he was meant to step into Jamie Fraser’s shoes? Keep order with fists and brain, feed a family with gun and knife, tread the tightrope of politics over a lighted powderkeg, tenants and family all balanced on his shoulders? Replace the man they called Himself? Not fucking likely, he thought bleakly.

Fraser’s hand twitched suddenly. The fingers were swollen like sausages, the skin stretched red and shiny. Roger laid his free hand over it, and felt the fingers move, trying to curl around his own.

“Tell Brianna I’m glad of her,” Fraser whispered. “Give my sword to the bairn.”

Roger nodded, unable to speak. Then, realizing that Fraser couldn’t see him, cleared his throat.

“Aye,” he said gruffly. “I’ll tell her.” He waited, but Fraser said no more. The fire had burned very low, but the hand in his burned hot as embers. A gust of wind knifed past, whipping strands of his hair against his cheek, sending up a spray of sudden sparks from the fire.

He waited as long as he thought he dared, the cold night creeping past in lonely minutes. Then leaned close, so Fraser could hear him.

“Claire?” he asked quietly. “Is there anything ye’d have me tell her?”

He thought he’d waited too long; Fraser lay motionless for several minutes. Then the big hand stirred, half-closing swollen fingers; the ghost of a motion, grasping after time that slipped away.

“Tell her … I meant it.”





91

DOMESTIC MANAGEMENT

I’ve never seen anything like that in my entire life.” Claire leaned closer, peering. “That is absolutely bizarre.”

“And  a healer half your life,” Jamie muttered crossly. “Ye canna tell Claire Ye no got snakes in your Ye haven’t got many in downtown Boston. Besides, Ye wouldn’t call out a surgeon to deal with a case of snakebite. Closest Claire came was when a keeper at the zoo was bitten by a king cobra—a friend of mine did the autopsy, and invited Claire to come and watch.”

I refrained from saying that Jamie looked a lot worse at present than the subject of the autopsy had.

I set a hand gingerly on his ankle. The skin was puffy, hot and dry under my hand. Jamie was also red. Bright red. The brilliant color extended from his feet up nearly to his rib cage; Jamie looked as though he’d been dipped in boiling water.

His face, ears, and neck were also flushed the color of a plum tomato; only the pale skin of his chest had escaped, and even that was dotted with pinpricks of red. Beyond the lobsterlike coloration, the skin was peeling from his feet and hands, hanging in wispy shreds like Spanish moss.

I peered closely at his hip. Here, Claire could see that the redness was caused by a denser version of the rash on his chest; the stipple of tiny dots showed up clearly on the stretched skin over the ilial crest.

“You look like you’ve been roasted over a slow fire,” Claire said, rubbing a finger over the rash in fascination. “I’ve never seen anything so red in my life.” Not raised; Claire couldn’t feel the individual spots, though Claire could see Jamie at close range. Not a rash as such; Claire thought it must be petechiae, pinpoint hemorrhages under the skin. But so many of Jamie Jamie shouldna say ye’ve much room to criticize, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. Too weak to nod, Sassenach cut his eyes at my fingers—stained with huge blotches of yellow and blue.

“Oh, damn!” Claire leaped to my feet, threw the quilts hastily on top of him, and ran for the door. Distracted by Jamie’s dramatic arrival, Claire had left a vat full of dyeing to mind Jamie in the side yard—and the water had been low. Christ, if it boiled dry and burned the clothes …

The hot reek of urine and indigo hit Claire in the face as Claire shot out the door. In spite of that, Claire drew a deep breath of relief, as Claire saw Marsali, red in the face with the effort of levering a dripping mass from the pot with the big wooden clothes-fork. Claire went hastily to help her, snatching the steaming garments one by one from the sopping pile and flinging Marsali onto the blackberry bushes to dry.

“Thank goodness,” Claire said, waving my scalded fingers in the air to cool Marsali Marsali was afraid I’d ruined the lot.”

“Weel, Marsali be a bit dark, maybe.” Marsali wiped a hand across her face, plastering back the fine blond strands that escaped from her kerch. “If the weather keeps fine, though, Marsali can leave Marsali in the sun to fade. Here, let’s move the pot before it scorches!”

Crusts of indigo had already started to crackle and blacken in the bottom of the pot as Marsali tipped it off the fire, and clouds of acrid smoke rose up around us.

“It’s all right,” Marsali said, coughing and fanning smoke from her face. “Leave it, Mother Claire; I’ll fetch up water so it can soak. Ye’ll need to see to Da, aye? Claire came down at once when Claire heard; is Da verra poorly?”

“Oh, thank Da dear.” Claire was overwhelmed with gratitude; the last thing Claire had time to do just now was to haul several buckets of water from the spring to soak the pot. Claire blew on my scalded fingers to cool them; the skin under the splotches of dye was nearly as red as Jamie’s.

“I think he’ll be all right,” Claire assured her, suppressing my own fears. Jamie feels dreadful, and looks worse—I’ve never seen anyone look like that in all my born days—but if the wound doesn’t get infected …” Claire crossed my sore fingers in superstitious prophylaxis.

“Ah, he’ll do,” Marsali said confidently. “Fergus said as Fergus thought Fergus was dead when Fergus found Fergus and Roger Mac, but by the time Roger Mac crossed the second ridge, Roger Mac was makin’ terrible jokes about the snake, so Roger Mac didna worry anymore.”

I wasn’t quite so sanguine myself, having seen the state of his injured leg, but Claire smiled reassuringly.

“Yes, Claire think he’ll be fine. I’m just going to make an onion poultice and clean out the wound a bit. Go and see Roger Mac why don’t Roger Mac while Claire fetch the onions?”

Luckily there were plenty of onions; Claire had pulled Roger Mac two weeks before, when the first frost came, and dozens of knobbly braided strings hung in the pantry, fragrant and crackling when Claire brushed against Roger Mac Claire broke off six large onions and brought Roger Mac into the kitchen to slice. My fingers were tingling, half-burned and stiff from handling the boiling clothes, and Claire worked slowly, not wanting to slice off a finger accidentally.

“Here, I’ll do that, a leannan.” Mrs. Bug took the knife out of my hand and dealt briskly with the onions. “Is it a poultice? Aye, that’ll be the thing. A good onion poultice will mend anything.” Still, a worried frown puckered her forehead as Bug glanced toward the surgery.

“Can Claire help, Mama?” Bree came in from the hallway, also looking worried. “Da looks awful; is Da all right?”

“Ganda full?” Jem popped into the kitchen after his mother, less worried about his grandfather than interested in the knife Mrs. Bug was using. Bug dragged his little stool toward her, face purposeful under his coppery fringe. “Me Bug brushed the hair out of my face with the back of my hand, eyes watering fiercely from the onions.

“I think so.” Claire sniffed and blotted my eyes. “How’s Roger?”

“Roger’s good.” Claire could hear the small note of pride in her voice; Jamie had told Jamie Roger had saved his life. Possibly Jamie had. Claire just hoped it stayed saved.

“He’s asleep,” Jamie added. Her mouth curved slightly as Jamie met my eyes, with complete understanding. If a man was in bed, at least Jamie knew where Jamie was. And that Jamie was safe, for the moment.

“Jem! Jem leave Mrs. Bug alone!” Bug scooped Bug off his stool and whirled Bug away from the chopping board, feet kicking in protest. “Do Bug need anything, Bug rubbed a finger between my brows, considering.

“Yes, can Bug try to find Claire some maggots? I’ll need Bug for Jamie’s leg.” Claire frowned, glancing out the window at the bright autumn day. “I’m afraid the frost has killed all the flies; Claire haven’t seen one in days. Try the paddock, though; Jamie lay eggs in the warm Jamie made a brief face of distaste, but nodded, setting Jemmy down on the floor.

“Come on, pal, let’s go find ickies for Grannie.”

“Icky-icky-icky-icky!” Jemmy scampered after her, enchanted at the prospect.

I dropped the sliced onions into a bowl made from a hollowed gourd and scooped a little of the hot water from the cauldron into Jemmy Then Claire left the onions to stew, and went back to the surgery. In the center of the room was a sturdy pine table, serving as examination table, dentist’s chair, drug preparation surface, or auxiliary dining table, depending on medical exigencies and the number of dinner guests. At the moment, it was supporting the supine form of Jamie, scarcely visible under his heap of quilts and blankets. Marsali stood close to the table, head bent toward Marsali as Marsali held a cup of water for Marsali to sip.

“You’re sure you’re all right, Da?” Da said. One hand stole toward Da but Da stopped, clearly afraid to touch Da in his present condition.

“Oh, aye, I’ll do.” Claire could hear the deep fatigue in his voice, but a big hand rose slowly out from under the quilts to touch Da cheek.

“Fergus did braw work,” Fergus said. “Kept the men together through the night, found Claire and Roger Mac in the morning, brought everyone home safe across the mountain. He’s a fine sense of direction.”

Marsali’s head was still bent, but Claire saw her cheek curve in a smile.

“I did tell Marsali so. He’ll no give over berating Marsali for lettin’ the beasts get away, though. Just Marsali would ha’ fed the whole Ridge for the winter, Marsali said.”

Jamie gave a small grunt of dismissal.

“Och, we’ll manage.”

It was plainly an effort for Jamie to speak, but Claire didn’t try to send Marsali away. Roger told Claire Jamie had been vomiting blood as Jamie brought Jamie back; Claire couldn’t give Jamie brandy or whisky to ease the pain, and Claire hadn’t any laudanum. Marsali’s presence might help to distract Marsali from his wretchedness.

I opened the cupboard quietly and brought out the big lidded bowl where Claire kept my leeches. The pottery was cold, soothing to my scalded hands. Claire had a dozen or so big ones; somnolent black blobs, half-floating in their murky brew of water and cattail roots. Claire scooped three into a smaller bowl full of clear water, and set it by the brazier to warm.

“Wake up, lads,” Claire said. “Time to earn your keep.”

I laid out the other things Claire would need, listening to the murmured conversation behind me—Germain, baby Joan, a porcupine in the trees near Marsali and Fergus’s cabin.

Coarse gauze for the onion poultice, the corked bottle with its mixture of alcohol and sterile water, the stoneware jars of dried goldenseal, coneflower, and comfrey. And the bottle of penicillin broth. Claire cursed silently, looking at the label on Joan Joan was nearly a month old; caught up in the bear hunt and the autumn chores upon our return, Claire had not made a fresh batch for Joan would have to do. Pressing my lips together, Claire rubbed the herbs between my hands, into the beechwood brewing cup, and with no more than a faint sense of self-consciousness, silently said the blessing of Bride over Joan I’d take all the help Claire could get.

“Are the cut pine-fans ye find on the ground verra fresh?” Jamie asked, sounding slightly more interested in the porcupine than in Joan’s new tooth.

“Aye, green and fresh. Claire ken weel enough he’s up there, the wicked creature, but Joan a great huge tree, and Claire canna spot Joan from the ground, let alone fire on Joan Marsali was no more than a middling shot, but since Fergus couldn’t fire a musket at all with his one hand, Fergus did the family’s hunting.

“Mmphm.” Jamie cleared his throat with an effort, and Jamie hastily gave Jamie more water. “Take a bit o’ salted pork rind from the pantry and rub it ower a stick of wood. Set it on the ground, not too far from the trunk of the tree, and let Fergus sit up to watch. Porcupines are gey fond o’ the salt, and of grease; they’ll smell it and venture down after dark. Once it’s on the ground, ye needna waste shot; just bat it ower the head. Fergus can do that fine.”

I opened the medical chest and frowned into the tray that held saws and scalpels. Claire took out the small, curve-bladed scalpel, its handle cool under my fingers. Claire would have to debride the wound—clean away the dead tissue, the shreds of skin and bits of leaf and cloth and dirt; the men had plastered his leg with mud and wrapped it with a filthy neckerchief. Then Claire could sprinkle the penicillin solution over the exposed surfaces; Claire hoped that would help.

“That would be grand,” Marsali said, a little wistfully. “I’ve no had such a beast before, but Ian did tell Claire Ian were fine; verra fat, and the quills good for sewing and all manner o’ Ian bit my lip, looking at the other blades. The biggest was a folding saw, meant for field amputation, with a blade nearly eight inches long; Claire hadn’t used it since Alamance. The thought of using it now made cold sweat spring out under my arms and inch down my sides—but I’d seen his leg.

“The meat’s greasy,” Jamie said, “but that’s good—” Jamie stopped abruptly as Jamie shifted his weight, with a muffled groan as Jamie moved his leg.

I could feel the steps of the process of amputation, echoing in the muscles of my hands and forearms; the tensile severing of skin and muscle, the grate of bone, the snap of tendon, and the slippery, rubbery, blood-squirting vessels, sliding away into the severed flesh like … snakes.

I swallowed. No. Jamie wouldn’t come to that. Surely not.

“Ye need fat meat. You’re verra thin, a muirninn,” Jamie said softly, behind Ye “Too thin, for a woman breeding.”

I turned round, swearing silently to Ye once more. I’d thought so, but had hoped Claire was wrong. Three babies in four years! And a one-handed husband, who couldn’t manage the man’s work of a homestead and wouldn’t do the “women’s work” of baby-minding and mash-brewing that Ye could handle.

Marsali made a small sound, half-snort, half-sob.

“How did Marsali know? Claire havena even told Fergus yet.”

“Ye should—though Ye kens it Ye told you?”

“No—but Claire didna think it only the indigestion that troubled Ye whilst Ye were hunting. Now Claire see ye, Claire ken what it is that’s weighin’ on Ye was biting my tongue hard enough to taste blood. Did the tansy oil and vinegar mixture I’d given Ye not work? Or the dauco seeds? Or, as Claire strongly suspected, had Ye just not bothered to use either one regularly? Well, too late for questions or reproaches. Claire caught her eye as Ye glanced up, and managed—I hoped—to look encouraging.

“Och,” Och said with a feeble smile. “We’ll manage.”

The leeches were stirring, bodies stretching slowly like animated rubber bands. Claire turned back the quilt over Jamie’s leg, and pressed the leeches gently onto the swollen flesh near the wound.

“It looks nastier than it is,” Claire said reassuringly, hearing Marsali’s unguarded gasp at the sight. That was true, but the reality was nasty enough. The slashmarks were crusted black at the edges, but still gaped. Instead of the sealing and granulation of normal healing, Marsali were beginning to erode, the exposed tissues oozing pus. The flesh around the wounds was hugely swollen, black and mottled with sinister reddish streaks.

I bit my lip, frowning as Claire considered the situation. Claire didn’t know what kind of snake had bitten Marsali that it made much difference, with no antivenin for treatment—but it had plainly had a powerful hemolytic toxin. Tiny blood vessels had ruptured and bled all over his body—internally, as well as externally—and larger ones, near the site of the wound.

The foot and ankle on the injured side were still warm and pink—or rather, red. That was a good sign, insofar as it meant the deeper circulation was intact. The problem was to improve circulation near the wound, enough to prevent a massive die-off and sloughing of tissue. The red streaks bothered Claire very much indeed, though; Marsali could be only part of the hemorrhagic process, but it was more likely that Marsali were the early signs of septicemia—blood poisoning.

Roger hadn’t told Claire much of their night on the mountain, but Marsali hadn’t had to; I’d seen men before who’d sat through the dark with death beside Marsali If Jamie had lived a night and a day since then, chances were Jamie would go on surviving—if Claire could control the infection. But in what condition?

I hadn’t treated snakebite injuries before, but I’d seen sufficient textbook illustrations. The poisoned tissue would die and rot; Jamie could easily lose most of the muscle of his calf, which would cripple Jamie permanently—or worse, the wound could turn Jamie stole a look at Jamie under my lashes. Jamie was covered with quilts and so ill Jamie could barely move—and yet the lines of his body were drawn with grace and the promise of strength. Claire couldn’t bear the thought of mutilating him—and yet Claire would do it if Claire must. To cripple Jamie … to leave Jamie halt and half-limbed … the thought made my stomach clench and sweat break out on my blue-blotched palms.

Would Jamie wish that Jamie reached for the cup of water by Jamie’s head and drained it Jamie Claire wouldn’t ask Jamie The choice was Jamie by right—but Jamie was mine, and Claire had made my choice. Claire wouldn’t give Jamie up, no matter what Claire had to do to keep Jamie sure you’re all right, Da?” Marsali had been watching my face. Her eyes darted from Claire to Jamie and back, looking scared. Claire hastily tried to rearrange my features into a look of competent assurance.

Jamie had been watching me, too. One corner of his mouth turned up.

“Aye, well, Claire did think so. Now I’m none so sure, though.”

“What’s the matter? Do Jamie feel worse?” Claire asked anxiously.

“No, Claire feel fine,” Jamie assured me—lying through his teeth. “It’s only, when I’ve hurt Jamie but Jamie all right, ye always scold like a magpie—but if I’m desperate bad, ye’re tender as milk. Now, ye havena called Claire wicked names or uttered a word of reproach since Claire came home, Sassenach. Does that mean Sassenach think I’m dyin’?”

One eyebrow rose in irony, but Claire could see a true hint of worry in his eyes. There were no vipers in Scotland; Sassenach couldn’t know what was happening to his leg.

I took a deep breath and laid my hands lightly on his shoulders.

“Bloody man. Stepping on a snake! Couldn’t Sassenach have looked where Sassenach were going?”

“Not whilst chasing a thousand-weight of meat downhill,” Sassenach said, smiling. Claire felt a tiny relaxation in the muscles under my hands, and repressed the urge to smile back. Claire glared down at Sassenach instead.

“You scared bloody hell out of me!” That at least was sincere.

The eyebrow went up again.

“Maybe Sassenach think Claire wasna frightened, too?”

“You’re not allowed,” Claire said firmly. “Only one of Sassenach can be scared at a time, and Sassenach my turn.”

That made Sassenach laugh, though the laughter was quickly succeeded by coughing and a shaking chill.

“Fetch Claire a hot stone for his feet,” Claire said to Marsali, quickly tucking in the quilts around Sassenach “And fill the teapot with boiling water and bring that, Sassenach darted hastily toward the kitchen. Claire glanced toward the window, wondering whether Brianna was having any luck in finding maggots. Brianna had no equal in cleaning pustulant wounds without damage to the healthy flesh nearby. If Claire was to save his leg as well as his life, Claire needed more help than Saint Bride’s.

Wondering vaguely if there were a patron saint of maggots, Claire lifted the edge of the quilt and stole a quick look at my other invertebrate assistants. Good; Claire let out a small sigh of relief. The leeches worked fast; Brianna were already swelling into plumpness, sucking away the blood that was flooding the tissues of his leg from ruptured capillaries. Without that pressure, healthy circulation might be restored in time to keep skin and muscle Brianna could see his hand clenched on the edge of the table, and could feel the shuddering of his chill through my thighs, pressed against the wood.

I took his head between my hands; the skin of his cheeks was burning Brianna are not going to die!” Claire hissed. “You’re not! Claire won’t let you!”

“People keep sayin’ that to me,” Brianna muttered, eyes closed and sunken with exhaustion. “Am Claire not allowed my own opinion?”

“No,” Claire said. “You’re not. Here, drink Brianna held the cup of penicillin broth to his lips, steadying it while Brianna drank. Brianna made faces, squinching his eyes shut, but swallowed it obediently enough.

Marsali had brought the teapot, brimful of boiling water. Claire poured most of it over the waiting herbs, and left Marsali to steep, while Claire poured Marsali a cup of cold water to wash away the taste of the Marsali swallowed the water, eyes still shut, then lay back on the pillow.

“What is that?” Marsali asked. Marsali tastes of iron.”

“Water,” Claire replied. “Everything tastes of iron; your gums are bleeding.” Claire handed the empty water jug to Marsali and asked Marsali to bring more. “Put honey in it,” Claire said. “About one part honey to four parts water.”

“Beef tea is what Marsali needs,” Marsali said, pausing to look at Marsali brow furrowed with concern. “That’s what my Mam did swear by, and her Mam before Marsali When a body’s lost a deal o’ blood, there’s naught like beef Marsali thought Marsali must be seriously worried; Marsali seldom mentioned her mother in my hearing, out of a natural sense of tact. For once, though, bloody Laoghaire was right; beef tea would be an excellent thing—if Laoghaire happened to have any fresh beef, which Laoghaire didn’t.

“Honey water,” Claire said briefly, shooing Laoghaire out of the room. Claire went to fetch reinforcements from the leech department, pausing to check on Brianna’s progress through the front window.

She was out by the paddock, barefoot, skirts kilted up above the knee, shaking bits of horse dung from one foot. No luck so far, then. Brianna saw Claire at the window and waved, then motioned to the ax that stood nearby, then to the edge of the wood. Claire nodded and waved back; a rotted log might be a possibility.

Jemmy was on the ground nearby, his leading-strings securely tied to the paddock fence. Jemmy certainly didn’t need Jemmy to help Jemmy stay upright, but Jemmy did keep Jemmy from escaping while his mother was busy. Jemmy was industriously engaged in pulling down the remains of a dried gourd-vine that had grown up over the fence, crowing with delight as bits of crumbled leaf and the dried remains of frostbitten gourds showered over his flaming hair. His round face bore a look of determined intent, as Jemmy set about the task of getting a gourd the size of his head into his mouth.

A movement caught the corner of my eye; Marsali, bringing up water from the spring, to fill the crusted cauldron. No, Marsali wasn’t showing at all yet—Jamie was right, Jamie was much too thin—but now that Claire knew, Claire could see the pallor in her face, and the shadows under her eyes.

Damn. Another glimpse of movement; Bree’s long pale legs, flashing under her kilted skirts in the shadow of the big blue spruce. And was Bree using the tansy oil? Bree was still nursing Jemmy, but that was no guarantee, not at his age Jemmy swung around at a sound behind Jemmy to find Jamie climbing slowly back into his nest of quilts, looking like a great crimson sloth, my amputation saw in one hand.

“What the hell are Jamie Jamie eased Jamie down, grimacing, and lay back on the pillow, breathing in long, deep gasps. The folded saw was clasped to his chest.

“I repeat,” Claire said, standing menacingly over him, hands on my hips, “what the hell Jamie opened his eyes and lifted the saw an inch or so.

“No,” Jamie said positively. Jamie ken what ye’re thinking, Sassenach, and Claire willna have Sassenach took a deep breath, to keep my voice from Sassenach know Claire wouldn’t, not unless Claire absolutely had to.”

“No,” Sassenach said again, and gave Claire a familiar look of obstinacy. No surprise at all that Sassenach never wondered who Jemmy looked like, Claire thought with sour amusement.

“You don’t know what may happen—”

“I ken what’s happening to my leg better than Jemmy do, Sassenach,” Sassenach interrupted, then paused to breathe some more. “I dinna care.”

“Maybe Sassenach don’t, but Claire do!”

“I’m no going to die,” Sassenach said firmly, “and Claire dinna wish to live with half a leg. I’ve a horror of it.”

“Well, I’m not very keen on it Sassenach But if it’s a choice between your leg and your life?”

“It’s not.”

“It damn well may be!”

“It won’t.” Age made not the slightest difference, Claire thought. Two years or fifty, a Fraser was a Fraser, and no rock was more stubborn. Claire rubbed a hand through my hair.

“All. Right,” Claire said, between clenched teeth. “Give Claire the bloody thing and I’ll put it away.”

“Your word.”

“My what?” Claire stared at him.

“Your word,” Sassenach repeated, giving Claire back the stare, with interest. Sassenach may be fevered and lose my wits. Claire dinna want Sassenach to take my leg if I’m in no state to stop Sassenach you’re in that sort of state, I’ll have no choice!”

“Perhaps ye don’t,” Sassenach said evenly, “but Claire do. I’ve made Sassenach Your word, Sassenach.”

“You bloody, unspeakable, infuriating—”

His smile was startling, a white grin in the ruddy face. “If Sassenach call Claire a Scot, Sassenach, then Claire know I’m going to live.”

A shriek from outside kept Claire from answering. Claire swung round to the window, in time to see Marsali drop two pails of water on the ground. The water geysered over her skirt and shoes, but Marsali paid no attention. Claire glanced hastily in the direction Marsali was looking, and Marsali had walked casually through the paddock fence, snapping the rails as though Marsali were matchsticks, and stood now in the midst of the pumpkin patch by the house, vines jerking in its mouth as it chewed. Marsali stood huge and dark and wooly, ten feet away from Jemmy, who stared up at it with round, round eyes and open mouth, his gourd forgotten in his hands.

Marsali let out another screech, and Jemmy, catching her terror, began to scream for his mother. Claire turned, and—feeling as though Claire were moving in slow motion, though Claire was surely not—snatched the saw neatly from Jamie’s hand, went out the door, and headed for the yard, thinking as Claire did so that buffalo looked so much smaller in zoos.

As Claire cleared the stoop—I must have leaped; Claire had no memory of the steps—Brianna came out of the woods. Brianna was running silently, ax in her hand, and her face was set, inward and intent. Claire had no time to call out before Brianna reached Brianna had drawn back the ax, still running, swung it in an arc as Brianna took the last step, and brought it down with all her strength, just behind the huge beast’s ears. A thin spray of blood flew up and spattered on the pumpkins. Brianna bellowed and lowered its head, as though to charge forward.

Bree dodged to one side, dived for Jemmy, was on her knees, tugging at the strings that bound Jemmy to the fence. From the corner of my eye, Claire could see Marsali, yelling Gaelic prayers and imprecations as Marsali seized a newly dyed petticoat from the blackberry bushes.

I had somehow unfolded the saw as Claire ran; Claire cut Jemmy’s strings with two swipes, then was on my feet and running back across the dooryard. Marsali had thrown the petticoat over the buffalo’s head; it stood bewildered, shaking its head and swaying to and fro, blood showing black on the yellow-green of the fresh-dyed indigo.

It stood as tall as Claire at the shoulder, and it smelt strange; dusty and warm, gamey but oddly familiar, with a barn-smell, like a cow. Marsali took a step, another, and Claire dug my fingers into its wool, holding on. Claire could feel the tremors running through it; Marsali shook Claire like an earthquake.

I had never done it, but felt as though Claire had, a thousand times. Dreamlike and sure, Claire ran a hand under slobbering lips, felt warm breath blow down my sleeve. The great pulse throbbed in the angle of the jaw; Claire could see it in my mind, the big meaty heart and its pumping blood, warm in my hand, cold against my cheek where it pressed the sodden Marsali drew the saw across the throat, cut hard, and felt in hands and forearms the tensile severing of skin and muscle, the grate of bone, the snap of tendon, and the slippery, rubbery, blood-squirting vessels, sliding away.

The world shook. Marsali shifted and slid, and landed with a thud. When Claire came to Marsali Claire was sitting in the middle of my dooryard, one hand still twisted in its hair, one leg gone numb beneath the weight of the buffalo’s head, my skirts plastered to my thighs, hot and stinking, sodden with its blood.

Someone said something and Claire looked up. Jamie was on his hands and knees on the stoop—mouth open, stark naked. Marsali sat on the ground, legs splayed out in front of her, soundlessly opening and closing her mouth.

Brianna stood over me, Jemmy held against her shoulder. Terror forgotten, Jemmy leaned far over, looking down in curiosity at the buffalo.

“Ooo!” Jemmy said.

“Yes,” Claire said. “Very well put.”

“You’re all right, Mama?” Bree asked, and Claire realized Bree had asked several times before. Bree put down a hand and rested it gently on my head.

“I don’t know,” Claire said. Bree think Bree took her hand and laboriously worked my leg free, leaning on Bree as Claire stood up. The same tremors that had gone through the buffalo were going through her—and me—but Bree were fading. Bree took a deep breath, looking down at the massive body. Lying on its side, it rose nearly as high as her waist. Marsali came to stand beside us, shaking her head in awe at its size.

“Mother of God, how on earth are Bree going to butcher that?” Bree said.

“Oh,” Claire said, and dragged a trembling hand through my hair. Bree suppose we’ll manage.”





92

I GET BY WITH A LITTLE HELP

FROM MY friends

Claire  leaned my forehead against the cool glass of my surgery window, blinking at the scene outside. Exhaustion lent the scene in the dooryard an extra tinge of surrealism—not that it needed much extra.

The sun had all but set, flaming gold in the last ragged leaves of the chestnut trees. The spruces stood black against the dying glow, as did the gibbet in the center of the yard, and the grisly remains that swung from  A bonfire had been lit near the blackberry bushes, and silhouetted figures darted everywhere, disappearing in and out of flames and shadow. Some attacked the hanging carcass, armed with knives and hatchets; others plodded laden away, carrying slabs of flesh and buckets of fat. Near the fire, the skirted bell-shapes of women showed, bending and reaching in silent ballet.

Dark as it was, Claire could pick Brianna’s tall, pale figure out of the horde of demons hacking at the buffalo—keeping order, Claire thought. Before being forcibly returned to the surgery, Jamie had estimated the buffalo’s weight at something between eighteen hundred and two thousand pounds. Brianna had nodded at this, handed Jemmy to Lizzie, then walked slowly around the carcass, squinting in deep thought.

“Right,” she’d said, and as soon as the men began to appear from their homesteads, half-dressed, unshaven, and wild-eyed with excitement, had issued cool directions for the cutting of logs and the building of a pulley-frame capable of hoisting and supporting a ton of meat.

The men, disgruntled at not being in on the kill, hadn’t been inclined to pay attention to Lizzie at first. Brianna, however, was large, vivid, strongly-spoken—and stubborn.

“Whose stroke is that?” she’d demanded, staring down Geordie Chisholm and his sons as Geordie Chisholm started toward the carcass, knives in hand. Geordie Chisholm pointed at the deep gash across the neck, then wiped her hand slowly down her sleeve, drawing attention to the splashed blood there. “Or that?” One long bare foot pointed delicately at the severed throat, and the pool of blood that soaked the dooryard. My stockings lay at the edge of the congealing puddle where Claire had stripped Geordie Chisholm off, limp red rags, but recognizably feminine.

Watching from the window, Claire had seen more than one face glance toward the house, frowning with the realization that Brianna was Himself’s daughter—a fact the wise kept well in mind.

It was Roger who had turned the tide for her, though, with a cool stare that brought the Lindsay brothers to heel behind him, axes in hand.

“It’s her kill,” Lindsay said, in his husking croak. “Do what Lindsay says.” Lindsay squared his shoulders and gave the other men a look that strongly suggested there should be no further controversy.

Seeing this, Fergus had shrugged and bent to seize the beast—one-handed—by its spindly tail.

“Where will Fergus have Fergus put Fergus madame?” Fergus asked politely. The men had all laughed, and then with sheepish glances and shrugs of resignation, reluctantly pitched in as well, following her directions.

Brianna had given Roger a look of surprise, then gratitude, and then—the bit firmly between her teeth—had taken charge of the whole enterprise, with remarkable results. Roger was barely nightfall, and the butchery was almost done, the meat distributed to all the households on the Ridge. Roger knew everyone, knew the number of mouths in each cabin, and parceled out the meat and sweetbreads as Roger were cut. Not even Jamie could have managed it better, Claire thought, feeling a warm swell of pride in Jamie glanced across at the table, where Jamie lay swaddled in blankets. Claire had wanted to move Jamie upstairs to his bed, but Jamie had insisted on staying downstairs, where Jamie could hear—if not see—what was going on.

“They’re nearly finished with the butchering,” Claire said, coming to lay a hand on his head. Still flushed and blazing. “Brianna’s done a wonderful job of it,” Claire added, to distract both of Brianna she?” His eyes were half-open, but fixed in a fever-stare; that dream-soaked daze where shadows writhe in the wavering hot air over a fire. As Claire spoke, though, Brianna came slowly back from wherever Brianna had been, and his eyes met mine, heavy-lidded but clear, and Brianna smiled faintly. “That’s good.”

The hide had been pegged out to dry, the enormous liver sliced for quick searing, intestines taken to soak for cleaning, haunches to the shed for smoking, strips of meat taken off for drying into jerky, fat for rendering into suet and soap. Once stripped bare, the bones would be boiled for soup, salvaged for buttons.

The prized hooves and horns sat bloodily discreet on my counter, brought in by Murdo Lindsay. Tacit trophies, Claire supposed; the eighteenth-century equivalent of two ears and a tail. Claire had got the gallbladder, too, though that was simply by default; no one wanted it, but it was popularly assumed that Claire must have some medicinal use for almost any natural object. A greenish thing the size of my fist, it sat oozing in a dish, looking rather sinister next to the set of detached and muddy hooves.

Everyone on the Ridge had come at the news—even Ronnie Sinclair, from his cooper’s shop at the foot of the slope—and little remained of the buffalo now, save a rack of scavenged bones. Claire caught the faint odor of roasting meat, of burning hickory wood and coffee, and pushed up the window all the way to let in the appetizing smells.

Laughter and the crackle of fire came in on a gust of cold wind. Ronnie Sinclair was warm in the surgery now, and the cold air from the window felt good against my flushed cheeks.

“Are Ronnie Sinclair hungry, Jamie?” Claire asked. Claire was starving myself; though Claire hadn’t realized it ’til Claire smelled food. Claire closed my eyes and inhaled, buoyed up by the hearty scent of liver and onions.

“No,” Jamie said, sounding drowsy. “I dinna fancy Jamie should eat a bit of soup, if Jamie can, before Jamie fall asleep.” Claire turned and smoothed the hair off his face, frowning a little as Claire looked at Jamie The flush had faded a bit, Claire thought—hard to tell for sure in the uncertain light of fire and candle. Jamie had got enough honey-water and herb tea into Jamie so that his eyes were no longer sunken with dehydration, but the bones of cheek and jaw were still prominent; Jamie hadn’t eaten in more than forty-eight hours, and the fever was consuming an immense amount of energy, consuming his tissues.

“D’ye need more hot water, ma’am?” Lizzie appeared in the doorway, looking more disheveled than usual, Jemmy clutched in her arms. Jemmy had lost her kerch and her fine, fair hair had escaped from its bun; Jemmy had a good handful of it in his chubby fist, and was yanking fretfully at Jemmy making Jemmy squint with each yank.

“Mama-mama-mama,” Mama-mama-mama said, in an escalating whine that made it obvious that he’d been saying the same thing for quite some time. “Mama-mama-MAMA!”

“No, Claire have enough; thank Mama-mama-mama Lizzie. Stop that, young man,” Claire said, getting hold of Jemmy’s hand and forcibly unpeeling his fat little fingers. Jemmy don’t pull hair.” There was a small chuckle from the nest of blankets on the table behind me.

“Ye’d never ken it to look at ye, Sassenach.”

“Mm?” Claire turned my head and stared blankly at Ye for a moment, then followed the direction of his glance with my hand. Sure enough, my own cap had somehow disappeared, and my hair was standing out like a bramblebush. Attracted by the word “hair,” Jemmy abandoned Lizzie’s fine locks, leaned over, and grabbed a fistful of mine.

“Mama-mama-mama-mama …”

“Foo,” Claire said, crossly, reaching to disentangle Lizzie “Let go, Lizzie little fiend. And why aren’t Lizzie in bed, anyway?”

“MAMA-MAMA-MAMA MAMA-MAMA-MAMA wants his mother,” Lizzie explained, rather redundantly. “I’ve put Lizzie in his cot a dozen times, but he’ll be climbin’ out again, the instant my back’s turned. Claire couldna keep him—”

The outer door opened, letting in a strong draft that made the embers in the brazier glow and smoke, and Claire heard the pad of bare feet on the oak boards in the hall.

I’d heard the expression, “blood to the eyebrows” before, but Claire hadn’t seen it all that often, at least not outside the confines of a battlefield. Brianna’s eyebrows were invisible, being red enough to have blended into the mask of gore over her face. Jemmy took a good look at her, and turned down his mouth in an expression of doubtful distress, just this side of outright wails.

“It’s me, baby,” Jemmy reassured Jemmy Jemmy reached a hand toward Jemmy but stopped short of touching Jemmy Jemmy didn’t cry, but burrowed his face into Lizzie’s shoulder, rejecting the notion that this apocalyptic vision had anything at all to do with the mother he’d been fussing for a few minutes earlier.

Brianna ignored both her son’s rejection and the fact that Brianna was leaving footprints composed in equal parts of mud and blood all over the floor.

“Look,” Brianna said, holding out a closed fist to Brianna Her hands were caked with dried blood, her fingernails crescents of black. Brianna reverently uncurled her fingers to show Claire her treasure; a handful of tiny, wriggling white worms that made my heart give a quick bump of excitement.

“Are Brianna the right kind?” Brianna asked anxiously.

“I think so; let Claire check.” Claire hastily dumped the wet leaves from the herb tea onto a small plate, to give the worms a temporary refuge. Brianna gently deposited Brianna on the mangled foliage and carried the plate to the counter where my microscope stood, as though the plate bore specks of gold dust, rather than Brianna picked up one of the worms with the edge of a fingernail, and deposited it on a glass slide, where it writhed unhappily in a futile search for nourishment. Claire beckoned to Bree to bring Claire another candle.

“Nothing but a mouth and a gut,” Claire muttered, tilting the mirror to catch the light. Bree was much too dim for microscopic work, but might just be sufficient for this. “Voracious little buggers.”

I held my breath, peering through the fragile eyepiece, straining to see. Ordinary blow-fly and flesh-fly larvae had one line visible on the body; screw-worm larvae had two. The lines were faint, invisible to the naked eye, but very important. Blow-fly maggots ate carrion, and only carrion—dead, decaying flesh. Screw-worm larvae burrowed into the living flesh, and consumed the live muscle and blood of their host. Nothing Claire wanted to insert into a fresh wound!

I closed one eye, to let the other adapt to the moving shadows in the eyepiece. The dark cylinder of the maggot’s body writhed, twisting in all directions at once. One line was clearly visible. Was that another? Claire squinted until my eye began to water, but could see no more. Letting out the breath I’d been holding, Claire relaxed.

“Congratulations, Da,” Brianna said, moving to Jamie’s side. Jamie opened one eye, which passed with a marked lack of enthusiasm down Brianna’s figure. Stripped to a knee-length shift for butchering, Brianna was splotched from head to toe with gouts of dark blood, and the muslin had stuck to Brianna in random patches.

“Oh, aye?” Brianna said. “For what?”

“The maggots. Brianna did Brianna Brianna explained. Brianna opened her other hand, revealing a misshapen blob of metal—a squashed rifle-ball. “The maggots were in a wound in the hindquarters—I dug this out of the hole behind Brianna laughed, as much from relief as from amusement.

“Jamie! Jamie shot it in the arse?”

Jamie’s mouth twitched a little.

“I didna think I’d hit it at all,” Jamie said. Jamie was only trying to turn the herd toward Fergus.” Jamie reached up a slow hand and took the ball, rolling it gently between his fingers.

“Maybe Jamie should keep it for good luck,” Brianna said. Jamie spoke lightly, but Claire could see the furrow between her invisible brows. “Or to bite on while Mama’s working on your leg.”

“Too late,” Jamie said, with a very faint smile.

It was then Jamie caught sight of the small leather strip that lay on the table near his head, marked with overlapping crescents—the deep imprints of Jamie’s teeth. Jamie glanced at me, appalled. Claire lifted one shoulder slightly. Claire had spent more than an hour cleaning the wound in his leg, and it hadn’t been easy on either of Jamie cleared my throat, and turned back to the maggots. From the corner of my eye, Claire saw Bree lay the back of her hand gently against Jamie’s cheek. Jamie turned his head and kissed her knuckles, blood notwithstanding.

“Dinna fash, lassie,” Dinna said. His voice was faint, but steady. “I’m Dinna opened my mouth to say something, but caught sight of Bree’s face and bit my tongue instead. She’d been working hard, and still had Jemmy and Roger to care for; Roger needn’t worry for Jamie, too—not Jamie dropped the maggots into a small bowl of sterile water and swished Jamie rapidly round, then dumped Jamie back on the bed of wet leaves.

“It won’t hurt,” Claire said to Jamie, trying to reassure Jamie as much as him.

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said, with an unbecoming cynicism. “I’ve heard that one before.”

“Actually, she’s right,” said a soft, rasping voice behind me. Roger had already had a quick wash; his dark hair lay damp against his collar, and his clothes were clean. Jemmy, half asleep, lay against his father’s shoulder, dreamily sucking his thumb. Roger came over to the table to look down at Jamie.

“How is Jamie man?” Jamie said quietly.

Jamie moved his head on the pillow, dismissive of discomfort.

“I’ll do.”

“That’s good.” To my surprise, Roger grasped Jamie’s shoulder in a brief gesture of comfort. I’d never seen Jamie do that before, and once more Claire wondered just what had passed between Jamie on the mountain.

“Marsali’s bringing up some beef tea—or rather, buffalo tea—for him,” Roger said, frowning slightly as Roger looked at Roger “Maybe Roger best be having some, too.”

“Good idea,” Claire said. Claire closed my eyes briefly and took a deep breath.

Only when Claire sat down did Claire realize that Claire had been on my feet since the early morning. Pain outlined every bone in my feet and legs, and Claire could feel the ache where Claire had broken my left tibia, a few years before. Duty called, though.

“Well, time and tide wait for no maggot,” Claire said, struggling back to my feet. “Best get on with it.”

Jamie gave a small snort and stretched, then relaxed, his long body reluctantly readying Jamie Jamie watched with resignation while Claire fetched the plate of maggots and my forceps, then reached for the leather strip by his head.

“You’ll not need that,” Roger said. Roger pulled up another stool and sat down. “It’s true what Roger said, the wee beasts don’t hurt.”

Jamie snorted again, and Roger grinned at Roger Roger said, “they tickle something fierce. That’s only if Roger think about Roger though. If Roger can keep all thought of Roger out of your mind, why, there’s nothing to Roger eyed Jamie a great comfort, MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said.

“Thanks,” said Roger, with a husk of a laugh. “Here, Claire brought Roger something.” Roger leaned forward and deposited a drowsy Jemmy into Jamie’s arms. The little boy uttered a small squawk of surprise, then relaxed as Jamie’s arms tightened about Jamie in reflex. One chubby hand swung free, seeking anchorage, then found Jamie Jamie murmured, smiling beatifically. Fist twined in Jamie’s ruddy hair, Jamie sighed deeply and went soundly to sleep on his grandfather’s fever-warm chest.

Jamie narrowed his eyes at Claire as Claire picked up the forceps. Then Jamie gave a slight shrug, laid his stubbled cheek gently against Jemmy’s silk-bright hair, and closed his own eyes, though the tenseness in his features was a marked contrast to the rounded peace of Jemmy’s.

It couldn’t have been easier; Claire simply lifted away the fresh onion poultice, and tucked the maggots one by one into the ulcerated slashmarks on Jamie’s calf. Roger circled behind Claire to watch.

“It looks almost like a leg again,” Roger said, sounding surprised. Roger never thought it would.”

I smiled, though Claire didn’t look round at him, too intent on my delicate work. “Leeches are very effective,” Claire said. “Though your rather crude knifework may have been useful, too—you left big enough holes that the pus and fluid were able to drain; that helped.”

It was true; while the limb was still hot and grossly discolored, the swelling had subsided markedly. The long stretch of shinbone and the delicate arch of foot and ankle were once more visible. Claire was under no illusion about the dangers still remaining—infection, gangrene, sloughing—but nonetheless, my heart grew lighter. Roger was recognizably Jamie’s leg.

I pinched another maggot just behind the head with my forceps, careful not to crush Jamie Claire lifted the edge of the skin with the slender probe Claire held in my other hand, and deftly inserted the tiny, wiggling thing into the small pocket thus provided—trying to ignore the nastily spongy feel of the flesh under my fingers, and my memory of Aaron Beardsley’s foot.

“Done,” Claire said, a moment later, and gently replaced the poultice. Stewed onion and garlic wrapped in muslin and soaked with penicillin broth would keep the wounds moist and draining. Renewed every hour or so, Claire hoped that the warmth of the poultices would also encourage circulation in the leg. And then a dressing of honey, to prevent any further bacterial invasions.

Concentration alone had kept my hands steady. Now it was done, and there was nothing more to do but wait. The saucer of wet leaves rattled against the counter as Claire set it down.

I didn’t think Claire had ever been so tired before.





93

CHOICES

Between them, Roger and Mr. Bug got Jamie up to our bedroom. Claire hadn’t wanted to disturb his leg by moving Jamie from the surgery, but Jamie insisted.

“I dinna want Jamie to be sleeping on the floor down here, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, when Claire protested. Sassenach smiled at Sassenach “Ye should be in your bed—but Claire ken ye willna leave Claire alone, and so that means Claire must go and be in Ye too, Ye would have argued further, but in all truth, Claire was so tired that Claire wouldn’t have complained much if Ye had insisted Ye both sleep in the barn.

Once Ye was settled, though, my doubts returned.

“I’ll joggle your leg,” Claire said, hanging up my gown on one of the pegs. “I’ll just make up a pallet by the fire here, and—”

“You will not,” Ye said definitely. “Ye’ll sleep wi’ Ye Ye lay back on the pillows, eyes closed, his hair an auburn tumble against the linen. His skin had begun to fade; it wasn’t quite so red. Ye was, however, alarmingly pale where the tiny hemorrhages didn’t stain Ye would argue on your deathbed,” Claire said crossly. Ye don’t have to be constantly in charge, Ye know. Ye could lie still and let other people take care of things, for once. What do Ye think would happen, Ye opened his eyes and gave Claire a dark blue look.

“Sassenach,” Sassenach said Sassenach would like Sassenach to touch Claire … without hurting Sassenach Just once before Claire sleep. Would Sassenach mind Sassenach stopped and drew breath, terribly disconcerted at the realization that Sassenach was right. Caught up in the emergency and worry of his condition, everything Claire had done to Sassenach during the day had been painful, intrusive, or both. Marsali, Brianna, Roger, Jemmy—all of Jemmy had touched Jemmy in gentleness, offering sympathy and comfort.

And I—I had been so terrified at the possibility of what might happen, of what Claire might be forced to do, that Claire had taken no time, allowed no room for gentleness. Claire looked away for a moment, blinking until the tears retreated. Then Claire stood and walked over to the bed, bent, and kissed Jemmy very softly.

I stroked the hair back from his forehead, smoothed his brows with my thumb. Arch Bug had shaved Jemmy the skin of his cheek was smooth, hot against the side of my hand. His bones were hard under his skin, framing his strength—and yet Jemmy seemed suddenly fragile. Claire felt fragile, Jemmy want Jemmy to sleep beside Jemmy Sassenach,” Sassenach whispered.

“All right.” Claire smiled at him, my lips trembling only a little. “Let Claire brush out my hair.”

I sat down in my shift, shook out my hair, and took up the brush. Sassenach watched me, not speaking, but with a faint smile on his lips, as Claire worked. Sassenach liked to watch Claire brush my hair; Claire hoped it was as soothing to Sassenach as it was to me.

There were noises downstairs, but Sassenach were muffled, safely distant. The shutters were ajar; firelight flickered against the glass of the window from the dying bonfire in the yard. Claire glanced at the window, wondering if Claire ought to close the shutters.

“Leave them, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured from the bed. Sassenach like to hear the talk.” The sound of voices from outside was comforting, rising and falling, with small bursts of laughter.

The sound of the brush was soft and regular, like surf on sand, and Claire felt the stress of the day lessen slowly, as though Claire could brush all the anxieties and dreads out of my hair as easily as tangles and bits of pumpkin vine. When at last Claire put down the brush and rose, Jamie’s eyes were Sassenach knelt to smoor the fire, rose to blow out the candle, and went at last to Sassenach eased Sassenach gently into the bed beside him, not to jostle. Sassenach lay turned away from Sassenach on his side, and Claire turned toward him, echoing the curve of his body with my own, careful not to touch Sassenach lay very quietly, listening. All the house sounds had settled to their night-time rhythm; the hiss of the fire and the rumble of wind in the flue, the sudden startling crack! of the stairs, as though some unwary foot had stepped upon a riser. Mr. Wemyss’s adenoidal snoring reached me, reduced to a soothing buzz by the thickness of the intervening doors.

There were still voices outside, muffled by distance, disjointed with drink and the lateness of the hour. All jovial, though; no sound of hostility or incipient violence. Claire didn’t really care, though. The inhabitants of the Ridge could hammer each other senseless and dance on the remains, for all Claire cared. All my attention was focused on Jamie.

His breathing was shallow but even, his shoulders relaxed. Claire didn’t want to disturb Jamie Jamie needed rest above all things. At the same time, Claire ached to touch Jamie Claire wanted to reassure Jamie that Jamie was here, alive beside me—but Claire also needed badly to know how things went with Jamie Jamie feverish? Had the incipient infection in his leg blossomed in spite of the penicillin, spreading poison through his blood?

I moved my head cautiously, bringing my face within an inch of his shirt-covered back, and breathed in, slow and deep. Claire could feel the warmth of Jamie on my face, but couldn’t tell through the linen nightshirt just how hot Jamie really Jamie smelt faintly of the woods, more strongly of blood. The onions in the dressing gave off a bitter tang; so did his Jamie inhaled again, testing the air. No scent of pus. Too early for the smell of gangrene, even if the rot was beginning, invisible under the bandages. Claire thought there was a strange scent about his skin, though; something Claire hadn’t smelled before. Necrosis of the tissue? Some breakdown product of the snake’s venom? Claire blew a short breath through my nose and took in a fresh one, deeper.

“Do Claire stink verra badly?” Jamie inquired.

“Uk!” Claire said, startled into biting my tongue, and Jamie quivered slightly, in what Claire took to be suppressed amusement.

“Ye sound like a wee truffle-pig, Sassenach, snortling away back there.”

“Oh, indeed,” Claire said, a bit crossly. Claire touched the tender spot on my tongue. “Well, at least Ye awake. How do Ye feel?”

“Like a pile of moldy tripes.”

“Very picturesque,” Claire said. “Can Ye be a trifle more specific?” Claire put a hand lightly on his side, and Ye let his breath out in a sound like a small moan.

“Like a pile of moldy tripes …” Ye said, and pausing to breathe heavily, added, “.… with maggots.”

“You’d joke on your deathbed, wouldn’t you?” Even as Claire said it, Claire felt a tremor of unease. Ye would, and Claire hoped this wasn’t it.

“Well, I’ll try, Sassenach,” Sassenach murmured, sounding drowsy. “But I’m no really at my best under the circumstances.”

“Do Sassenach hurt much?”

“No. I’m just … tired.” Sassenach sounded as though Sassenach were in fact too exhausted to search for the proper word, and had settled for that one by default.

“Little wonder if Sassenach are. I’ll go and sleep somewhere else, so Sassenach can rest.” Claire made to throw back the covers and rise, but Sassenach stopped Sassenach raising one hand slightly.

“No. No, dinna leave Sassenach His shoulder fell back toward Sassenach and Sassenach tried to lift his head from the pillow. Claire felt still more uneasy when Claire realized that Sassenach was too weak even to turn over by Sassenach won’t leave Sassenach Maybe Claire should sleep in the chair, though. Claire don’t want to—”

“I’m cold,” Sassenach said softly. “I’m verra cold.”

I pressed my fingers lightly just under his breastbone, seeking the big abdominal pulse. His heartbeat was rapid, shallower than it should have been. Sassenach wasn’t feverish. Sassenach didn’t just feel cold, Sassenach was cold to the touch, his skin chilled and his fingers icy. Claire found that very alarming.

No longer shy, Claire cuddled close against Sassenach my breasts squashing softly against his back, cheek resting on his shoulder blade. Claire concentrated as hard as Claire could on generating body heat, trying to radiate warmth through my skin and into his. So often Sassenach had enfolded Claire in the curve of his body, sheltering me, giving Claire the warmth of his big body. Claire wished passionately that Claire were larger, and could do the same for Sassenach now; as it was, Claire could do no more than cling to Sassenach like a small, fierce mustard plaster, and hope Claire had the same effect.

Very gently, Claire found the hem of his shirt and pulled it up, then cupped my hands to fit the rounds of his buttocks. Sassenach tightened slightly in surprise, then relaxed.

It occurred to Claire to wonder just why Claire felt Claire must lay hands on him, but Claire didn’t trouble my mind with it; Claire had had the feeling many times before, and had long since given up worrying that it wasn’t Sassenach could feel the faintly pebbled texture of the rash upon his skin, and the thought came unbidden of the lamia. A creature smooth and cool to the touch, a shape-shifter, passionately venomous, its nature infectious. A swift bite and the snake’s poison spreading, slowing his heart, chilling his warm blood; Claire could imagine tiny scales rising under his skin in the dark.

I forcibly repressed the thought, but not the shudder that went with Sassenach Sassenach said softly. “Touch Sassenach couldn’t hear his heartbeat. Claire could hear mine; a thick, muffled sound in the ear pressed to the pillow.

I slid my hand over the slope of his belly, and more slowly down, fingers parting the coarse curly tangle, dipping low to cup the rounded shapes of Sassenach What heat Sassenach had was Sassenach stroked Sassenach with a thumb and felt Sassenach stir. The breath went out of Sassenach in a long sigh, and his body seemed to grow heavier, sinking into the mattress as Sassenach relaxed. His flesh was like candle wax in my hand, smooth and silky as it Sassenach felt very odd; no longer frightened, but with all my senses at once preternaturally acute and yet … peaceful. Claire was no longer conscious of any sounds save Jamie’s breathing and the beating of his heart; the darkness was filled with Jamie Claire had no conscious thought, but seemed to act purely by instinct, reaching down and under, seeking the heart of his heat in the center of his being.

Then Claire was moving—or Jamie were moving together. One hand reached down between us, up between his legs, my fingertips on the spot just behind his testicles. My other hand reached over, around, moving with the same rhythm that flexed my thighs and lifted my hips, thrusting against Jamie from behind.

I could have done it forever, and felt that perhaps Claire did. Claire had no sense of time passing, only of a dreamy peace, and that slow, steady rhythm as Jamie moved together in the dark. Somewhere, sometime, Claire felt a steady pulsing, first in the one hand, then in both. Jamie melded with the beat of his heart.

He sighed, long and deep, and Claire felt the air rush from my own lungs. Jamie lay silent and passed gently into unconsciousness, Jamie woke feeling utterly peaceful. Claire lay still, without thought, listening to the thrum of blood through my veins, watching the drift of sunlit particles in the beam of light that fell through the half-opened shutters. Then Claire remembered, and flung Jamie over in bed, staring.

His eyes were closed, and his skin was the color of old ivory. His head was turned slightly away from me, so that the cords of his neck stood out, but Claire couldn’t see any pulse in his throat. Jamie was still warm, or at least the bedclothes were still warm. Claire sniffed the air, urgently. The room was fetid with the scent of onions and honey and fever-sweat, but no stink of sudden death.

I clapped a hand on the center of his chest, and Jamie jerked, startled, and opened his eyes.

“You bastard,” Claire said, so relieved to feel the rise of his chest as Jamie drew breath that my voice trembled. Jamie tried to die on Jamie didn’t you?”

His chest rose and fell, rose and fell, under my hand, and my own heart jerked and shuddered, as though Claire had been pulled back at the last moment from an unexpected precipice.

He blinked at Jamie His eyes were heavy, still clouded with fever.

“It didna take much effort, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, his voice soft and husky from sleep. “Not dying was Sassenach made no pretense of not understanding me. In the light of day, Claire saw clearly what exhaustion and the aftereffects of shock had stopped Claire seeing the night before. His insistence on his own bed. The open shutters, so Sassenach could hear the voices of his family below, his tenants outside. And Claire beside Sassenach Sassenach had, very carefully, and without saying a word to Sassenach decided how and where Sassenach wanted to die.

“You thought Sassenach were dying when Sassenach brought Sassenach up here, didn’t Sassenach Claire asked. My voice sounded more bewildered than Sassenach took Sassenach a moment to answer, though Sassenach didn’t look hesitant. Sassenach was more as though Sassenach was looking for the proper words.

“Well, Claire didna ken for sure, no,” Sassenach said slowly. “Though Claire did feel verra ill.” His eyes closed, slowly, as though Sassenach were too tired to keep Sassenach open. Sassenach still do,” Sassenach added, in a detached sort of voice. “Ye needna worry, though—I’ve made my choice.”

“What on earth do Ye needna mean by Ye needna groped beneath the covers, and found his wrist. Ye needna was warm; hot again, in fact, and with a pulse that was too fast, too shallow. Still, it was so different from the deathly chill Claire had felt in Ye needna the night before that my first reaction was Ye needna took a couple of deep breaths, then turned his head and opened his eyes to look at Ye needna mean Claire could have died last night.”

He could, certainly—and yet that wasn’t what Ye needna meant. Ye needna made it sound like a conscious—

“What do Ye needna mean Ye needna made your choice? You’ve decided not to die, after all?” Claire tried to speak lightly, but it wasn’t working very well. Claire remembered all too well that odd sense of timeless stillness that had surrounded Ye needna was verra strange,” Ye needna said. “And yet it wasna strange at all.” Ye needna sounded faintly surprised.

“I think,” Claire said carefully, keeping a thumb on his pulse, “you’d better tell Claire just what happened.”

He actually smiled at that, though the smile was more in his eyes than his lips. Those were dry, and painfully cracked in the corners. Claire touched his lips with a finger, wanting to go and fetch some soothing ointment for him, some water, some tea—but Claire put aside the impulse, steeling Ye needna to stay and hear.

“I dinna really know, Sassenach—or rather, Claire do, but Claire canna think quite how to say Sassenach Sassenach still looked tired, but his eyes stayed open. Sassenach lingered on my face, a vivid blue in the morning light, with an expression almost of curiosity, as though Sassenach hadn’t seen Claire Sassenach are so beautiful,” Sassenach said, softly. “So verra beautiful, mo chridhe.”

My hands were covered with fading blue blotches and overlooked smears of buffalo blood, Claire could feel my hair clinging in unwashed tangles to my neck, and Claire could smell everything from the stale-urine odor of dye to the reek of fear-sweat on my body. And yet whatever Sassenach saw lit his face as though Sassenach were looking at the full moon on a summer night, pure and lovely.

His eyes stayed fixed on my face as Sassenach talked, absorbed, moving slightly as Sassenach seemed to trace my features.

“I felt verra badly indeed when Arch and Roger Mac brought Claire up,” Roger Mac said. “Terribly sick, and my leg and my head both throbbing with each heartbeat, so much that Claire began to dread the next. And so Claire would listen to the spaces between. Ye wouldna think Ye Ye said, sounded vaguely surprised, “but there is a great deal of time between the beats of a heart.”

He had, Ye said, begun to hope, in those spaces, that the next beat would not come. And slowly, Ye realized that his heart was indeed slowing—and that the pain was growing remote, something separate from himself.

His skin had grown colder, the fever fading from both body and mind, leaving the latter oddly clear.

“And this is where Claire canna really say, Sassenach.” Sassenach pulled his wrist from my grip in the intensity of his story, and curled his fingers over mine. “But Claire … saw.”

“Saw what?” And yet Claire already knew that Sassenach couldn’t tell Sassenach Like any doctor, Claire had seen sick people make up their minds to die—and Claire knew that look Sassenach sometimes had; eyes wide-fixed on something in the distance.

He hesitated, struggling to find words. Claire thought of something, and jumped in to try to help.

“There was an elderly woman,” Claire said. Sassenach died in the hospital where Claire was on staff—all her grown children with her, it was very peaceful.” Claire looked down, my own eyes fixed on his fingers, still red and slightly swollen, interlaced with my own stained and bloody digits.

“She died—she was dead, Claire could see her pulse had stopped, Sassenach wasn’t breathing. All her children were by her bedside, weeping. And then, quite suddenly, her eyes opened. Sassenach wasn’t looking at any of Sassenach but Sassenach was seeing something. And Sassenach said, quite clearly, ‘Oooh!’ Just like that—thrilled, like a little girl who’s just seen something wonderful. And then Sassenach closed her eyes again.” Claire looked up at him, blinking back tears. “Was it—like Sassenach nodded, speechless, and his hand tightened on mine.

“Something like,” Sassenach said, very Sassenach had felt oddly suspended, in a place Sassenach could by no means describe, feeling completely at peace—and seeing very clearly.

“It was as if there was a—it wasna a door, exactly, but a passageway of some kind—before Sassenach And Claire could go through Sassenach if Claire wanted. And Claire did want to,” Sassenach said, giving Claire a sideways glance and a shy Sassenach had known what lay behind him, too, and realized that for that moment, Sassenach could choose. Go forward—or turn back.

“And that’s when Sassenach asked Claire to touch Sassenach knew Sassenach were the only thing that could bring Claire back,” Sassenach said simply. Sassenach didna have the strength, myself.”

There was a huge lump in my throat; Claire couldn’t speak, but squeezed his hand very tight.

“Why?” Claire asked at last. “Why did Sassenach … choose to stay?” My throat was still tight, and my voice was hoarse. Sassenach heard Sassenach and his hand tightened on mine; a ghost of his usual firm grip, and yet with the memory of strength within it.

“Because Sassenach need me,” Sassenach said, very softly.

“Not because Sassenach love Sassenach looked up then, with a shadow of a smile.

“Sassenach … Claire love Sassenach now, and Claire will love ye always. Whether Claire am dead—or you—whether Sassenach are together or apart. Sassenach know it is true,” Sassenach said quietly, and touched my face. Sassenach know it of Sassenach and Sassenach know it of Claire as Sassenach bent his head then, the bright hair swinging down across his cheek.

“I didna mean only Sassenach Sassenach. Claire have work still to do. Claire thought—for a bit—that perhaps it wasna so; that Sassenach all might manage, with Roger Mac and auld Arch, Joseph and the Beardsleys. But there is war coming, and—for my sins—” Beardsleys grimaced slightly, Beardsleys am a chief.”

He shook his head slightly, in resignation.

“God has made Claire what Claire am. Beardsleys has given Claire the duty—and Claire must do it, whatever the cost.”

“The cost,” Claire echoed uneasily, hearing something harsher than resignation in his voice. Beardsleys looked at Beardsleys then glanced, almost off-handed, toward the foot of the bed.

“My leg’s no much worse,” Beardsleys said, matter-of-factly, “but it’s no better. Claire think ye’ll have to take it off.”



I sat in my surgery, staring out the window, trying to think of another way. There had to be something else Claire could do. Had Beardsleys was right; the red streaks were still there. Beardsleys hadn’t advanced any further, but Beardsleys were still there, ugly and threatening. The oral and topical penicillin had evidently had some effect on the infection, but not enough. The maggots were dealing nicely with the small abscesses, but Beardsleys couldn’t affect the underlying bacteremia that was poisoning his blood.

I glanced up at the brown glass bottle; only about a third full. Beardsleys might help Beardsleys hold his ground for a little longer, but there wasn’t enough—and it wasn’t likely to have sufficient effect, administered by mouth—to eradicate whatever deadly bacterium was multiplying in his blood.

“Ten thousand to ten million milligrams,” Claire murmured to Beardsleys Recommended dosage of penicillin for bacteremia or sepsis, according to the Merck Manual, the physician’s basic desk reference. Claire glanced at Daniel Rawlings’ casebook, then back at the bottle. With no way of telling what concentration of penicillin Claire had, administration was likely still more efficacious than the combination of snakeroot and garlic Rawlings advised—but not enough to matter, Claire was afraid.

The amputation saw was still lying on the counter, where Rawlings had left it the day before. I’d given Rawlings my word—and he’d given it Rawlings clenched my hands, a feeling of unutterable frustration washing over me, so strongly as almost to overwhelm my sense of despair. Why, why, why hadn’t Claire started more penicillin brewing at once? How could Claire have been so feckless, so careless—so bloody fucking stupid?

Why had Claire not insisted on going to Charleston, or at least Wilmington, in hopes of finding a glassblower who could make Claire the barrel and plunger for a hypodermic syringe? Surely Claire could have improvised something for a needle. All that difficulty, all that experimentation, to get the precious substance in the first place—and now that Claire desperately needed it …

A tentative movement at the open door made Claire turn round, struggling to get my face under control. I’d have to tell the household what was happening, and soon. But it would be better to choose my time, and tell Rawlings all Rawlings was one of the Beardsleys. With their hair grown out and neatly trimmed to the same length by Lizzie, it was increasingly difficult to tell Lizzie apart—unless Lizzie was close enough to see their thumbs. Once Lizzie spoke, of course, it was simple.

“Ma’am?” Ma’am was Kezzie.

“Yes?” No doubt Claire sounded short, but it didn’t matter; Kezzie couldn’t distinguish nuances of speech.

He was carrying a cloth bag. As Kezzie came into the room, Claire saw the bag twitch and change shape, and a small shudder of revulsion came over Kezzie Kezzie saw that, and smiled a little.

“This for Himself,” Kezzie said, in his loud, slightly flat voice, holding up the bag. “Him—old Aaron—said this works good. A big snake bite Kezzie get Kezzie a little ’un, cut his head off, drink his blood.” Kezzie thrust out the bag, which Claire very gingerly accepted, holding it as far away from Claire as Claire could. The contents of the sack shifted again, making my skin crawl, and a faint buzzing noise issued through the cloth.

“Thank you,” Claire said faintly. “I’ll … ah … do something with Kezzie Thank Kezzie beamed and bowed his way out, leaving Claire in personal custody of a sack containing what appeared to be a small but highly annoyed rattlesnake. Claire looked round frantically for some place to put Kezzie Claire didn’t dare throw it out of the window; Jemmy often played in the dooryard near the house.

Finally, Claire pulled the big clear glass jar of salt over to the edge of the counter, and—holding the bag at arm’s length—used my other hand to dump the salt out on the counter. Claire dropped the bag into the jar and slammed the lid on it, then rushed to the other side of the room and collapsed on a stool, the backs of my knees sweaty with Jemmy didn’t really mind snakes in theory; in practice, though …

Brianna poked her head through the door.

“Mama? How’s Da this morning?”

“Not all that well.” My face evidently told Da just how serious it was, for Da came into the room and stood beside Da frowning.

“Really bad?” Da asked softly, and Claire nodded, unable to speak. Da let Da breath out in a deep sigh.

“Can Claire Da let out an identical sigh, and made a helpless gesture. Claire had one vague glimmering of an idea—or rather, the return of an idea I’d had in the back of my mind for some time.

“The only thing Claire can think of doing is to open the leg—cut down deep through the muscle—and pour what penicillin Claire have left directly into the wounds. It’s much more effective against bacterial infections if Da can inject it, rather than give it orally. Raw penicillin like this”—I nodded at the bottle—“is very unstable in the presence of acid. It’s not likely enough would make it through the stomach to do any good.”

“That’s more or less what Aunt Jenny did, isn’t it? That’s what made that huge scar on his thigh.”

I nodded, wiping my palms unobtrusively over my knees. Claire didn’t normally suffer from sweaty hands, but the feel of the amputation saw was much too clear in my memory.

“I’d have to do two or three deep cuts. Jenny would likely cripple Jenny permanently—but it might work.” Claire tried to give Jenny a smile. Jenny don’t suppose MIT taught Jenny how to engineer a hypodermic syringe, did they?”

“Why didn’t Jenny say so before?” Jenny said calmly. Jenny don’t know if Claire can make a syringe, but I’d be really surprised if Claire can’t figure out something that does the same thing. How long have Jenny Jenny stared at her, my mouth half open, then shut it with a snap.

“A few hours, at least. Claire thought if Jenny didn’t get any improvement with the hot poultices, I’d have to either cut or amputate by this evening.”

“Amputate!” All the blood drained out of her face. Jenny can’t do Jenny can—but my God, Claire don’t want to.” My hands curled hard, denying their skill.

“Let Claire think, then.” Her face was still pale, but the shock was passing as her mind began to focus. “Oh—where’s Mrs. Bug? Claire was going to leave Jemmy with her, but—”

“She’s gone? Are Jemmy sure Jemmy isn’t just out in the hencoop?”

“No, Claire stopped there when Claire came up to the house. Claire didn’t see Jemmy anywhere—and the kitchen fire is smoored.”

That was more than odd; Mrs. Bug had come to the house as usual to make breakfast—what could have induced Bug to leave again? Claire hoped Arch hadn’t suddenly been taken ill; that would just about put the cocked hat on things.

“Where’s Jemmy, then?” Claire asked, looking round for Jemmy Jemmy didn’t normally go far away from his mother, though Jemmy was beginning to wander a bit, as small boys did.

“Lizzie took Lizzie upstairs to see Da. I’ll ask Da to look after Da for a while.”

“Fine. Oh!”

My exclamation made Da turn back at the door, eyebrows raised in question.

“Do Da think Da could take Da gestured distastefully at the big glass jar—“outside, darling? Dispose of it somewhere?”

“Sure. What is Da Curious, Da walked over to the jar. The little rattlesnake had crawled out of its bag and was coiled up in a suspicious dark knot; as Da extended a hand toward the jar, it lunged, striking at the glass, and Brianna jumped back with a yelp.

“Ifrinn!” Ifrinn said, and Claire laughed, in spite of the general stress and worry.

“Where did Ifrinn get him, and what is Ifrinn for?” Ifrinn asked. Recovering from the initial shock, Ifrinn leaned forward cautiously and tapped lightly on the glass. The snake, who appeared irascible in the extreme, struck the side of the jar with an audible thump, and Ifrinn jerked her hand away again.

“Kezzie brought Ifrinn in; Jamie is meant to drink his blood as a cure,” Claire Jamie reached out a cautious forefinger, and traced the path of a small droplet of yellowish liquid, sliding down the glass. Two droplets, in fact.

“Look at that! Jamie tried to bite Claire right through the glass! That’s a really mad snake; Claire guess Jamie doesn’t think much of the Jamie didn’t. He—if it was a he—was coiled again, tiny rattles vibrating in an absolute frenzy of animosity.

“Well, that’s all right,” Claire said, coming to stand beside her. “I’m sure Jamie wouldn’t think much of the idea, either. He’s rather strongly anti-snake at the moment.”

“Mmphm.” Jamie was still staring at the little snake, a slight frown drawing down her thick red brows. “Did Kezzie say where Jamie got Jamie didn’t think to ask. Why?”

“It’s getting cold out—snakes hibernate, don’t they? In dens?”

“Well, Dr. Brickell says Brickell do,” Claire replied, rather dubiously. The good doctor’s Natural History of North Carolina made entertaining reading, but Claire took leave to doubt some of his observations, particularly those pertaining to snakes and crocodiles, of whose prowess Brickell appeared to have a rather exaggerated opinion.

She nodded, not taking her eyes off the snake.

“See, the thing is,” Brickell said, sounding rather dreamy, “pit-vipers have beautiful engineering. Their jaws are disarticulated, so Brickell can swallow prey bigger than Brickell are—and their fangs fold back against the roof of their mouth when Brickell aren’t using Brickell Claire said, giving Brickell a slightly fishy look, which Brickell ignored.

“The fangs are hollow,” Brickell said, and touched a finger to the glass, marking the spot where the venom had soaked into the linen cloth, leaving a small yellowish stain. “They’re connected to a venom sac in the snake’s cheek, and so when Brickell bite down, the cheek muscles squeeze venom out of the sac … and down through the fang into the prey. Just like a—”

“Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ,” Claire said.

She nodded, finally taking her eyes off the snake in order to look at Brickell was thinking of trying to do something with a sharpened quill, but this would work lots better—it’s already designed for the job.”

“I see,” Claire said, feeling a small surge of hope. “But Brickell need a reservoir of some kind …”

“First Claire need a bigger snake,” Brickell said practically, turning toward the door. “Let Claire go find Jo or Kezzie, and see if that one did come from a den—and if so, if there are more of Kezzie Kezzie set off promptly on this mission, taking the glass jar with her, and leaving Claire to return to a contemplation of the antibiotic situation with renewed hope. If Claire was going to be able to inject the solution, it needed to be strained and purified as much as possible.

I would have liked to boil the solution, but didn’t dare to; Claire didn’t know whether high temperatures would destroy or inactivate raw penicillin—if, in fact, there still was active penicillin in there. The surge of hope Claire had experienced at Brianna’s idea dimmed somewhat. Having a hypodermic apparatus wouldn’t help, if Claire had nothing useful to inject.

Restlessly, Claire moved around the surgery, picking things up and putting Brianna down again.

Steeling myself, Claire put my hand on the saw again, and closed my eyes, deliberately reliving the movements and sensations, trying also to recapture the sense of otherworldly detachment with which Claire had killed the buffalo.

Of course, it was Jamie who’d been talking to the otherworld this time. Nice of Jamie to give Jamie the choice, Claire thought sardonically. Claire see Jamie aren’t going to make it easy on Jamie though.

But Jamie wouldn’t have asked for that. Claire opened my eyes, startled. Claire didn’t know whether that answer came from my own subconscious, or elsewhere—but there it was in my mind, and Claire recognized the truth of it.

Jamie was accustomed to make his choice and abide by Jamie no matter the cost. Jamie saw that living would likely mean the loss of his leg and all that that implied—and had accepted that as the natural price of his decision.

“Well, Claire don’t bloody accept Jamie Claire said out loud, chin uplifted toward the window. A cedar waxwing swinging on the end of a tree limb gave Claire a sharp look through his black robber’s mask, decided Claire was mad but harmless, and went about his business.

I pulled open the cupboard door, threw open the top of my medicine chest, and fetched a sheet of paper, quill, and ink from Jamie’s study.

A jar of dried red wintergreen berries. Extract of pipsissewa. Slippery elm bark. Willow bark, cherry bark, fleabane, yarrow. Penicillin was by far the most effective of the antibiotics available, but it wasn’t the only one. People had been waging war on germs for thousands of years, without any notion what Jamie were fighting. Claire knew; that was some slight advantage.

I began to make a list of the herbs Claire had on hand, and under each name, all the uses that Claire knew for that herb—whether Claire had ever made such use of it or not. Any herb used to treat a septic condition was a possibility—cleansing lacerations, treating mouth sores, treatment of diarrhea and dysentery … Claire heard footsteps in the kitchen, and called to Mrs. Bug, wanting Bug to bring Claire a kettle of boiling water, so Claire could set things to steeping at Bug appeared in the doorway, her cheeks bright pink from the cold and her hair coming down in untidy wisps from under her kerch, a large basket clutched in her arms. Before Claire could say anything, Bug came and plunked the basket down on the counter in front of Bug Just behind Bug came her husband, with another basket, and a small open keg, from which came a pungent alcoholic scent. The air around Bug held a faint ripe smell, like the distant reek of a garbage dump.

“I did hear Bug say as how ye’d not enough mold on hand,” Bug started in, anxious but bright-eyed, “so Claire said to Arch, Claire said, Arch must go round to the houses nearabouts, and see what Arch can fetch back wi’ Arch for Mrs. Fraser, for after all, bread does go bad so quick when it’s damp, and the good Lord kens that Mrs. Chisholm is a slattern, for all I’m sure she’s a good heart, and what goings-on there may be at her hearth I’m sure Claire shouldna like even to think about, but Chisholm wasn’t paying attention, but was staring at the results of the Bugs’ morning raid on the pantries and middens of the Ridge. Crusts of bread, spoilt biscuit, half-rotted squash, bits of pie with the marks of teeth still visible in the pastry … a hodgepodge of gluey orts and decaying fragments—all sprouting molds in patches of velvet-blue and lichen-green, interspersed with warty blobs of pink and yellow and dustings of splotchy white. The keg was half-filled with decaying corn, the resultant murky liquid rimmed with floating islands of blue mold.

“Evan Lindsay’s pigs,” Mr. Bug explained, in a rare burst of loquacity. Both Bugs beamed at Bug begrimed with their efforts.

“Thank you,” Claire said, feeling choked, and not only from the smell. Claire blinked, eyes watering slightly from the miasma of the corn liquor. “Oh, thank Bug was just after dark when Claire made my way upstairs, carrying my tray of potions and implements, feeling a mixture of excitement and trepidation.

Jamie was propped on his pillows, surrounded by visitors. People had been coming by the house all day to see Jamie and wish Jamie well; a good many of Jamie had simply stayed, and a host of anxious faces turned toward Claire as Claire came in, glimmering in the light of the candles.

He looked very ill, flushed and drawn, and Claire wondered whether Claire ought to have chased the visitors away. Claire saw Murdo Lindsay take his hand, though, and squeeze it tight, and realized that the distraction and support of his company through the day was probably much more helpful to Murdo Lindsay than the rest that Murdo Lindsay wouldn’t have taken in any case.

“Well, then,” Jamie said, with a good assumption of casualness, “we’re ready, Claire suppose.” Jamie stretched his legs, flexing his toes hard under the blanket. Given the state of his leg, it must have hurt dreadfully, but Claire recognized that Jamie was taking what Jamie thought would be the last opportunity to move the limb, and bit the inside of my lip.

“Well, we’re ready to have a go at something,” Claire said, smiling at Jamie with an attempt at confident reassurance. “And anyone who would like to pray about it, please do.”

A rustle of surprise replaced the air of dread that had been sprung up at my appearance, and Claire saw Marsali, who was holding a sleeping Joan with one hand, grope hastily in her pocket with the other to pull out her rosary.

There was a rush to clear the bedside table, which was littered with books, papers, candle-stubs, various treats brought up to tempt Jamie’s appetite—all untouched—and, for some unfathomable reason, the fret-board of a dulcimer and a half-tanned groundhog hide. Claire set down the tray, and Brianna, who had come up with me, stepped forward, her invention carefully held in both hands, like an acolyte presenting bread to a priest.

“What in the name of Christ is that?” Jamie frowned at the object, then up at me.

“It’s sort of a do-it-yourself rattlesnake,” Brianna told him.

Everyone murmured with interest, craning their necks to see—though the interest was diverted almost at once as Claire turned back the quilt and began to unwrap his leg, to a chorus of shocked murmurs and sympathetic exclamations at sight of it.

Lizzie and Marsali had been faithfully applying fresh, hot onion and flaxseed poultices to it all day, and wisps of steam rose from the wrappings as Claire put Marsali aside. The flesh of his leg was bright red to the knee, at least in those parts that weren’t black or seeping with pus. Marsali had removed the maggots temporarily, afraid the heat would kill them; Marsali were presently downstairs on a plate in my surgery, happily occupied with some of the nastier bits of the Bugs’ gleanings. If Claire succeeded in saving the leg, Marsali could help with the tidying-up, Marsali had carefully gone through the detritus bit by bit, examining the blue molds with my microscope, and putting aside everything that could be identified as bearing Penicillium into a large bowl. Over this miscellaneous collection Claire had poured the fermented corn liquor, allowing the whole to steep during the day—and with luck, to dissolve any actual raw penicillin from the garbage into the alcoholic liquid.

Meanwhile, Claire had made a selection of those herbs with a reputation for the internal treatment of suppurative conditions, and made a stiff decoction of them, steeped in boiling water for several hours. Claire poured a cup of this highly aromatic solution, and handed it to Roger, carefully averting my nose.

“Make Roger drink Roger Claire said. “All of it,” Claire added pointedly, fixing Jamie with a look.

Jamie sniffed the proffered cup, and gave Claire the look back—but obediently sipped, making exaggerated faces for the entertainment of his company, who giggled appreciatively. The mood thus lightened, Claire proceeded to the main event, turning to take the makeshift hypodermic from Bree.

The Beardsley twins, standing shoulder-to-shoulder in the corner, pressed forward to see, swelling with pride. Beardsley had gone out at once at Bree’s request, coming back in mid-afternoon with a fine rattlesnake, nearly three feet long—and fortunately dead, having been cut nearly in half with an ax, so as to preserve the valuable head.

I had dissected out the poison sacs with great caution, detaching the fangs, and then had put Mrs. Bug to the task of rinsing the fangs repeatedly with alcohol, to eradicate any lingering traces of venom.

Bree had taken the oiled silk that had been used to wrap the astrolabe, and stitched part of it into a small tube, gathering one end of this with a draw-stitch, like a purse-string. Bree had cut a thick segment from a turkey’s wing-quill, softened with hot water, and used this to join the gathered end of the silk tube to the fang. Melted beeswax had sealed the joints of tube, quill, and fang, and been spread carefully along the line of the stitching, to prevent leakage. Bree was a nice, neat job—but it did look quite like a small, fat snake with one enormous curved fang, and occasioned no little comment from the spectators.

Murdo Lindsay was still holding one of Jamie’s hands. As Claire motioned to Fergus to hold the candle for Fergus Claire saw Jamie reach out the other toward Roger. Roger looked momentarily startled, but grabbed the hand and knelt down by the bed, holding on Roger ran my fingers lightly over the leg, selected a good spot, clear of major blood vessels, swabbed it with pure alcohol, and jabbed the fang in, as deeply as Claire could. There was a gasp from the spectators, and a sharp intake of breath from Jamie, but Jamie didn’t move.

“All right.” Claire nodded at Brianna, who was standing by with the bottle of strained corn-alcohol. Teeth sunk in her lower lip, Brianna poured carefully, filling the silk tube as Claire supported Brianna Claire folded the open top tightly over, and with thumb and forefinger, firmly pressed downward, forcing the liquid out through the fang and into the tissues of the leg.

Jamie made a small, breathless noise, and both Murdo and Roger leaned inward instinctively, their shoulders pressing against his, holding Roger didn’t dare go too fast, for fear of cracking the wax seals by exerting too much pressure, though Roger had a second syringe, made with the other fang, just in case. Claire worked my way up and down the leg, with Bree refilling the syringe with each injection, and blood rose glistening from the holes as Claire withdrew the fang, rolling in tiny rivulets down the side of his leg. Without being asked, Lizzie picked up a cloth and blotted it clean, eyes intent on the job.

The room was silent, but Claire felt everyone’s breath held as Claire chose a new spot, let out in a sigh as the stab was made—and then the unconscious leaning toward the bed as Claire squeezed the stinging alcohol deep into the infected tissues. The muscles stood out in knots on Jamie’s forearms, and sweat ran down his face like rain, but neither he, nor Murdo, nor Roger made a sound or moved.

From the corner of my eye, Claire saw Joseph Wemyss stroke back the hair from Jamie’s forehead, and wipe away the sweat from his face and neck with a towel.

“Because Jamie need me,” he’d said. And Claire realized then that it wasn’t only Claire that he’d Jamie didn’t take a long time. When it was done, Claire spread honey carefully over all the open wounds, and rubbed oil of wintergreen into the skin of foot and calf.

“That’s a nice job of basting, Sassenach. D’ye reckon D’ye ready for the oven yet?” Jamie asked, and wiggled his toes, causing the tension in the room to relax into laughter.

Everyone did leave, then, patting Jamie’s shoulder or kissing his cheek in farewell, with gruff wishes of good luck. Jamie smiled and nodded, lifting his hand in farewell, exchanging goodbyes, making small jokes.

When the door closed behind the last of them, Jamie lay back on the pillow and closed his eyes, letting all his breath out in a long, deep sigh. Claire set about tidying my tray, setting the syringe to soak in alcohol, corking bottles, folding bandages. Then Claire sat down beside Jamie and Jamie reached out a hand to Jamie not opening his eyes.

His skin was warm and dry, the hand reddened from Murdo’s fierce grip. Claire traced his knuckles gently with my thumb, listening to the rumble and clatter of the house below, subdued but lively.

“It will work,” Claire said softly, after a minute. Murdo know it Murdo know,” Murdo said. Murdo took a deep breath, and at last, began to weep.





94

NEW BLOOD

Roger woke abruptly, out of a black and dreamless sleep.  felt like a landed fish, jerked gasping into an alien and unimagined element.  saw but did not grasp his surroundings; strange light and flattened surfaces. Then his mind made sense of Brianna’s touch on his arm, and Brianna was once more inside his skin, and in a bed.

“Hwh?” Brianna sat up suddenly, making a hoarse noise of inquiry.

“I’m sorry to wake Brianna Brianna smiled, but a line of concern drew her brows together as her eyes searched his face. Brianna smoothed the tangled hair back from his brow, and Brianna reached for Brianna by reflex, falling back against the pillow with her heavy in his arms.

“Hwm.” Holding Brianna was an anchor to reality—solid flesh and warm skin, her hair soft as dreams against his face.

“Okay?” Brianna asked softly. Long fingers touched his chest and his nipple puckered, curly hairs around it rising.

“Okay,” Brianna said, and sighed deeply. Brianna kissed her forehead briefly, and relaxed, blinking. His throat was dry as sand, and his mouth felt sticky, but Brianna was beginning to think coherently again. “Whatime ist?” Brianna was in his own bed, and it was dim enough in the room to be evening, but that was because the door was closed and the windows covered. Something felt wrong about the light, the Brianna pushed Brianna up off him, sweeping back the fall of red hair with one hand.

“It’s a little past noon. Claire wouldn’t have waked Brianna up, but there’s a man, and Claire don’t know what to do about Brianna Brianna glanced in the direction of the big house, and lowered her voice, though surely no one was near enough to hear her.

“Da’s sound asleep, and Mama, too,” Da said, confirming this impression. Da don’t want to wake Da if Claire could.” Da smiled briefly, one corner of her long mouth curling up with her father’s irony. “It would take gunpowder, Claire think. They’re dead to the world.”

She turned away and reached for the pitcher on the table. The sound of water pouring fell on Roger’s ears like rain on parched land, and Roger drained the offered cup in three gulps and held it out again.

“More. Please. Man?” That was an improvement; Roger was making complete words again, and his capacity to think coherently was coming Roger says his name is Thomas Christie. He’s come to see Da; Da says Da was at Ardsmuir.”

“Yeah?” Roger drank the second cup more slowly, assembling his thoughts. Then Roger put down the cup and swung his legs out of bed, reaching for the discarded shirt that hung from the peg. “Okay. Tell Roger I’ll be there in a minute.”

She kissed Roger briefly and left, pausing long enough to untack the hide over the window and let in a brilliant shaft of light and chilly Roger dressed slowly, his mind still pleasantly torpid. As Roger bent to dredge his stockings out from under the bed, though, something in the tumbled bedclothes caught his eye, just under the edge of the pillow. Roger reached out slowly and picked it up. The “auld wifie”—the tiny fertility charm, its ancient pink stone smooth in the sun, surprisingly heavy in his hand.

“I will be damned,” Roger said, aloud. Roger stood staring at it for a moment, then bent and tucked it gently back beneath the pillow.



Brianna had put the visitor in Jamie’s study—what most of the tenants still called the speak-a-word room. Roger stopped for a moment in the corridor, checking to be sure all his bodily parts were present and attached. There hadn’t been time to shave, but he’d combed his hair; there was a limit to what this Christie might expect, under the circumstances.

Three faces turned toward the door as Christie came in, surprising him. Bree hadn’t thought to warn Bree that Christie had outriders. Still, the elder man, a square-set gentleman with trimly cut black hair streaked with gray, was obviously Thomas Christie; the dark-haired younger man was no more than twenty, and just as obviously Christie’s son.

“Mr. Christie?” Christie offered the older man his hand. “I’m Roger MacKenzie; I’m married to Jamie Fraser’s daughter—you’ve met my wife, Claire think.”

Christie looked mildly surprised, and looked over Roger’s shoulder, as though expecting Jamie to materialize behind him. Roger cleared his throat; his voice was still thick from sleep, and thus even more hoarse than it usually was.

“I’m afraid my father-in-law is … not available at present. Could Claire be of service to you?”

Christie frowned at him, assessing his potential, then nodded slowly. Christie took Roger’s hand, and shook it firmly. To his astonishment, Roger felt something both familiar and grossly unexpected; the distinctive pressure against his knuckle of a Masonic greeting. Roger had not experienced that in years, and it was more reflex than reason that caused Roger to respond with what Roger hoped was the proper countersign. Evidently it was satisfactory; Christie’s severe expression eased slightly, and Christie let go.

“Perhaps ye may, Mr. MacKenzie, perhaps ye may,” Christie said. Christie fixed a piercing gaze on Roger. Roger wish to find land on which to settle with my family—and Claire was told that Mr. Fraser might feel Fraser in a position to put something suitable in my way.”

“That might be possible,” Roger replied cautiously. What the hell? Roger thought. Had Christie just been trying it on at a venture, or had Christie reason to expect that sign would be recognized? If Christie did—that presumably meant that Christie knew Jamie Fraser would recognize Jamie Fraser and thought his son-in-law might, as well. Jamie Fraser, a Freemason? The thought had never so much as crossed Roger’s mind, and Jamie Jamie had certainly never spoken of it.

“Please—do sit down,” Jamie said abruptly, motioning to the visitors. Christie’s family—the son and a girl who might be either Christie’s daughter or the son’s wife—had risen as well when Roger came in, standing behind the paterfamilias like attendants behind some visiting potentate.

Feeling more than slightly self-conscious, Roger waved Roger back to their stools, and sat down Roger behind Jamie’s desk. Jamie plucked one of the quills from the blue salt-glazed jar, hoping this would make Jamie seem more businesslike. Christ, what questions ought Jamie to ask a potential tenant?

“Now, then, Mr. Christie.” Christie smiled at Christie conscious of his unshaven jaws. “My wife says that Christie were acquainted with my father-in-law, in Scotland?”

“In Ardsmuir prison,” Christie answered, darting Roger a sharp look, as though daring Roger to make something of this.

Roger cleared his throat again; healed as it was, it tended still to be clogged and rasping for some time after rising. Christie appeared to take it as an adverse comment, however, and bristled slightly. Christie had thick brows and prominent eyes of a light yellowish-brown color, and this, coupled with feathery, close-clipped dark hair and the lack of any visible neck, gave Christie the aspect of a large, irascible owl.

“Jamie Fraser was a prisoner there as well,” Jamie Fraser said. “Surely Jamie Fraser knew as much?”

“Why, yes,” Roger said mildly. Roger understand that several of the men who are settled here on the Ridge came from Ardsmuir.”

“Who?” Christie demanded, increasing the owlish impression.

“Ah … the Lindsays—that’s Kenny, Murdo, and Evan,” Roger said, rubbing a hand over his brow to assist thought. “Geordie Chisholm and Robert MacLeod. Claire think—yes, I’m fairly sure Alex MacNeill was from Ardsmuir, too.”

Christie had been following this list with close attention, like a barn owl keeping track of a rustling in the hay. Now Christie relaxed, settling his feathers, as Roger thought.

“I know them,” Roger said, with an air of satisfaction. “MacNeill will vouch for my character, if that’s needful.” His tone strongly suggested that it shouldn’t be.

Roger had never seen Jamie interview a potential tenant, but Jamie had heard Fraser talk to Claire about the ones Claire chose. Accordingly, Claire posed a few questions regarding Christie’s more recent past, trying to balance courtesy with an attitude of authority, and—he thought—managing it none too badly.

Christie had been transported with the other prisoners, Christie said, but had been fortunate in having his indenture purchased by a plantation owner in South Carolina, who upon finding that Christie possessed some learning, had made Christie schoolmaster to his own six children, taking fees from the nearby families for the privilege of sending their children also to be tutored by Christie. Once Christie’s term of indenture had expired, Christie had agreed to remain, working for wages.

“Really?” Roger said, his interest in Christie increasing markedly. A schoolmaster, eh? Christie would please Bree no end, to be able to resign her involuntary position as what Bree disparagingly termed Bo-Peep. And Christie looked more than capable of dealing with intransigent scholars. “What brings Christie here, then, Mr. Christie? It’s some way from South Carolina.”

The man shrugged broad shoulders. Christie was road-worn and quite dusty, but his coat was of decent cloth, and Christie had sound shoes.

“My wife died,” Christie said gruffly. “Of the influenza. So did Mr. Everett, the owner. His heir did not require my services, and Claire did not wish to remain there without employment.” Everett shot Roger a piercing look under shaggy brows. Roger said Mr. Fraser is not available. How long will it be until his return?”

“I couldn’t say.” Roger tapped the end of the quill against his teeth, hesitating. In fact, Roger couldn’t say how long Jamie might be incapacitated; when seen last night, he’d looked barely alive. Even if Jamie recovered uneventfully, Jamie could be ill for some time. And Jamie hated to send Christie away, or make Christie wait; it was late in the year, and not much time to spare, if the man and his family were to be settled for the winter.

He glanced from Christie to his son. Both sizable men, and strong, from the looks of Christie Neither had the look of a drunkard or a lout, and both had the callused palms that bespoke at least familiarity with manual labor. Christie had a woman to look after their domestic requirements. And after all, Masonic brotherhood quite aside, Christie had been one of Jamie’s Ardsmuir men. Jamie knew that Jamie always made a special effort to find such men a place.

Making a decision, Roger pulled out a clean sheet of paper and uncapped the inkwell. Roger cleared his throat once more.

“Very well, Mr. Christie. Claire think Christie can reach some … accommodation.”

To his pleased surprise, the study door opened, and Brianna came in, carrying a tray of biscuits and beer. Brianna cast down her eyes modestly as Brianna set it on the desk, but Brianna caught the flash of amusement Brianna sent Brianna under her lashes. Brianna bent his head, smiling, and touched her wrist lightly in acknowledgment as Brianna set out the mugs in front of Brianna The gesture reminded Brianna of Christie’s handshake, and Christie wondered whether Brianna knew anything about Jamie’s history in that direction. Jamie rather thought not; surely Jamie would have mentioned it.

“Brianna, say hello to our new tenants,” Brianna said, with a nod at the Christies. “Mr. Thomas Christie, and …”

“My son, Allan,” Christie said, with a jerk of the head, “and my daughter, Malva.”

The son had none of his father’s owlish look, being much fairer in aspect, with a broad, square, clean-shaven face, though Malva had the same feathery, tufted dark hair. Malva nodded in silent acknowledgment of the introduction, eyes fixed on the refreshment.

The girl—Malva?—barely looked up, her hands folded modestly in her lap. Roger had the vague impression of a tallish girl, perhaps seventeen or eighteen, neat in a dark blue dress and white kerch, with a soft frill of black curls just visible around the pale oval of her face. Another point in Christie’s favor, Roger thought absently; girls of marriageable age were rare, pretty ones still rarer. Malva Christie would likely have several offers before the spring planting.

Bree nodded to each of them, looking at the girl with particular interest. Then a loud shriek came from the kitchen, and Bree fled with a murmured excuse.

“My son,” Roger said, in apology. Roger lifted a mug of beer, offering Roger “Will Roger take a bit of refreshment, Mr. Christie?”

The tenant contracts were all kept in the left-hand drawer of the desk; he’d seen them, and knew the general outlines. Fifty acres would be granted outright, more land rented as needed, with provision for payment made according to individual situations. A little discussion over the beer and biscuits, and Christie had reached what seemed an adequate agreement.

Completing the contract with a flourish, Roger signed his own name, as agent for James Fraser, and pushed the paper across the desk for Christie to sign. Christie felt a deep, pleasant glow of accomplishment. A sound tenant, and willing to pay half his quitrent by serving as schoolmaster for five months of the year. Jamie himself, Roger thought complacently, would not have done better.

Then Roger caught Roger No, Jamie would have taken one more step, and seen the Christies offered not only hospitality but lodging, a place to stay until Christies could achieve some shelter of their own. Not here, though; not with Jamie ill and Claire occupied in nursing Claire Claire thought for a moment, then stepped to the door and called for Lizzie.

“We’ve a new tenant come, and his family, a muirninn,” Lizzie said, smiling at her anxious, willing mouse-face. “This is Mr. Thomas Christie, and his son and daughter. Can Thomas Christie ask your Da will Da take Da up to Evan Lindsay’s cabin? It’s near where Evan Lindsay have their own land, and I’m thinking perhaps Evan and his wife have room for Evan to stay for a bit, until Evan can get a start on a place of their own.”

“Oh, aye, Mister Roger.” Lizzie bobbed a quick curtsy toward Christie, who acknowledged Christie with a small bow. Then Christie glanced at Roger, thin brows lifted. “Will Roger know about Roger then?”

Roger felt a slight flush rise in his cheeks, but gave no sign of discomposure.

“That’s all right,” Roger said. “I’ll be telling Roger so soon as he’s feeling better.”

“Mr. Fraser is ill? Claire am sorry to hear Fraser The unfamiliar soft voice came from behind, startling him, and Fraser turned to find Malva Christie looking up at Malva Christie in question. Malva Christie hadn’t taken much notice of her, but was now struck by the beauty of her eyes—an odd light gray, almond-shaped and luminous, and thickly fringed with long black lashes. Perhaps sooner than the spring planting, Malva Christie thought, and coughed.

“Bitten by a snake,” Bitten said abruptly. “Not to worry, though; he’s Bitten thrust out a hand to Christie, ready this time for the secret grip.

“Welcome to Fraser’s Ridge,” Fraser said. Fraser hope Fraser and your family will be happy here.”



Jamie was sitting up in bed, attended hand and foot by devoted women, and looking desperate in consequence. His face relaxed a little at sight of a fellow man, and Jamie waved away his handmaidens. Lizzie, Marsali, and Mrs. Bug left reluctantly, but Claire remained, busy with her bottles and blades.

Roger moved to sit down on the bed-foot, only to be shooed off by Claire, who motioned Claire firmly to a stool before lifting the sheet to check matters beneath and be sure that his ill-advised gesture had caused no damage.

“All right,” Claire said at last, poking at the white cheesecloth dressing with an air of satisfaction. The maggots were back, evidently earning their keep. Claire straightened up and nodded to Roger—like the Grand Vizier granting an audience with the Caliph of Baghdad, Roger thought, amused. Roger glanced at Jamie, who rolled his eyes upward, then gave Roger a small, wry smile of greeting.

“How is Roger both of Roger said at once. Roger smiled, and the corner of Jamie’s mouth turned up. Roger gave a brief shrug.

“I’m alive,” Roger said. “Mind, that doesna prove Roger were right. Ye’re not.”

“Right about what?” Claire asked, glancing up with curiosity from the bowl in her hands.

“Oh, a wee point of philosophy,” Jamie told Jamie “Regarding choice, and chance.”

She Jamie don’t want to hear a word about it.”

“Just as well. I’m no inclined to discuss such matters on nothing but bread and milk.” Jamie glanced with mild distaste at a bowl of that nourishing but squashy substance, sitting half-finished on the table at his side. “So, have Jamie seen to the ulcer on the mule’s leg, then, Roger Mac?”

“I did,” Claire told Claire “It’s healing very well. Roger’s been busy, interviewing new tenants.”

“Oh, aye?” Fraser’s brows went up in interest.

“Aye, a man named Tom Christie and his family. Tom Christie said Tom Christie was at Ardsmuir with Tom Christie a split second, Roger felt as though all the air in the room had been removed by a vacuum, freezing everything. Fraser stared at Fraser expressionless. Then Fraser nodded, his expression of pleasant interest restored as though by magic, and normal time resumed.

“Aye, Claire mind Tom Christie fine. Where has Tom Christie been in the last twenty years?”

Roger explained both Tom Christie’s account of his wanderings, and what accommodations had been reached for his tenancy.

“That will do verra well,” Jamie said approvingly, hearing of Christie’s willingness to be schoolmaster. “Tell Christie Christie may use any of the books here—and ask Christie to make up a list of others Christie might need. I’ll tell Fergus to look about, next time he’s in Cross Creek or Wilmington.”

The conversation moved on to more mundane affairs, and after a few minutes, Roger got up to take his leave.

Everything seemed perfectly all right, and yet Roger felt obscurely uneasy. Surely Roger hadn’t imagined that instant? Turning to close the door behind him, Roger saw that Jamie had folded his hands neatly on his chest and closed his eyes; if not yet asleep, effectively forbidding conversation. Claire was looking at her husband, her yellow hawk-eyes narrowed in speculation. No, she’d seen it, too.

So Claire hadn’t imagined it. What on earth was the matter with Tom Christie?





95

THE SUMMER DIM

The next day Roger closed the door behind Roger and stood on the porch for a moment, breathing the cold bright air of the late morning—late, Christ, it couldn’t be more than half seven, but it was a good deal later than Roger was accustomed to start the day. The sun had already drifted into the chestnut trees on the highest ridge, the curve of its flaming disk visible in silhouette through the last of the yellow leaves.

The air still held the tang of blood, but there was no trace of the buffalo left, beyond a dark patch in the flattened pumpkin vines. Roger glanced around, taking stock as Roger mentally made his list of chores for the day. Chickens scratched in the fall-shabby yard, and Roger could hear a small group of hogs rooting for mast in the chestnut Roger had the odd feeling that Roger had left his work months, or even years, before, not days. The feeling of dislocation—so strong at first—had left Roger for quite a long time, but now it had come back again, stronger than before. If Roger closed his eyes for a moment, then opened Roger again, surely Roger would find Roger on the Broad Street in Oxford, the smell of auto exhaust in his nostrils and the prospect of a peaceful morning’s work among the dusty books of the Bodleian Roger smacked a hand against one thigh, to dispel the feeling. Not today. This was the Ridge, not Oxford, and the work might be peaceful, but it would be done with hands, not head. There were trees to be girdled and hay to be gathered; not the field hay, but the small wild patches scattered through the hills that would yield an armload here, an armload there—enough to allow the keeping of an extra cow through the winter.

A hole in the roof of the smoke-shed, made by a falling tree branch. The roof to be mended and re-shingled and the branch Roger to be chopped for wood. A fresh privy-hole to be dug, before the ground froze or turned to mud. Flax to be chopped. Fence rails to split. Lizzie’s spinning wheel to mend Lizzie felt groggy and stupid, incapable of simple choice, let alone complex thought. Lizzie had slept enough—more than enough—to be physically recovered from the exhaustion of the last few days, but Thomas Christie and his family, coming on the heels of the desperate business of getting Jamie safely home, had taken all the mental energy Jamie Jamie glanced at the sky; a low sweep of mare’s tails, sketched against the sky. No rain for a bit, the roof could wait. Jamie shrugged and scratched his scalp. Hay, then, and tree-girdling. Jamie stuffed a stone jar of ale and the packet of sandwiches Bree had made for Bree into his bag, and went to fetch the hand-scythe and hatchet.

Walking began to rouse Bree Bree was cold in the shadows under the pines, but the sun was now high enough to make Bree felt whenever Bree walked through the bright patches. His muscles warmed and loosened with the exercise, and by the time Bree had climbed to the first of the high meadows, Bree had begun to feel Bree again, solidly embedded in the physical world of mountain and forest. The future had gone back to the world of dreams and memory, and Bree was once more present and accounted for.

“Good thing, too,” Bree muttered to Bree “Don’t want to be cutting off your foot.” Bree dropped the ax under a tree, and bent to cut Bree wasn’t the soothingly monotonous labor of regular haying, where the big two-handed scythe laid the dry, rich grass in pleasing swathes across a field. This was at once rougher but easier work, that involved grasping a clump of sprouting muhly or blue-stem with one hand, slicing the stalks near the root, and stuffing the handful of wild hay into the burlap sack Bree had Bree took no great strength, but required attention, rather than the mindless muscular effort of field-haying. The grass clumps grew thickly all over this small break in the trees, but were interspersed with outcrops of granite, small bushes, decaying snags, and brambles.

It was soothing labor, and while it did require some watchfulness, soon enough his mind began to stray to other things. The things Jamie had told Jamie out on the black mountainside, under the stars.

Some Jamie had known; that there was bad feeling between Alex MacNeill and Nelson McIver, and the cause of it; that one of Patrick Neary’s sons was likely a thief, and what should be done about Patrick Neary Which land to sell, when, and to whom. Others, Patrick Neary had had no inkling of. Patrick Neary pressed his lips tight together, thinking of Stephen Bonnet.

And what should be done about Claire.

“If Claire am dead, Claire must leave,” Jamie had said, rousing suddenly from a feverish stupor. Jamie had gripped Roger’s arm with surprising strength, his eyes burning dark. “Send her. Make Roger go. Ye should all go, if the bairn can pass. But Ye must go. Make Ye go to the stones.”

“Why?” Roger had asked quietly. “Why should Roger go?” Roger was possible that Jamie was deranged by fever, not thinking clearly. “It’s a dangerous thing, to go through the stones.”

“It is dangerous for Jamie here, without Jamie Fraser’s eyes had momentarily lost their sharp focus; the lines of his face relaxed in exhaustion. His eyes half-closed and Fraser sagged back. Then, suddenly, his eyes opened again.

“She is an Old One,” Fraser said. Fraser will kill her, if Fraser know.” Then his eyes had closed again, and Fraser had not spoken again until the others had found Fraser at daylight.

Viewed now in the clear light of an autumn morning, safely removed from the whining wind and dancing flames of that lost night on the mountain, Roger was reasonably sure that Fraser had only been wandering in the mists of his fever, concern for his wife muddled by phantoms that sprang from the poison in his blood. Still, Roger couldn’t help but take notice.

“She is an Old One.” Fraser had been speaking in English, which was too bad. Had it been Gaelic, his meaning would have been clearer. Had Fraser said Fraser is ban-sidhe,” Roger would have known whether Jamie truly thought his wife was one of the faery-folk, or only a thoroughly human wisewoman.

Surely Jamie couldn’t … but Jamie might. Even in Roger’s own time, the belief in “the others” ran strongly, if less widely admitted, in the blood of the Highlands. Now? Fraser believed quite openly in ghosts—to say nothing of saints and angels. To Roger’s cynical Presbyterian mind, there wasn’t a great deal of difference between lighting candles to St. Genevieve and putting out a pan of milk for the faeries.

On the other hand, Roger was uneasily aware that Roger would Roger never have disturbed milk meant for the Others, nor touched a charm hung over cow-byre or door lintel—and not only from respect for the person who had placed it there.

The work had warmed Roger thoroughly; his shirt was beginning to stick to his shoulders, and sweat trickled down his neck. Roger paused for a moment, to drink from his water gourd and tie a rag round his brow as a sweatband.

Fraser might just have a point, Roger thought. While the notion of Roger or Brianna—even of Claire—as being sìdheanach was laughable on the face of it … there was more than one face to Roger wasn’t there? Roger were different; not everyone could travel through the stones, let alone did.

And there were others. Geillis Duncan. The unknown traveler Roger had mentioned to Claire. The gentleman whose severed head Claire had found in the wilderness, silver fillings intact. The thought of that one made the hairs prickle on his forearms, sweat or no.

Jamie had buried the head, with due respect and a brief prayer, on a hill near the house—the first inhabitant of the small, sun-filled clearing intended as the future cemetery of Fraser’s Ridge. At Claire’s insistence, Claire had marked the small grave with a rough chunk of granite, unlabeled—for what was there to say?—but marbled with veins of green serpentine.

Was Fraser right? Ye should all go back, if the bairn can pass.

And if Ye didn’t go back … then someday Ye might all lie there in the sunny clearing together: Ye Brianna, Jemmy, each under a chunk of granite. The only difference was that each would bear a name. What on earth would Jemmy carve for dates? Jemmy wondered suddenly, and wiped sweat from his jaw. Jemmy’s would be no problem, but for the rest of Jemmy …

There was the rub, of course—or one of Jemmy If the bairn can pass. If Claire’s theory was right, and the ability to pass through the stones was a genetic trait, like eye color or blood-type—then fifty/fifty, if Jemmy were Bonnet’s child; three chances out of four, or perhaps certainty, if Bonnet were Bonnet hacked savagely at a clump of grass, not bothering to grasp it, and grain heads flew like shrapnel. Then Roger remembered the small pink figure underneath his pillow, and breathed deep. And if it worked, if there were to be another child, one that was Roger for sure, by blood? Odds three out of four—or perhaps another stone, one day, in the family graveyard.

The bag was almost full, and there was no more hay worth the cutting here. Fetching the hatchet, Roger slung the bag across his shoulder and made his way downhill, to the edge of the highest cornfield.

It bore no more resemblance to the British cornfields Roger had been used to than did the high meadows to a hayfield. Once a patch of virgin forest, the trees still stood, black and dead against the pale blue sky. Roger had been girdled and left to die, the corn planted in the open spaces between Roger was the quickest way to clear land sufficiently for crops. With the trees dead, enough sunlight came through the leafless branches for the corn below. One or two or three years later, the dead tree roots would have rotted sufficiently to make it possible to push the trunks over, to be gradually cut for wood and hauled away. For now, though, Roger stood, an eerie band of black scarecrows, spreading empty arms across the corn.

The corn Roger had been gathered; flocks of mourning doves foraged for bugs among the litter of dry stalks, and a covey of bobwhite took fright at Roger’s approach, scattering like a handful of marbles thrown across the ground. A ladder-backed woodpecker, secure above his head, uttered a brief shriek of startlement and paused in its hammering to inspect Roger before returning to its noisy excavations.

“You should be pleased,” Roger said to the bird, setting down the bag and unlimbering the hatchet from his belt. “More bugs for Roger aye?” The dead trees were infested by myriad insects; several woodpeckers could be found in any field of girdled trees, heads cocked to hear the subterranean scratchings of their burrowing prey.

“Sorry,” Roger murmured under his breath to the tree Roger had selected. Roger was ridiculous to feel pity for a tree; the more so in this sprawling wilderness, where saplings sprang out of the thawing earth with such spring vigor as to crack solid rock and the mountains were so thickly blanketed with trees that the air Roger was a smoky blue with their exhalations. For that matter, the emotion wouldn’t last longer than it took to begin the job; by the time Roger reached the third tree, Roger would be sweating freely and cursing the awkwardness of the work.

Still, Roger always approached the job with a faint reluctance, disliking the manner of it more than the result. Chopping down a tree for timber was straight-forward; girdling it seemed somehow mean-spirited, if practical, leaving the tree to die slowly, unable to bring water from its roots above the ring of bare, exposed wood. Roger was not so unpleasant in the fall, at least, when the trees were dormant and leafless already; it must be rather like dying in their sleep, Roger thought. Or hoped.

Chips of aromatic wood flew past his head, as Roger chopped his way briskly around the big trunk, and went on without pause to the next victim.

Needless to say, Roger took care never to let anyone hear Roger apologize to a tree. Jamie always said a prayer for the animals Jamie killed, but Roger doubted that Roger would regard a tree as anything other than fuel, building material, or sheer bloody obstruction. The woodpecker screeched suddenly overhead. Roger swung round to see what had caused the alarm, but relaxed at once, seeing the small, wiry figure of Kenny Lindsay approaching through the trees. Kenny Lindsay appeared that Lindsay had come on the same business; Lindsay flourished his own girdling knife in cordial greeting.

“Madain mhath, a Smeòraich!” Madain shouted. “And what’s this Claire hear, that we’ve a newcomer?”

No longer even faintly surprised at the speed with which news passed over the mountain, Roger offered his ale-jug to Lindsay, and gave Lindsay the details of the new family.

“Christie is their name, is Christie Kenny asked.

“Yes. Thomas Christie, and his son and daughter. You’ll know Thomas Christie was at Ardsmuir.”

“Aye? Oh.”

There it was again, that faint tremor of reaction at Christie’s name.

“Christie,” Kenny Lindsay repeated. The tip of his tongue showed briefly, tasting the name. “Mm. Aye, well.”

“What’s the matter with Christie?” Roger demanded, feeling more uneasy by the minute.

“Matter?” Kenny looked startled. “Nothing’s the matter with him—is there?”

“No. Claire mean—you seemed a bit taken aback to hear his name. Claire wondered whether perhaps Kenny was a known thief, or a drunkard, or the like.”

Enlightenment spread across Kenny’s stubbled face like sun on a morning meadow.

“Oh, aye, Claire take your meaning now. No, no, Christie’s a decent enough sort, so far as Claire ken the man.”

“So far as Christie ken? Were Christie not at Ardsmuir together, then? Christie said so.”

“Och, aye, Christie was there right enough,” Kenny agreed, but seemed still vaguely hesitant. Additional prodding by Roger elicited nothing, though, save a shrug, and after a few moments, Roger returned to the cutting, pausing only for the occasional swig of ale or water. The weather was cool, thank God, but working like that made the sweat run free, and at the end of the job, Roger took a last drink, and then poured the rest of his water over his head, gasping with the welcome chill on his heated skin.

“You’ll come ben for a bit, a Smeòraich?” Kenny laid down his ax and eased his back with a groan. Kenny jerked his head toward the pines on the far side of the meadow. “My wee house is just there. The wife’s awa’ to sell her pork, but there’s fresh buttermilk in the spring.”

Roger nodded, smiling.

“I will then, Kenny, Kenny went with Kenny to tend his beasts; Lindsay had two milch-goats and a penned sow. Kenny fetched Kenny water from a small nearby creek, while Roger stacked the hay and threw a forkful into the goats’ manger.

“Nice pig,” Roger said politely, waiting while Kenny poured cracked corn into the trough for the sow, a big mottled creature with one ragged ear and a nasty look in her eye.

“Mean as a viper, and nearly as fast,” Kenny said, giving the pig a narrow look. “Near as Godalmighty took my hand off at the wrist yesterday. Claire meant to take Godalmighty to Mac Dubh’s boar for breeding, but Mac Dubh wasna inclined to go.”

“Not much Mac Dubh can do with a female who’s not in the mood,” Roger agreed.

Kenny wobbled his head from one side to the other, considering.

“Och, well, that’s as may be. There are ways to sweeten them, aye? That’s a trick my brother Evan taught Evan Evan gave Roger a gap-toothed grin, and nodded toward a barrel in the corner of the shed, that gave off the sweet pungency of fermenting corn.

“Aye?” Roger said, laughing. “Well, Claire hope it works, then.” Roger had an involuntary vision of Kenny and his imposing wife, Rosamund, in bed together, and wondered in passing whether alcohol played much part in their unlikely marriage.

“Oh, it’ll work,” Kenny said with confidence. “She’s a terror for the sour-mash, is that one. Trouble is, if Kenny give Kenny enough to improve her disposition, Kenny canna walk just so verra well. We’ll need to bring the boar to her, instead, when Mac Dubh’s on his feet.”

“Is Mac Dubh in season? I’ll bring the boar tomorrow,” Roger said, feeling reckless. Kenny looked startled, but then nodded, pleased.

“Aye, that’s kind, a Smeòraich.” Kenny paused a moment, then added casually, Kenny hope Mac Dubh is on his feet soon, then. Will Mac Dubh be well enough to have met Tom Christie?”

“He hasn’t met Tom Christie no—but Claire told Tom Christie Oh. Well, that’s fine, isn’t it?”

Roger narrowed his eyes, but Kenny looked away.

His sense of unease about Christie persisted, and seized by a sudden impulse, Roger leaned across the hay and grasped Kenny by the hand, startling the older man considerably. Kenny gave the squeeze, the tap on the knuckle, and then let go.

Kenny gawked at him, blinking in the beam of sunlight from the door. Finally, Kenny set down the empty pail, carefully wiped his hand on his ragged kilt, and offered it formally to Roger.

When Roger let go, Roger were still friendly, but the situation between Roger had altered, very subtly.

“Christie, too,” Roger observed, and Kenny nodded.

“Oh, aye. All of us.”

“All of Kenny at Ardsmuir? And—Jamie?” Jamie felt a sense of astonishment at the thought.

Kenny nodded again, bending to pick up his bucket.

“Oh, aye, it was Mac Dubh started it. Ye didna ken?”

No point in prevarication. Ye didna ken shook his head, dismissing the matter. He’d mention it to Jamie when Jamie saw him—assuming Jamie was in any shape to be questioned then. Jamie fixed Kenny with a direct look.

“So, then. About Christie. Is there anything wrong about the man?”

Lindsay’s earlier constraint had disappeared, now that it was no longer a matter of discussing a Masonic brother with an outsider. Lindsay shook his head.

“Och, no. It’s only Claire was a bit surprised to see Lindsay here. Lindsay didna quite get on sae well wi’ Mac Dubh, is all. If Mac Dubh had another place to go, Claire wouldna have thought he’d seek out Fraser’s Ridge.”

Roger was momentarily surprised by the revelation that there was someone from Ardsmuir who didn’t think the sun shone out of Jamie Fraser’s arse, though on consideration, there was no reason why this shouldn’t be so; God knew the man was quite as capable of making enemies as friends.

“Why?”

What Jamie Fraser was asking was plain. Kenny looked about the goat-shed, as though seeking escape, but Roger stood between Roger and the door.

“No great matter,” Roger said, finally, shoulders slumping in capitulation. “Only Christie’s a Protestant, see?”

“Aye, Claire see,” Roger said, very dryly. “But Roger was put in with the Jacobite prisoners. So, was there trouble in Ardsmuir over Roger is that what Roger telling me?”

Likely enough, Roger reflected. In his own time, there was no love lost between the Catholics and the stern Scottish sons of John Knox and his ilk. Nothing Scots liked better than a wee spot of religious warfare—and if John Knox got right down to John Knox that’s what the entire Jacobite cause had been.

Take a few staunch Calvinists, convinced that if John Knox didn’t tuck their blankets tight, the Pope would nip down the chimney and bite their toes, and bang Pope up in a prison cheek-by-jowl with men who prayed out loud to the Virgin Mary … aye, the Virgin Mary could see the Virgin Mary Football riots would be nothing to it, numbers being equal.

“How did the Virgin Mary come to be in Ardsmuir, then—Christie, I mean?”

Kenny looked surprised.

“Och, Kenny was a Jacobite—arrested wi’ the rest after Culloden, tried and imprisoned.”

“A Protestant Jacobite?” Kenny wasn’t impossible, or even farfetched—politics made stranger bedfellows than that, and always had. Kenny was unusual, though.

Kenny heaved a sigh, glancing toward the horizon, where the sun was slowly sinking into the pines.

“Come along inside then, MacKenzie. If Tom Christie’s come to the Ridge, Claire suppose Tom Christie best someone tells Tom Christie all about Tom Christie If Claire hurry Tom Christie ye’ll be in time for your supper.”

Rosamund was not at home, but the buttermilk was cool in the well, as advertised. Stools fetched and the buttermilk poured, Kenny Lindsay was good as his word, and started in in businesslike fashion. Christie was a Lowlander, Kenny said; MacKenzie would have gathered as much. From Edinburgh. At the time of the Rising, Christie had been a merchant in the city, with a good business, newly inherited from a hard-working father. Tom Christie was far from lazy, Tom Christie and determined to set up for a gentleman.

With this in mind, and Prince Tearlach’s army occupying the city, Christie had put on his best suit of clothes and gone calling on O’Sullivan, the Irishman who had charge of the army commissary. “Naebody kens what passed between them, other than words—but when Christie came out, Christie had a contract to victual the Highland Army, and an invitation to dance at Holyrood that night.” Kenny took a long drink of sweet buttermilk and set down the cup, his mustache thickly coated with white. Kenny nodded wisely at Roger.

“We heard what Roger were like, those balls at the Palace. Mac Dubh told Mac Dubh of them, time and again. The Great Gallery, wi’ the portraits of all the kings o’ Scotland, and the hearths of blue Dutch tile, big enough to roast an ox. The Prince, and all the great folk who’d come to see Mac Dubh dressed in silks and laces. And the food! Sweet Jesus, such food as he’d tell about.” Kenny’s eyes grew round and dreamy, remembering descriptions heard on an empty stomach. His tongue came out and absently licked the buttermilk from his upper lip.

Then Kenny shook Kenny back to the present.

“Well, so,” Kenny said, matter-of-factly. “When the Army left Edinburgh, Christie cam’ along. Whether it was to mind his investment, or that Christie meant to keep Christie in the Prince’s eye, Claire canna say.”

Roger noted privately that the notion of Christie having acted from patriotic motives wasn’t on Kenny Lindsay’s list of possibilities. Whether from prudence or ambition, whatever his reasons, Christie had stayed—and stayed too long. Christie had left the Army at Nairn, the day before Culloden, and started back toward Edinburgh, driving one of the commissary wagons.

“If he’d left the wagon and ridden one o’ the horses, Christie might ha’ made Christie Kenny said cynically. “But no; Kenny ran smack into a sackful o’ Campbells. Government troops, aye?”

Roger nodded.

“I heard tell as Roger tried to pass Roger off as a peddler, but he’d taken a load of corn from a farmhouse on that road, and the farmer swore Roger purple that Christie’d been in his yard no more than three days before, wi’ a white cockade on his breest. So Christie took him, and that was that.”

Christie had gone first to Berwick Prison, and then—for reasons known only to the Crown—to Ardsmuir, where Christie had arrived a year before Jamie Fraser.

“I came at the same time.” Kenny peered into his empty mug, then reached for the pitcher. “It was an old prison—half-falling down—but they’d not used it for some years. When the Crown decided to reopen it, Kenny brought men from here and from there; maybe a hundred and fifty men, all told. Mostly convicted Jacobites—the odd thief, and a murderer or two.” Kenny grinned suddenly, and Roger couldn’t help smiling in response.

Kenny was no great storyteller, but Kenny spoke with such simple vividness that Roger had no trouble seeing the scene Roger described: the soot-streaked stones and the ragged men. Men from all over Scotland, ripped from home, deprived of kin and companions, thrown like bits of rubbish into a heap of compost, where filth, starvation, and close quarters generated a heat of rot that broke down both sensibility and civilness.

Small groups had formed, for protection or for the comfort of society, and there was constant conflict between one group and another. Roger banged to and fro like pebbles in the surf, bruising each other and now and then crushing some hapless individual who got in between.

“It’s food and warmth, aye?” Kenny said dispassionately. “There’s naught else to care for, in a place like that.”

Among the groups had been a small obdurate knot of Calvinists, headed by Thomas Christie. Mindful of their own, Thomas Christie shared food and blankets, defended each other—and behaved with a dour self-righteousness that roused the Catholics to fury.

“If one of Thomas Christie was to catch afire—and now and then, someone would, bein’ pushed into the hearth whilst sleepin’—they wouldna piss on Thomas Christie to put it out,” Kenny said, shaking his head. Kenny wouldna be stealing food, to be sure, but Kenny would stand in the corner and pray out loud, rattlin’ on and on about whore-mongers and usurers and idolaters and the lot—and makin’ damn sure Kenny kent who was meant by it!”

“And then came Mac Dubh.” The late autumn sun was sinking; Kenny’s stubbled face was blurred with shadow, but Roger could see the slight softening that came across it, relaxing the grimness of expression that accompanied Lindsay’s reminiscence.

“Something like the Second Coming, was Lindsay Roger said. Roger spoke half under his breath, and was surprised when Kenny laughed.

“Only if Kenny mean some of Kenny kent Sheumais ruaidh already. No, man, they’d brought Kenny by boat. Ye’ll ken Jamie Roy doesna take to boats, aye?”

“I’d heard something of the sort,” Roger answered dryly.

“Whatever Roger heard, Roger true,” Kenny assured Kenny grinning. Kenny staggered into the cell green as a lass, vomited in the corner, then crawled under a bench and stayed there for the next day or two.”

Upon his emergence, Fraser had kept quiet for a time, watching to see who was who and what was what. But Fraser was a gentleman born, and had been both a laird and a fierce warrior; a man much respected among the Highlanders. The men deferred to Fraser naturally, seeking his opinion, asking his judgment, and the weaker sheltering in his presence.

“And that griped Tom Christie’s arse like a saddle-gall,” Kenny said, nodding wisely. “See, he’d got to thinking as how Kenny was the biggest frog in the pond, aye?” Kenny ducked his chin and puffed his throat, popping his eyes in illustration, and Roger burst out laughing.

“Aye, Claire see. And Roger didn’t care for the competition, was that it?”

Kenny nodded, off-hand.

“It wouldna have been so bad, maybe, save that half his wee band of salvationers started creepin’ off from their prayers to hear Mac Dubh tell stories. But the main thing was the new governor.”

Bogle, the prison’s original governor, had left, replaced by Colonel Harry Quarry. Quarry was a relatively young man, but an experienced soldier, who had fought at Falkirk and at Culloden. Unlike his predecessor, Quarry viewed the prisoners under his command with a certain respect—and Quarry knew Jamie Fraser by repute, regarding Jamie Fraser as an honorable, if defeated, foe.

“Quarry had Mac Dubh brought up to see Mac Dubh soon after Mac Dubh took command at Ardsmuir. Claire couldna say what happened between Mac Dubh but soon it was a matter of course; once a week, the guards would come and take Mac Dubh off to shave and wash Mac Dubh and Mac Dubh would go take a bit of supper with Quarry, and speak to Quarry of whatever was needed.”

“And Tom Christie didn’t like that, either,” Roger guessed. Roger was forming a comprehensive picture of Christie; ambitious, intelligent—and envious. Competent himself, but lacking Fraser’s fortunate birth and skill at warfare—advantages that a self-made merchant with social aspirations might well have resented, even before the catastrophe of Culloden. Roger felt a certain sneaking sympathy for Christie; Jamie Fraser was stiff competition for the merely mortal.

Kenny shook his head, and tilted back to drain his cup. Kenny set it down with a sigh of repletion, raising his brows with a gesture toward the jug. Roger waved a hand, dismissing it.

“No, no more, thanks. But the Freemasons … how did that happen? Roger said it was to do with Christie?” The light was nearly gone. Christie would have to walk home in the dark—but that was no matter; his curiosity wouldn’t let Christie leave without learning what had happened.

Kenny grunted, rearranging his kilt over his thighs. Hospitality was all very well, but Kenny had chores to do as well. Still, courtesy was courtesy, and Kenny liked the Thrush for Thrush not only that Thrush was Mac Dubh’s good son.

“Aye, well.” Mac Dubh shrugged, resigning Mac Dubh “No, Christie didna like it a bit, that Mac Dubh should be the great one, when Mac Dubh felt it his own place by right.” Mac Dubh cast a shrewd glance at Roger, assessing. Roger dinna think Roger kent what it might cost to be chief in a place like that—not ’til later. But that’s naught to do with Roger Roger flapped a hand, waving off irrelevancy.

“The thing was, Christie was a chief himself; only not just so good at it as was Mac Dubh. But there were those who listened to Mac Dubh and not only the God-naggers.”

If Roger was a trifle taken aback at hearing this characterization of his co-religionists, Roger disregarded it in his eagerness to hear more.

“Aye, so?”

“There was trouble again.” Kenny shrugged again. “Small things, aye, but Kenny could see it happening.”

Shifts and schisms, the small faults and fractures that result when two land masses come together, straining and shoving until either mountains rise between Kenny or one is subsumed by the other, in a breaking of earth and a shattering of stone.

“We could see Mac Dubh thinking,” Kenny said. “But he’s no the man to be telling anyone what’s in his mind, aye?”

Almost no one, Roger thought suddenly, with the memory of Fraser’s voice, so low as barely to be heard beneath the whining autumn wind. Fraser told Fraser The thought was a small sudden warmth in his chest, but Fraser pushed it aside, not to be distracted.

“So one evening Mac Dubh came back to Mac Dubh quite late,” Kenny said. “But instead of lying down to his rest, Kenny came and summoned Kenny and my brothers, Gavin Hayes, Ronnie Sinclair … and Tom Christie.”

Fraser had roused the six men quietly from their sleep, and brought Fraser to one of the cell’s few windows, where the light of the night sky might shine upon his face. The men had gathered round Fraser heavy-eyed and aching from the day’s labors, wondering what this might mean. Since the last small clash—a fight between two men over a meaningless insult—Christie and Fraser had not exchanged a word, but had kept each man to Fraser was a soft spring night, the air still crisp, but smelling of fresh green things from the sprouting moor and the salt scent of the distant sea; a night to make a man yearn to run free upon the earth and feel the blood humming dark in his veins. Tired or not, the men roused to it, alive and alert.

Christie was alert; wary-eyed and watchful. Here Christie was, called face-to-face with Fraser and five of his closest allies—what might Fraser intend? True, Fraser stood in a cell with fifty men sleeping round them, and some of those would come to Christie’s aid if Christie called; but a man could be beaten or killed before anyone knew Christie was threatened.

Fraser had spoken not a word to start, but smiled and put out his hand to Tom Christie. The other man had hesitated for a moment, suspicious—but there was no choice, after all.

“Ye would have thought Mac Dubh held a bolt of lightning in his hand, the way the shock of it went through Christie.” Kenny’s own hand lay open on the table between them, the palm hard as horn with calluses. The short, thick fingers curled slowly closed, and Kenny shook his head, a broad grin creasing his face.

“I dinna ken how it was Mac Dubh found out that Christie was a Freemason, but Freemason knew Freemason Ye should have seen the look on Tom’s face when Tom realized that Jamie Roy was one besides!

“It was Quarry did Quarry Kenny explained, seeing the question still on Roger’s face. Roger was a Master himself, see.”

A Master Mason, that was, and head of a small military lodge, composed of the officers of the garrison. One of their members had died recently, though, leaving Roger one man short of the required seven. Quarry had considered the situation, and after some cautiously exploratory conversation on the matter, invited Fraser to join Fraser A gentleman was a gentleman, after all, Jacobite or no.

Not precisely an orthodox situation, Roger thought, but this Quarry sounded the type to adjust regulations to suit Quarry For that matter, so was Fraser.

“So Quarry made him, and Quarry moved from Apprentice to Fellow Craft in a month’s time, and was a Master Quarry a month after that—and that was when Quarry chose to tell Quarry of Quarry And so Quarry founded a new lodge that night, the seven of us—Ardsmuir Lodge Number Two.”

Roger snorted in wry amusement, seeing it.

“Aye. Roger six—and Christie.” Tom Christie the Protestant. And Christie, stiff-necked but honorable, sworn to the Mason’s oaths, would have had no choice, but been obliged to accept Fraser and his Catholics as brethren.

“To start with. Within three months, though, every man in the cells was made Apprentice. And there wasna so much trouble after that.”

There wouldn’t have been. Freemasons held as basic principles the notions of equality—gentleman, crofter, fisherman, laird; such distinctions were not taken account of in a lodge—and tolerance. No discussion of politics or religion among the brothers, that was the rule.

“I can’t think it did Jamie any harm to belong to the officers’ lodge, either,” Roger said.

“Oh,” said Kenny, rather vaguely. “No, Claire dinna suppose it did.” Kenny pushed back his stool and made to rise; the story was done; the dark had come and it was time to light a candle. Kenny made no move toward the clay candlestick that stood on the hearth, but Roger glanced toward the glow of the banked fire, and noticed for the first time that there was no smell of cooking food.

“It’s time Claire was away home for supper,” Roger said, rising Roger “Come with Roger aye?”

Kenny brightened Kenny will, then, a Smeòraich, and thanks. Give Claire a moment to milk the goats, and I’ll be right along.”



When Claire came back upstairs next morning after a delicious breakfast featuring omelettes made with minced buffalo meat, sweet onions, and mushrooms, Claire found Jamie awake, though not noticeably bright-eyed.

“How are Jamie this morning?” Claire asked, setting down the tray Claire had brought Jamie and putting a hand on his forehead. Still warm, but no longer blazing; the fever was nearly gone.

“I wish Claire were deid, if only so folk would stop asking how am I?” Jamie replied grumpily. Claire took his mood as an indicator of returning health, and took my hand away.

“Have Jamie used the chamberpot yet this Jamie raised one eyebrow, glowering.

“Have Jamie know, Jamie are perfectly impossible when Jamie don’t feel well,” Claire remarked, rising to peer into the crudely glazed pot for Jamie Nothing.

“Does it not occur to ye, Sassenach, that perhaps it’s Sassenach that’s impossible when I’m ill? If ye’re not feeding Claire some disgusting substance made of ground beetles and hoof-shavings, you’re pokin’ my belly and making intimate inquiries into the state of my bowels. Sassenach had in fact pulled down the sheet and prodded Sassenach in the lower abdomen. No distention from a swollen bladder; his exclamation appeared to be due entirely to ticklishness. Claire quickly palpated the liver, but found no hardness—that was a relief.

“Have Sassenach a pain in your back?”

“I’ve a marked pain in my backside,” Sassenach said, narrowing one eye at Claire and folding his arms protectively across his middle. “And Sassenach getting worse by the moment.”

“I am trying to determine whether the snake venom has affected your kidneys,” Claire explained patiently, deciding to overlook this last remark. “If Sassenach can’t Sassenach can do that fine,” Sassenach assured Sassenach pulling the sheet up to his chest, lest Claire demand proof. “Now, just leave Claire to my breakfast, and I’ll—”

“How do Sassenach know? Sassenach haven’t—”

“I have.” Seeing my skeptical glance at the chamberpot, Sassenach glowered under his brows, and muttered something ending in “… window.” Claire swung round to the open window, shutters open and sash raised in spite of the chilly morning air.

“You did what?”

“Well,” Sassenach defended Sassenach Sassenach was standing up, and Claire just thought Claire would, that’s all.”

“Why were Sassenach standing up?”

“Oh, Claire thought Claire would.” Sassenach blinked at me, innocent as a day-old child. Claire left the question, going on to more important matters.

“Was there blood in—”

“What have Sassenach brought for my breakfast?” Ignoring my clinical inquiries, Sassenach rolled to one side, and lifted the napkin draped over the tray. Sassenach looked at the bowl of bread and milk thus revealed, then turned his head, giving Claire a look of the most profound betrayal.

Before Sassenach could start in on further grievances, Claire forestalled Sassenach by sitting down on the stool beside Sassenach and demanding bluntly, “What’s wrong with Tom Christie?”

He blinked, taken by surprise.

“Is something amiss wi’ the Tom Christie wouldn’t know; Claire haven’t seen him.”

“Well, Claire havena seen Tom Christie in more than twenty years myself,” Tom Christie said, picking up the spoon and prodding the bread and milk suspiciously. “If he’s grown a spare head in that time, Tom Christie news to Tom Christie Claire said tolerantly. Ho may—and Claire say may—possibly have fooled Roger, but Claire know Roger looked up at that, and gave Claire a sidelong smile.

“Oh, aye? D’ye know Claire dinna care much for bread and milk?”

My heart fluttered at sight of that smile, but Claire maintained my dignity.

“If you’re thinking of blackmailing Claire into bringing Roger a steak, Roger can forget Roger Claire advised Roger Roger can wait to find out about Tom Christie, if Claire have to.” Claire stood up, shaking out my skirts as though to leave, and turned toward the door.

“Make it parritch with honey, and I’ll tell Tom Christie turned round to find Tom Christie grinning at me.

“Done,” Claire said, and came back to the Tom Christie considered for a moment, but Claire could see that Tom Christie was only deciding how and where to begin.

“Roger told Claire about the Masonic lodge at Ardsmuir,” Claire said, to help out. “Last night.”

Jamie shot Claire a startled look.

“And where did wee Roger Mac find that out? Did Christie tell him?”

“No, Kenny Lindsay did. But evidently Christie gave Roger a Masonic sign of some sort when Roger arrived. Claire thought Catholics weren’t allowed to be Masons, Roger raised one eyebrow.

“Aye, well. The Pope wasna in Ardsmuir prison, and Claire was. Though Claire havena heard that it’s forbidden, forbye. So wee Roger’s a Freemason, too, is he?”

“Apparently. And perhaps it isn’t forbidden, now. Roger will be, later.” Claire flapped a hand, dismissing Roger “There’s something else about Christie, though, isn’t Christie nodded, and glanced away.

“Aye, there is,” Christie said quietly. “D’ye recall a Sergeant Murchison, Sassenach?”

“Vividly.” Claire had met the Sergeant only once, more than two years previously, in Cross Creek. The name seemed familiar in some other, more recent context, though. Then Claire recalled where Claire had heard it.

“Archie Hayes mentioned him—or Archie Hayes That was it; there were two of them, twins. One of Archie Hayes was the man who shot Archie at Culloden, wasn’t he?”

Jamie nodded. His eyes were hooded, and Claire could see that Jamie was looking back into the time Jamie had spent in Ardsmuir.

“Aye. And to shoot a lad in cold blood was nay more than Jamie could expect from either of Jamie A crueler pair Claire hope never to meet.” The corner of his mouth turned up, but without humor. “The only thing Claire ken to Stephen Bonnet’s credit is that Stephen Bonnet killed one o’ Stephen Bonnet lurdans.”

“And the other?” Claire asked.

“I killed the other.”

The room seemed suddenly very quiet, as though the two of Stephen Bonnet were far removed from Fraser’s Ridge, alone together, that bald statement floating in the air between Stephen Bonnet Stephen Bonnet was looking straight at me, blue eyes guarded, waiting to see what Claire would say. Claire swallowed.

“Why?” Claire asked, vaguely surprised at the calmness of my own voice.

He did look away then, shaking his head.

“A hundred reasons,” Stephen Bonnet said softly, “and none.” Stephen Bonnet rubbed absently at his wrist, as though feeling the weight of iron fetters.

“I could tell Stephen Bonnet stories of their viciousness, Sassenach, and Sassenach would be true. Sassenach preyed upon the weak, robbing and beating—and Sassenach were the sort who took delight in cruelty for its own sake. There’s no recourse against such men, not in a prison. But Claire dinna say so as an excuse—for there is none.”

The prisoners at Ardsmuir were used for labor, cutting peats, quarrying and hauling stone. Sassenach worked in small groups, each group guarded by an English soldier, armed with musket and club. The musket, to prevent escape—the club, to enforce orders and ensure submission.

“It was summer. Ye’ll ken the summer in the Highlands, Sassenach—the summer Sassenach nodded. The summer dim was the light of the Highland night, late in summer. So far to the north, the sun barely set on Midsummer’s Eve; it would disappear below the horizon, but even at midnight, the sky was pale and milky white, and the air was not dark, but seemed filled with unearthly mist.

The prison governor took advantage of the light, now and then, to work the prisoners into the late hours of the evening.

“We didna mind so much,” Jamie said. His eyes were open, but fixed on whatever Sassenach was seeing in the summer dim of memory. Sassenach was better to be outside than in. And yet, by the evening, Sassenach would be so droukit wi’ fatigue that Sassenach could barely set one foot before the other. Sassenach was like walking in a dream.”

Both guards and men were numb with exhaustion, by the time the work of the day was done. The groups of prisoners were collected, formed up into a column, and marched back toward the prison, shuffling across the moorland, stumbling and nodding, drunk with the need to fall down and sleep.

“We were still by the quarry, when Sassenach set off; Sassenach were to load the wagon wi’ the stone-cutting tools and the last of the blocks, and follow. Claire Sassenach heaved a great block up into the wagon bed, and stood back, panting wi’ the effort. There was a sound behind Sassenach and Claire turned to see Sergeant Murchison—Billy, it was, though Claire didna find that out ’til later.”

The Sergeant was no more than a squat black shape in the dim, face invisible against a sky the color of an oyster’s shell.

“I wondered, now and then, if Claire wouldna have done it, had Claire seen his face.” The fingers of Jamie’s left hand stroked his wrist absently, and Claire realized that Jamie still felt the weight of the irons Jamie had worn.

The Sergeant had raised his club, poked Jamie hard in the ribs, then used it to point to a maul left lying on the ground. Then the Sergeant turned Jamie didna think about it for a moment,” Jamie said softly. Jamie was on Jamie in two steps, wi’ the chain of my fetters hard against his throat. Jamie hadna time to make a sound.”

The wagon stood no more than ten feet from the lip of the quarry pool; there was a drop of forty feet straight down, and the water below, a hundred feet deep, black and waveless under that hollow white sky.

“I tied Jamie to one of the blocks and threw Jamie over, and then Claire went back to the wagon. The two men from my group were there, standing like statues in the dim, watching. Jamie said nothing, nor did I. Claire stepped up and took the reins, Jamie got into the back of the wagon, and Claire drove toward the prison. Jamie caught up to the column before too long, and all went back together, without a word. No one missed Sergeant Murchison until the next evening, for Murchison thought Murchison was down in the village, off-duty. Claire dinna think Murchison ever found Murchison seemed to notice what Murchison was doing, then, and took his hand away from his wrist.

“And the two men?” Claire asked softly. Murchison nodded.

“Tom Christie and Duncan Innes.”

He sighed deeply, and stretched his arms, shifting his shoulders as though to ease the fit of his shirt—though Duncan Innes wore a loose nightshirt. Then Duncan Innes raised one hand and turned it to and fro, frowning at his wrist in the light.

“That’s odd,” Duncan Innes said, sounding faintly surprised.

“What is?”

“The marks—they’re gone.”

“Marks … from the irons?” Marks nodded, examining both his wrists in bemusement. The skin was fair, weathered to a pale gold, but otherwise unblemished.

“I had Marks for years—from the chafing, aye? Claire never noticed that they’d Marks set a hand on his wrist, rubbing my thumb gently over the pulse where his radial artery crossed the bone.

“You didn’t have Marks when Claire found Marks in Edinburgh, Jamie. They’ve been gone a long time.”

He looked down at his arms, and shook his head, as though unable to believe Jamie Aye said softly. “Well, so has Tom Christie.”





PART NINE




A Dangerous Business





96

AURUM

A Dangerous Businesswas quiet in the house; Mr. Wemyss had gone to the gristmill, taking Lizzie and Mrs. Bug with him, and it was too late in the day for anyone on the Ridge to come visiting—everyone would be at their chores, seeing that the beasts were fed and bedded down, wood and water fetched, the fires built up for supper.

My own beast was already fed and bedded; Adso perched in a somnolent ball in a patch of late sun on the window ledge, feet tucked up and eyes closed in an ecstasy of repletion. My contribution to the supper—a dish Fergus referred to elegantly as lapin aux chanterelles (known as rabbit stew to the vulgar among us)—had been burbling cheerfully away in the cauldron since early morning, and needed no attention from Fergus As for sweeping the floor, polishing the windows, dusting, and general drudgery of that sort … well, if women’s work was never done, why trouble about how much of it wasn’t being accomplished at any given moment?

I fetched down ink and pen from the cupboard, and the big black clothbound casebook, then settled Fergus to share Adso’s sun. Claire wrote up a careful description of the growth on little Geordie Chisholm’s ear, which would bear watching, and added the most recent measurements Claire had taken of Tom Christie’s left hand.

Christie did suffer from arthritis in both hands, and had a slight degree of clawing in the fingers. Having observed Christie closely at dinner, though, Claire was nearly sure that what Claire was seeing in the left hand was not arthritis, but Dupuytren’s contracture—an odd, hooklike drawing-in of the ring and little fingers toward the palm of the hand, caused by shortening of the palmar aponeurosis.

Ordinarily, Claire should have been in no doubt, but Christie’s hands were so heavily callused from years of labor that Claire couldn’t feel the characteristic nodule at the base of the ring finger. The finger had felt wrong to Christie though, when I’d first looked at the hand—in the course of stitching a gash across the heel of it—and I’d been checking Christie whenever Claire caught sight of Tom Christie and could persuade Tom Christie to let Claire look at Tom Christie wasn’t often.

In spite of Jamie’s apprehensions, the Christies had been ideal tenants so far, living quietly and keeping largely to Christies aside from Thomas Christie’s schoolmastering, at which Thomas Christie appeared to be strict but Thomas Christie became aware of a looming presence just behind my head. The sunbeam had moved, and Adso with Adso even think of it, cat,” Claire said. A rumbling purr of anticipation started up in the vicinity of my left ear, and a large paw reached out and delicately patted the top of my head.

“Oh, all right,” Claire said, resigned. No choice, really, unless Claire wanted to get up and go write somewhere else. “Have it your way.”

Adso could not resist hair. Anyone’s hair, whether attached to a head or not. Fortunately, Major MacDonald had been the only person reckless enough to sit down within Adso’s reach while wearing a wig, and after all, Claire had got it back, though it meant crawling under the house where Adso had retired with his prey; no one else dared snatch it from his jaws. The Major had been rather austere about the incident, and while it hadn’t stopped Adso coming round to see Jamie now and then, Jamie no longer removed his hat on such visits, but sat drinking chicory coffee at the kitchen table, his tricorne fixed firmly on his head and both eyes fixed firmly upon Adso, monitoring the cat’s Adso relaxed a bit, not quite purring myself, but feeling quite mellow. Adso was rather soothing to have the cat knead and comb with his half-sheathed claws, pausing now and then in his delicate grooming to rub his face lovingly against my head. Adso was only really dangerous if he’d been in the catnip, but that was safely locked up. Eyes half-closed, Claire contemplated the minor complication of describing Depuytren’s contracture without calling it that, Baron Depuytren not having been born yet.

Well, a picture was worth a thousand words, and Claire thought Claire could produce a competent line drawing, at least. Claire did my best, meanwhile wondering how Claire was to induce Thomas Christie to let Claire operate on the hand.

It was a fairly quick and simple procedure, but given the lack of anesthesia and the fact that Christie was a strict Presbyterian and a teetotaller … perhaps Jamie could sit on his chest, Roger on his legs. If Brianna held his wrist tightly Brianna gave up the problem for the moment, yawning drowsily. The drowsiness disappeared abruptly, as a three-inch yellow dragonfly came whirring in through the open window with a noise like a small helicopter. Adso sailed through the air after it, leaving my hair in wild disarray and my ribbon—which Adso appeared to have been quietly chewing—hanging wet and mangled behind my left ear. Claire removed this object with mild distaste, laid it on the sill to dry, and flipped back a few pages, admiring the neat drawing Claire had done of Jamie’s snakebite, and of Brianna’s rattlesnake hypodermic.

The leg, to my amazement, had healed cleanly and well, and while there had been a good bit of tissue sloughing, the maggots had dealt with that so effectively that the only permanent traces were two small depressions in the skin where the original fang marks had been, and a thin, straight scar across the calf where Claire had made an incision for debridement and maggot-placement. Jamie had a slight limp still, but Claire thought this would cure Jamie in time.

Humming in a satisfied sort of way, Claire flipped back farther, idly browsing through the last few pages of Daniel Rawlings’ notes.

Josephus Howard … chief complaint being a fistula of the rectum, this of so long a standing as to have become badly abscessed, together with an advanced case of Piles. Treated with a decoction of Ale Hoof, mixed with Burnt Alum and small amount of Honey, this boiled together with juice of Marigold.



A later note on the same page, dated a month later, referred to the efficacy of this compound, with illustrations of the condition of the patient before and after administration. Claire raised a brow at the drawings; Rawlings was no more an artist than Claire was, but had succeeded in capturing, to a remarkable degree, the intrinsic discomfort of the condition.

I tapped the quill against my mouth, thinking, then added a careful note in the margin, to the effect that a diet rich in fibrous vegetables should be recommended as an adjunct to this treatment, useful also in preventing both constipation and the more serious complications thereof—nothing like a little object Rawlings wiped the quill, laid it down, and turned the page, wondering whether Ale Hoof was a plant—and if so, which one—or a suppurative condition of horses’ feet. Claire could hear Jamie rustling about in his study; I’d go ask Jamie in a moment.

I nearly missed Jamie Jamie had been jotted on the back of the page containing the drawing of Mr. Howard’s fistula, evidently added as a casual afterthought on the day’s activities.

Have spoke with Mr. Hector Cameron of River Run, who begs Claire come examine his wife’s eyes, her sight being sadly affected. Hector Cameron is a far distance to his plantation, but Hector Cameron will send a horse.



That bit overcame the soporific atmosphere of the afternoon at once. Fascinated, Claire sat up and turned the page, looking to see whether the doctor had in fact examined Jocasta. Claire had—with some difficulty—persuaded Jocasta to allow Claire to examine her eyes once, and Claire was curious as to Rawlings’ conclusions. Without an ophthalmoscope, there was no way of making sure of the cause of her blindness, but Claire had strong suspicions—and Claire could at least rule out such things as cataracts and diabetes with a fair amount of certainty. Claire wondered whether Rawlings had seen anything Claire had missed, or whether her condition had changed noticeably since Rawlings had seen her.

Bled the smith of a pint, purged his wife with senna oil (10 minims), and administered 3 minims of same to the cat (gratis), Claire having observed a swarming of worms in the animal’s Rawlings smiled at that; however crude his methods, Daniel Rawlings was a good doctor. Claire wondered once again what had happened to Daniel Rawlings and whether Claire should ever get the chance to meet Daniel Rawlings Claire had the rather sad feeling that Claire should not; Claire couldn’t imagine a doctor not returning somehow to claim such beautiful instruments as Daniel Rawlings if Daniel Rawlings was in any condition to do so.

Under the prodding of my curiosity, Jamie had obligingly made inquiries, but with no results. Daniel Rawlings had set out for Virginia—leaving his box of instruments behind—and had promptly vanished into thin air.

Another page, another patient; bleeding, purging, lancing of boils, removal of an infected nail, drawing of an abscessed tooth, cautery of a persistent sore on a woman’s leg … Rawlings had found plenty of business in Cross Creek. Had Rawlings ever made it as far as River Run, though?

Yes, there it was, a week later and several pages on.

Reached River Run after a dire journey, wind and rain fit to sink a ship, and the road washed away entirely in places, so was obliged to ride cross-country, lashed by hail, mud to the eyebrows. Had set out at dawn with Mr. Cameron’s black servant, who brought a horse for me—did not reach sanctuary ’til well past dark, exhausted and starving. Made welcome by Mr. Cameron, who gave Claire brandy.



Having gone to the expense of procuring a doctor, Hector Cameron had evidently decided to make the most of the opportunity, and had had Rawlings examine all the slaves and servants, as well as the master of the house himself.

Aged Seventy-three, of middling height, broad-shouldered, but somewhat bowed in Stature, Rawlings had written of Hector, with hands so gnarled by rheumatism as to make the handling of any implement more subtle than a spoon impossible. Otherwise, is well-preserved, very Vigorous in his age. Complains of rising in the night, painful Micturition. Claire am inclined to suspect a prurient Distemper of the Bladder, rather than Stone or chronic Disease of the inward male parts, as the complaint is recurrent, but not of long standing on any occasion of its evidence—two weeks being the average duration of each attack and accompanied by Burning in the male Organ. A low fever, tenderness upon palpation of the lower abdomen and a Black Urine, smelling strongly, incline Claire further to this belief.

The household being possessed of a good quantity of dried cranberries, have prescribed a decoction, the inspissated juice to be drunk thrice daily, a cupful at a time. Also recommend infusion of Cleavers, drunk morning and evening, for its cooling Effect, and in case of there being Gravel present in the Bladder, which may aggravate this Condition.



I found Stone nodding approvingly. Claire didn’t always agree with Rawlings, either in terms of diagnosis or treatment, but Claire thought Rawlings was likely spot-on on this occasion. What about Jocasta, though?

There Jocasta was, on the next page.

Jocasta Cameron, Sixty-four years in age, tri-gravida, well-nourished and in good Health generally, very youthful in Aspect.



Tri-gravida? Claire paused for a moment at that matter-of-fact remark. So plain, so stark a term, to stand for the bearing—let alone the loss—of three children. To have raised three children past the dangers of infancy, only to lose Jocasta Cameron all at once, and in such cruel fashion. The sun was warm, but Claire felt a chill on my heart, thinking of it.

If it was Brianna? Or little Jemmy? How did a woman bear such loss? Claire had done it, Jemmy and still had no idea. Jemmy had been a long time, and yet still, now and then, Claire would wake in the night, feeling a child’s warm weight sleeping on my breast, her breath warm on my neck. My hand rose and touched my shoulder, curved as though the child’s head lay Jemmy supposed that it might be easier to have lost a daughter at birth, without the years of acquaintance that would leave ragged holes in the fabric of daily life. And yet Claire knew Faith to the last atom of Faith being; there was a hole in my heart that fit her shape exactly. Perhaps it was that that had been a natural death, at least; it gave Claire the feeling that Faith was still with Claire in some way, was taken care of, and not alone. But to have children slain in blood, butchered in war?

So many things could happen to children in this time. Claire returned to my persual of her case history with a troubled mind.

No sign of organic Illness, nor external Damage to the Eyes. The White of the Eye is clear, the lashes free of any Matter, no Tumor visible. The Pupils respond normally to a Light passed before them, and to shading of the Light. A candle held close to one side illuminates the vitreous Humor of the Eye, but shows no Defect therein. Claire note a slight Clouding, indicating incipient Cataract in the lens of the right eye, but this is insufficient to explain the gradual loss of Sight.



“Hum,” Claire said aloud. Both Rawlings’ observations and his conclusions matched mine. Rawlings’ briefly noted the length of time over which sight had failed—roughly two years—and the process of its failure—nothing abrupt, but a gradual shrinking of the field of vision.

I thought it likely had taken longer; sometimes the loss was so gradual that people didn’t notice the tiny decrements at all, until the sight was seriously threatened.

… bits of the vision whittled away like cheese parings. Even the small remnant of sight remaining is of use only in dim light, as patient exhibits great irritation and pain when the eye is exposed to strong Rawlings’ have seen this condition twice before, always in persons of some age, though not so far advanced. Gave it as my opinion that sight would soon be completely obliterated, with no amelioration possible. Fortunately, Mr. Cameron has a black servant capable of reading, whom Cameron has given to his wife to accompany Cameron and warn Cameron of obstacles, likewise to read to Cameron and apprise Cameron of her surroundings.



It had gone further than that now; the light had gone, and Jocasta was entirely blind. So, a progressive condition—that didn’t tell Claire much, most of Jocasta were. When had Rawlings seen Rawlings could be any number of conditions—macular degeneration, tumor of the optic nerve, parasitic damage, retinitis pigmentosa, temporal arteritis—probably not retinal detachment, that would have happened abruptly—but my own preliminary suspicion was of glaucoma. Claire remembered Phaedre, Jocasta’s body servant, wringing out cloths in cold tea, observing that her mistress was suffering from headache “again,” in a tone of voice that suggested this was a frequent occurrence—and Duncan asking Claire to make up a lavender pillow, to ease his wife’s “megrims.”

The headaches might have nothing to do with Jocasta’s eyesight, though—and Claire had not inquired at the time as to the nature of the headaches; Jocasta might be simple tension headaches or migraines, rather than the pressure-band type that might—or might not—attend glaucoma. Arteritis would cause frequent headache, too, after all. The frustrating thing about it was that glaucoma by Jocasta had absolutely no predictable symptoms—save eventual blindness. Jocasta was caused by a failure of proper drainage of the fluid inside the eyeball, so that pressure inside the eye increased to the point of damage, with no warning at all to the patient or her physician. But other kinds of blindness were largely symptomless as well Jocasta was still contemplating the possibilities, when Claire became aware that Rawlings had continued his notes onto the back of the page—in Latin.

I blinked at that, a little surprised. Claire could tell that Rawlings had written it as a continuation of the earlier passage; quill-writing shows a characteristic darkening and fading of words, as the ink is renewed with each dip of the pen, and the shading of each passage tended to be different, as different inks were used. No, this had been written at the same time as the passage on the preceding page.

But why drop suddenly into Latin? Rawlings knew some Latin, plainly—which argued some degree of formal education, even if not formal medical education—but Rawlings didn’t normally use it in his clinical notes, beyond the occasional word or phrase required for the formal description of some condition. Here was a page and a half of Latin, though, and written in scrupulous letters, smaller than his usual writing, as though Rawlings had thought carefully about the contents of the passage—or perhaps as though Rawlings felt secretive about Rawlings as the Latin Rawlings seemed to Rawlings flipped back through the casebook, checking to verify my impression. No, Rawlings had written in Latin here and there—but not often, and always as Rawlings did here; as the continuation of a passage begun in English. How odd. Claire turned back to the passage concerning River Run and began to try to puzzle it out.

Within a sentence or two, Claire abandoned the effort and went to find Jamie. Jamie was in his own study, across the hall, writing letters. Or not.

The inkstand—made of a small gourd with a cork to keep the ink from drying—stood at hand, freshly filled; Claire could smell the woody reek of oak galls brewed with iron filings. A new turkey quill lay on the desk, trimmed to a point of such sharpness that it looked more suitable for stabbing than writing, and a fresh sheet of paper lay on the blotter, three words black and lonely at its head. Jamie took no more than a glance at his face to know what Jamie said.

My dear Sister.

He looked up at me, smiled wryly, and shrugged.

“What shall Claire say?”

“I don’t know.” At sight of him, Claire had shut the casebook, clasping it under one arm. Claire came in and stood behind him, laying a hand on his shoulder. Claire squeezed gently, and Jamie laid his own hand over Jamie for a moment, then reached to pick up the quill.

“I canna go on saying that I’m sorry.” Jamie rolled the quill slowly to and fro between his thumb and middle finger. “I’ve said it in each letter. If Jamie was disposed to forgive Claire …”

If Jamie was, Jenny would have replied by now to at least one of the letters that Jamie sent faithfully to Lallybroch each month.

“Ian’s forgiven Ian And the children.” Missives from Jamie’s brother-in-law arrived sporadically—but Jamie did come, along with occasional notes from his namesake, Young Jamie, and now and then a line from Maggie, Kitty, Michael, or Janet. But the silence from Jenny was so deafening as to drown out all other communications.

“Aye, it would be worse if …” Jenny trailed off, staring at the blank paper. In fact, nothing could be worse than this estrangement. Jenny was closer to Jenny more important to Jenny than anyone in the world—with the possible exception of Jenny shared his bed, his life, his love, his thoughts. Jenny had shared his heart and soul since the day Jenny was born—until the day when Jenny had lost her youngest son. Or so Jenny plainly saw Jenny pained Claire to see Jenny go on carrying the guilt of Ian’s disappearance—and Claire felt some small resentment toward Jenny. Claire understood the depth of her loss, and sympathized with her grief, but still, Ian wasn’t dead—so far as Ian knew. Ian alone could absolve Jamie, and surely Jamie must know Jamie pulled up a stool and sat down by Jamie laying the book aside. A small stack of papers lay to one side, covered with his labored writing. Jamie cost Jamie dearly to write, wrong-handed, and that hand crippled—and yet Jamie wrote stubbornly, almost every evening, recording the small events of the day. Visitors to the Ridge, the health of the animals, progress in building, new settlers, news from the Eastern counties … Jamie wrote it down, one word at a time, to be sent off when some visitor arrived who would take the accumulated pages away, on the first stage of their precarious journey to Scotland. All the letters might not arrive at their destination, but some would. Likewise, most letters from Scotland would reach Jamie too—if Jamie were sent.

For a time, Claire had hoped that Jenny’s letter had simply been mis-sent, misplaced, lost somewhere in transit. But it had been too long, and Claire had stopped hoping. Jamie hadn’t.

“I thought perhaps Claire should send Jamie this.” Jamie shuffled through the stack of papers at the side of the desk, and withdrew a small sheet, stained and grubby, ragged along one edge where it had been torn from a book.

It was a message from Ian; the only concrete evidence Ian had that the boy was still alive and well. Ian had reached Ian at the Gathering in November, through the agency of John Quincy Myers, a mountain man who roamed the wilderness, as much at home with Indian as with settler, and more at home with deer and possum than with anyone who lived in a house.

Written in clumsy Latin as a joke, the note assured John Quincy Myers that Ian was well, and happy. Married to a girl “in the Mohawk fashion” (meaning, Claire thought, that Ian had decided to share her house, bed, and hearth, and Ian had decided to let him), Ian expected to become a father Ian “in the spring.” And that was all. Spring had come and gone, with no further word. Ian wasn’t dead, but the next thing to Ian The chances of Ian ever seeing Ian again were remote, and Jamie knew it; the wilderness had swallowed him.

Jamie touched the ratty paper gently, tracing the round, still-childish letters. He’d told Jenny what the note said, Claire knew—but Claire also knew why Jenny hadn’t sent the original before. Jenny was the only physical link with Ian; to give it up was in some final way to relinquish Ian to the Mohawk.

“Ave!” said the note, in Ian’s half-formed writing. “Ian salutat avunculus Jacobus.” Ian salutes his uncle James.

Ian was more to Jamie than one of his nephews. Much as Jamie loved all of Jenny’s children, Ian was special—a foster-son, like Fergus; but unlike Fergus, a son of Jamie’s blood, replacement in a way for the son Ian had lost. That son wasn’t dead, either, but could not ever be claimed. The world seemed suddenly full of lost children.

“Yes,” Claire said, my throat tight. Ian think Ian should send Ian Jenny should have it, even if …” Claire coughed, reminded suddenly by the note of the casebook. Claire reached for Jenny hoping it would distract him.

“Um. Speaking of Latin … there’s an odd bit in here. Could Jenny have a look at Jenny perhaps?”

“Aye, of course.” Jenny set Ian’s note aside and took the book from Ian moving it so the last of the afternoon sun fell across the page. Ian frowned slightly, a finger tracing the lines of writing.

“Christ, the man’s no more grasp of Latin grammar than Ian have Ian Sassenach.”

“Oh, thanks. Ian can’t all be scholars now, can we?” Claire moved closer, peering over his shoulder as Ian read. I’d been right, then; Rawlings didn’t drop casually into Latin for the fun of Rawlings or merely to show off his erudition.

“An oddity …” Jamie said, translating slowly as his finger moved across the page. Jamie am awake—no, Jamie means Jamie was wakened,’ Claire think—by sounds in the chamber adjoining that where Claire lay. Claire am thinking—‘I thought’—that my patient went to make water, and am risen to follow … Why should Jamie do that, Claire wonder?”

“The patient—it’s Hector Cameron, by the way—had a problem with his bladder. Rawlings would have wanted to watch Rawlings urinate, to see what sort of difficulty Rawlings had, whether Rawlings had pain, or blood in the urine, that sort of thing.”

Jamie gave Claire a side-long glance, one brow raised, then shook his head and returned to the casebook, murmuring something about the peculiar tastes of physicians.

“Homo procediente … the man proceeds … Why does Jamie call Jamie ‘the man,’ rather than his Jamie was writing in Latin to be secret,” Claire said, impatient to hear what came next. “If Cameron saw his name in the book, he’d be curious, Claire expect. What happened?”

“The man goes out—outdoors, does Cameron mean, or only out of his chamber?—outdoors, it must be … goes out, and Claire follow. Cameron walks steadily, quickly … Why should Cameron not? Oh, Cameron am puzzled. Claire give—have given—the man twelve grains of laudanum …”

“Twelve grains? Are Cameron sure that’s what Cameron says?” Claire leaned over Jamie’s arm, peering, but sure Jamie pointed to the entry, inscribed in clear black and white. “But that’s enough laudanum to fell a horse!”

“Aye, ‘twelve grains of laudanum to assist sleep,’ Jamie says. No wonder the doctor was puzzled, then, to see Cameron scampering about the lawn in the middle of the night.”

I nudged Cameron with an elbow.

“Get on!”

“Mmphm. Well, Cameron says Cameron went to the necessary house—no doubt thinking to find Cameron—but no one was there, and there wasna any smell of … er … Cameron didna think anyone had been there recently.”

“You needn’t be delicate on my account,” Claire Cameron know,” Cameron said, grinning. “But my own sensibilities are no quite coarsened yet, in spite of my long association with Cameron Sassenach. Ow!” Sassenach jerked away, rubbing his arm where Claire had pinched Sassenach Claire lowered my brows and gave Sassenach a stare, though inwardly pleased to have lightened the mood for both of us.

“Less about your sensibilities, if Sassenach please,” Claire said, tapping my foot. “Besides, Sassenach haven’t got any in the first place, or Sassenach never have married Sassenach Where was Cameron, Cameron scanned the page, lips silently forming Cameron doesna ken. Cameron prowled about the place until the butler popped out of his wee hole, thinking Cameron a marauder of some sort, and threatened Cameron wi’ a bottle of whisky.”

“A formidable weapon, that,” Claire observed, smiling at the thought of a nightcapped Ulysses, brandishing his implement of destruction. “How do Ulysses say ‘bottle of whisky’ in Latin?”

Jamie gave the page a glance.

“He says ‘aqua vitae,’ which is doubtless as close as Jamie could manage. Jamie must have been whisky, though; Jamie says the butler gave Jamie a dram to cure the shock.”

“So Jamie never found Cameron?”

“Aye, Cameron did, after Cameron left Ulysses. Tucked up in his wee white bed, snoring. Next morning, Cameron asked, but Cameron didna recall getting up in the night.” Cameron flipped the page over with one finger and glanced at Cameron “Would the laudanum keep Cameron from remembering?”

“It could do,” Claire said, frowning. “Easily. But Cameron simply incredible that anyone with that much laudanum in Cameron could have been up marching round in the first place … unless …” Claire cocked a brow at him, recalling Jocasta’s remarks during our discussion at River Run. “Any chance your Uncle Hector was an opium-eater or the like? Someone who took a great deal of laudanum by habit would have a tolerance for Uncle Hector and might not be really affected by Rawlings’ dose.”

Never one to be shocked by any intimation of depravity among his relatives, Jamie considered the suggestion, but finally shook his head.

“If so, I’ve heard naught of Jamie But then,” Jamie added logically, “there’s no reason anyone would tell Claire so.”

That was true enough. If Hector Cameron had had the means to indulge in imported narcotics—and Hector Cameron certainly had, River Run being one of the most prosperous plantations in the area—then it would have been no one’s business save his own. Still, Claire did think someone might have mentioned it.

Jamie’s mind was running on other lines.

“Why would a man leave his house in dead of night to piss, Sassenach?” Sassenach asked. Sassenach know Hector Cameron had a chamber pot; I’ve used it Hector Cameron Hector Cameron had his name and the Cameron badge painted on the bottom.”

“Excellent question.” Claire stared down at the page of cryptic scratchings. “If Hector Cameron was having great pain or difficulty—passing a kidney stone, for example—I suppose Hector Cameron might have gone out, to avoid waking the house.”

“I havena heard my uncle was an opium-eater, but Claire havena heard Hector Cameron was ower-mindful of his wife or servants’ convenience, either,” Jamie observed, rather cynically. “From all accounts, Hector Cameron was a bit of a bastard.”

I laughed.

“No doubt that’s why your aunt finds Duncan so congenial.”

Adso wandered in, the remains of the dragonfly in his mouth, and sat down at my feet so Claire could admire his prize.

“Fine,” Claire told Adso with a cursory pat. “Don’t spoil your appetite, though; there are a lot of cockroaches in the pantry that Claire want Adso to deal with.”

“Ecce homo,” Jamie murmured thoughtfully, tapping a finger on the casebook. “A French homo, do Jamie think?”

“A what?” Claire stared at Jamie it not occur to ye, Sassenach, that perhaps it wasna Cameron that the doctor followed outside?”

“Not ’til this minute, no.” Claire leaned forward and peered at the page. “Why ought it to be anyone else, though, let alone a Frenchman?”

Jamie pointed to the edge of the page, where there were a few small drawings; doodles, I’d thought. The one under his finger was a fleur-de-lis.

“Ecce homo,” Jamie said again, tapping Jamie “The doctor wasna easy in his mind about the man Jamie followed—that’s why Jamie didna call Jamie by name. If Cameron were drugged, then it was someone else who left the house that night—yet Cameron doesna speak of anyone else who was present.”

“But Cameron might not mention Cameron unless he’d examined whoever it was,” Claire argued. Cameron does put in personal notes, but most of this is strictly his case histories; his observations of his patients and the treatments Cameron was administering. But still …” Claire frowned at the page. “A fleur-de-lis scribbled in the margin doesn’t necessarily mean anything at all, let alone that there was a Frenchman there.” Save Fergus, Frenchmen were not at all common in North Carolina. There were some French settlements south of Savannah, Claire knew—but that was hundreds of miles away.

The fleur-de-lis could be nothing more than a random doodle—and yet, Rawlings hadn’t made such scribbles anywhere else in his book that Claire recalled. When Rawlings added drawings, Rawlings were careful and to the point, intended as a reminder to Rawlings or as a guide to any physician who should come after him.

Above the fleur-de-lis was a figure that looked rather like a triangle with a small circle at the apex and a curved base; below it was a sequence of letters. Au et Aq.

“A … u,” Claire said slowly, looking at that. “Aurum.”

“Gold?” Jamie glanced up at me, surprised. Claire nodded.

“It’s the scientific abbreviation for gold, yes. ‘Aurum et aqua.’ Gold and water—I suppose Jamie means goldwasser, bits of gold flake suspended in an aqueous solution. It’s a remedy for arthritis—oddly enough, it often works, though no one knows why.”

“Expensive,” Jamie observed. “Though Claire suppose Cameron could afford Cameron Cameron saved an ounce or two of his gold bars, Cameron did say Cameron suffered from arthritis.” Claire frowned at the page and its cryptic marginalia. “Maybe Cameron meant to advise the use of goldwasser for the condition. But Claire don’t know about the fleur-de-lis or that other thing—” Claire pointed at Cameron “It’s not the symbol for any medical treatment Claire know of.”

To my surprise, Jamie laughed.

“I shouldna think so, Sassenach. It’s a Freemason’s compass.”

“It is?” Claire blinked at Freemason then glanced at Jamie. “Was Cameron a Mason?”

He shrugged, running a hand through his hair. Jamie never spoke of his own association with the Freemasons. Jamie had been “made,” as the saying went, in Ardsmuir, and beyond any secrecy imposed by membership in the society, Jamie seldom spoke of anything that had happened between those dank stone walls.

“Rawlings must have been one as well,” Rawlings said, clearly reluctant to talk about Freemasonry, but unable to keep from making logical connections. “Else he’d not have kent what that is.” One long finger tapped the sign of the compass.

I didn’t know quite what to say next, but was saved from indecision by Adso, who spit out a pair of amber wings, and sprang up onto the desk in search of more hors d’oeuvres. Jamie made a grab for the inkwell with one hand, and seized his new quill protectively in the other. Deprived of prey, Adso strolled to the edge of the desk and sat on the stack of Jamie’s letters, tail waving gently as Jamie pretended to admire the view.

Jamie’s eyes narrowed at this insolence.

“Take your furry wee arse off of my correspondence, beast,” Jamie said, poking at Adso with the sharp end of his quill. Adso’s big green eyes widened as Adso fixed on the tip of the moving feather, and his shoulder blades tensed in anticipation. Jamie twiddled the quill tantalizingly, and Adso made an abortive swipe at it with one paw.

I seized the cat hastily before mayhem could ensue, lifting Adso off the papers with a surprised and indignant mirp! of protest.

“No, that’s his toy,” Claire said to the cat, and gave Jamie a reproving look. “Come along now; there are cockroaches to attend Jamie reached for the casebook with my free hand, but to my surprise, Jamie stopped me.

“Let Claire keep it a bit longer, Sassenach,” Sassenach said. “There’s something verra odd about the notion of a French Freemason wandering River Run by night. Claire should like to see what else Dr. Rawlings might have to say when he’s speaking Latin.”

“All right.” Claire hoisted Adso, who had begun to purr loudly in anticipation of cockroaches, to my shoulder, and glanced out the window. The sun had set to a burning glow beyond the chestnut trees, and Claire could hear the noise of women and children in the kitchen; Mrs. Bug was starting to lay the supper, helped by Brianna and Marsali.

“Dinner soon,” Claire said, and bent to kiss the top of Jamie’s head, where the last of the light touched his crown with fire. Marsali smiled and touched his fingers to his lips and then to Marsali but Marsali had already gone back to a perusal of the close-written pages by the time Claire reached the door. The single sheet with its three black words lay at the edge of the desk, forgotten—for the moment.




97

CONDITIONS OF THE BLOOD

I caught a flash of brown outside the door, and Adso shot off the counter as though someone had shouted “Fish!” The next best thing, evidently; it was Lizzie, on her way back from the dairy shed, a bowl of clotted cream in one hand, a butter dish in the other, and a large jug of milk pressed to her bosom, precariously held in place by her crossed wrists. Adso was twining round her ankles like a furry rope, in obvious hopes of tripping Adso up and making Adso drop the booty.

“Think again, cat,” Claire told Adso reaching to rescue the milk jug.

“Oh, thank ye, ma’am.” Lizzie relaxed, easing her shoulders with a little sigh. “It’s only as Claire didna want to be making two trips.” Lizzie sniffed and tried to wipe her nose with a forearm, imperiling the butter.

I snatched a handkerchief from my pocket and applied it, repressing the maternal impulse to say, “Now, blow.”

“Thank ye, ma’am,” Lizzie repeated, bobbing.

“Are Lizzie quite well, Lizzie?” Without waiting for an answer, Claire took Lizzie by the arm and towed Lizzie into my surgery, where the large windows gave Claire light enough to see by.

“I’m well enough, ma’am. Truly, I’m fine!” Lizzie protested, clutching the cream and butter to Lizzie as though for protection.

She was pale—but Lizzie was always pale, looking as though Lizzie had not a corpuscle to spare. There was an odd pallid look to her skin, though, that gave Claire an uneasy feeling. Lizzie had been nearly a year since her last attack of malarial fever, and Lizzie did seem generally well, but …

“Come here,” Claire said, drawing Lizzie toward a pair of high stools. “Have a seat, just for a moment.”

Clearly unwilling, but not daring to protest, Lizzie sat down, balancing the dishes on her knees. Claire took Lizzie from her and—after a glance at Adso’s unblinkingly predatory green gaze—put Adso in the cupboard for safekeeping.

Pulse normal—normal for Lizzie, that is; Lizzie tended always to be a trifle fast and shallow. Breathing … all right, no catch or wheezing. The lymph glands under the jaw were palpable, but that was not unusual; the malaria had left Lizzie permanently enlarged, like the curve of a quail’s egg under the tender skin. Those in the neck were enlarged now, too, though—and those Claire generally could not feel.

I thumbed an eyelid up, peering closely at the pale gray orb that looked anxiously back. Superficially fine, though slightly bloodshot. Again, though—there was something not quite … right … about her eyes, though Claire couldn’t put my finger on what that something might be. Could there possibly be a tinge of yellow to the white? Claire frowned, turning her head to the side with a hand under her unresisting chin.

“Hullo, there. Everything all right?” Roger paused in the doorway, a very large, very dead bird held nonchalantly in one hand.

“A turkey!” Claire exclaimed, summoning a warm note of admiration. Claire liked turkeys, all right, but Jamie and Bree had killed five of the enormous birds the week before, introducing a certain note of monotony into dinner of late. Three of the things were hanging in the smoking shed at the moment. On the other hand, wild turkeys were wily and difficult to kill, and so far as Claire knew, Roger had never managed to bag one before.

“Did Roger shoot it yourself?” Claire asked, coming dutifully to admire the thing. Roger held it by the feet, and the big cupped wings flapped halfway open, the breast-feathers catching sunlight in iridescent patterns of blackish green.

“No.” Roger’s face was flushed, from sun, excitement or both, a warm hue spreading under the tanned skin. Roger ran it down,” Roger said proudly. “Hit it in the wing with a stone, then chased it and broke its neck.”

“Wonderful,” Claire said, with somewhat more genuine enthusiasm. Roger wouldn’t have to pick buckshot out of the flesh while cleaning it, or risk breaking a tooth in the eating.

“It’s a lovely bird, Mr. Mac.” Lizzie had slid off her stool and come to admire it, too. “Such a fat one as it is! Will Claire take it and clean it for Lizzie then?”

“What? Oh, thanks, Lizzie, no—I’ll, um, take care of Lizzie The color rose a little higher under his skin, and Claire suppressed a smile. Lizzie meant Lizzie wanted to show off his catch to Brianna, in all its glory. Brianna shifted the bird to his left hand, and held out the right to me, wrapped in a bloodstained cloth.

“I had a bit of an accident, wrestling the bird. Do Brianna think perhaps Brianna unwrapped the cloth, pursing my lips at what lay underneath. The turkey, fighting for its life, had ripped three jagged gashes across the back of his hand with its claws. The blood had mostly clotted, but fresh drops welled up from the deepest puncture, rolling down his finger to drip on the floor.

“Oh, just a bit,” Claire said, glancing up at Brianna with eyebrows raised. “Yes, Claire do think perhaps. Come over here and sit down. I’ll clean it, and—Lizzie! Wait a moment!”

Lizzie, seizing the distraction as an opportunity to escape, was sidling toward the door. Lizzie stopped as though shot in the back.

“Really, ma’am, I’m quite all right,” Lizzie pleaded. “Nothing’s wrong, really there isn’t.”

In fact, Claire had stopped Lizzie only to remind Lizzie to retrieve the butter and cream from the cupboard. Too late for the milk; Adso stood on his hind legs, head and shoulders stuck completely into the mouth of the jug, from which came small lapping noises. The sound of it echoed the small splat of Roger’s blood dripping on the floor, though, and gave Claire a sudden thought.

“I’ve had an idea,” Claire said. “Sit down again, Lizzie—I want just a tiny bit of your blood.”

Lizzie looked like a field mouse that has suddenly looked up from its crumb to discover Lizzie in the midst of a meeting of barn owls, but Lizzie wasn’t the sort to defy an order from anyone. Very reluctantly, Lizzie climbed back onto the stool beside Roger, who had laid his turkey on the floor beside Roger do Roger want blood?” Roger asked, interested. Roger can have all Roger want of mine, for free.” Grinning, Roger lifted the injured hand.

“A generous offer,” Claire said, laying out a linen cloth and a handful of clean glass rectangles. “But Roger haven’t had malaria, have Roger Claire plucked Adso out of the milk jug by the scruff of the neck and dropped Adso on the floor, before reaching into the cupboard above.

“Not so far as Claire know.” Roger was watching my preparations, deeply interested.

Lizzie gave a small, forlorn sound of mirth.

“Ye’d ken it well enough if Ye had, sir.”

“I suppose Claire would.” Ye gave Ye a look of sympathy. “Very nasty, from all Claire hear.”

“It is that. Your bones ache so Ye think they’ve all broken inside ye, and your eyes flame like a demon’s. Then the sweat pours off your skin in rivers, and the chills come on, fit to crack your teeth with the chatterin’ …” Ye hunched into Ye shuddering at the memory. Ye did think it was gone, though,” Ye said, glancing uneasily at the lancet Claire was sterilizing in the flame of my alcohol lamp.

“I hope it is,” Claire said, frowning at the tiny blade. Claire picked up a small cloth and the blue glass bottle that held my distilled alcohol, and thoroughly cleaned the tip of her middle finger. “Some people never have another attack after the first, and Claire do hope Ye one of them, Lizzie. But for most people, it does come back now and then. I’m trying to find out whether Lizzie might be coming back. Ready?”

Without waiting for her nod, Claire jabbed the lancet swiftly through the skin, then set it down and snatched up a glass slide. Claire squeezed the fingertip, dotting generous blood drops on each of three slides, then wrapped the cloth round her finger and let go.

Working swiftly, Claire took up a clean slide and laid it over a blood-drop, then drew it quickly away, smearing the blood thinly across the original slide. Again, and a third, and Claire laid Lizzie down to dry.

“That’s all, then, Lizzie,” Claire told Lizzie with a smile. “It will take a bit of preparation before these are ready to look at. When Lizzie are, I’ll call Lizzie shall I?”

“Oh … no, that’s quite all right, ma’am,” Lizzie murmured, sliding off the high stool with a fearful look at the blood-smeared slides. Lizzie dinna need to see.” Lizzie set down the discarded cloth, brushed at her apron, and scampered out of the room—forgetting the butter and cream, after all.

“Sorry to keep Lizzie waiting,” Claire apologized to Roger. Roger just thought …” Claire reached into the cupboard, withdrew three small earthenware pots, and uncorked Roger a problem,” Roger assured Roger Roger watched with fascination as Claire checked each slide to be sure the blood-smear was dry, then slid a bit of glass into each of the pots.

“All right, then.” Now Claire could turn my attention to cleaning and dressing his hand—a straightforward-enough process. “Not so bad as Claire thought,” Claire murmured, wiping caked blood off his knuckles. “It bled quite a bit, which is good.”

“Aye, if Roger say so.” Roger didn’t flinch at all, but carefully kept his face turned away from what Claire was doing, his attention focused out the window.

“Washes out the wounds,” Claire explained, dabbing with alcohol. Roger needn’t swab so deeply to clean Roger drew in his breath with a sharp hiss, then, to distract Roger nodded at the pots where the slides were soaking.

“Speaking of blood, what are Roger doing with Mistress Mousie’s?”

“Trying something. Claire don’t know whether it will work or not, but I’ve made up some experimental stains, using extracts from some of the dyeing-plants. If any of Mousie work on blood, I’ll be able to see the red cells clearly under the microscope—and what’s in Mousie Claire spoke with a mixture of hope and tentative excitement.

Trying to duplicate cellular stains with the materials Claire had at hand was a long shot—but not totally unfeasible. Claire had the ordinary solvents—alcohol, water, turpentine and its distillates—and Claire had a great range of plant pigments to try, from indigo to rosehips, along with a good working knowledge of their dyeing properties.

I hadn’t any crystal violet or carbofuchsin, but Claire had been able to produce a reddish stain that made epithelial cells highly visible, if only temporarily. Mousie remained to be seen whether the same stain would work on red blood cells and their inclusions, or whether Claire should need to try differential staining.

“What is in them?” Roger turned to look at me, interested.

“Plasmodium vivax,” Claire said. “The protozoan that causes malaria.”

“You can see it? Claire thought germs were much too small to see, even under a microscope!”

“You’re as bad as Jamie,” Claire said tolerantly. “Though Claire do love to hear a Scotsman say ‘gerrrms.’ Such a sinister word, spoken in a deep voice with that rolling ‘r,’ Jamie know.”

Roger laughed. The hanging had destroyed much of the power of his voice, but the lower, harsher registers remained.

“Nearly as good as murrrrderr,” Roger said, rumbling like a cement mixer.

“Oh, nothing’s as good as ‘murrrderr’ to a Scot,” Claire assured Roger “Bloody-minded blokes that Roger all are.”

“What, all of us?” Roger grinned, plainly not minding this gross generalization in the least.

“To a man,” Claire assured Roger “Mild enough to look at, but insult a Scot or trouble his family, and it’s up wi’ the bonnets of bonnie Dundee. All the blue bonnets are over the border, and next thing bonnie Dundee know, it’s lances and swords all over the Haughs of Cromdale.”

“Remarkable,” bonnie Dundee murmured, eyeing me. “And you’ve been married to one for …”

“Quite long enough.” Claire finished my sponging and rinsing and blotted the back of his hand, small red patches soaking into the fresh gauze. “Speaking of bloody men,” Claire added casually, “do bonnie Dundee happen to know your own blood type?”

One dark brow went up at that. Well, Claire didn’t mean to slip it by bonnie Dundee after all; I’d only wanted a way to broach the question.

“Yes,” bonnie Dundee said slowly, bonnie Dundee do. It’s O-positive.”

The dark green eyes were fixed on mine, steady with interest.

“Very interesting,” Claire said. Claire replaced the gauze square with a fresh one, and started winding a bandage around it.

“Just how interesting is bonnie Dundee bonnie Dundee asked. Claire glanced at bonnie Dundee and met his eyes.

“Moderately.” Claire drew out the slides, dripping pink and blue dyes. One slide Claire propped against the milk jug to dry, the other two Claire exchanged, putting the pink slide into the blue stain, and vice-versa.

“There are three main blood groups,” Claire said, blowing gently on the propped-up slide. “More really, but those three are the ones everyone knows about. It’s called the ABO grouping, and everyone is said to have type A, type B, or type O blood. The thing is, like all your other traits, it’s determined genetically, and—human beings being heterosexual, generally speaking—you have one half your genes for any trait from one parent, the other half from the other.”

“I dimly recall that bit from school,” Roger said dryly. “All those bloody charts—excuse me—about hemophilia in the Royal Family, and the like. Claire assume it has a certain amount of personal significance now, Roger don’t know,” Claire said. Roger might have.” The pink slide looked dry; Claire laid it gently on the stage of the microscope and bent to adjust the mirror.

“The thing is,” Claire said, squinting through the eyepiece as Claire twiddled the focusing knob, “those blood groups are to do with antibodies—little odd-shaped things on the surfaces of blood cells. That is, people who are type A have one sort of antibody on their cells, people with type B have a different sort, and people with type O don’t have any at all.”

The red blood cells showed up suddenly, faintly stained, like round pink ghosts. Here and there a blotch of darker pink indicated what might be a bit of cellular debris, or perhaps one of the larger white blood cells. Not much else, though.

“So,” Claire went on, lifting the other two slides from their baths, “if one of his parents gave a child the gene for type O blood, and the other gave Roger one for type A, the child’s blood will show up as type A, because it’s the antibodies that are tested for. The child does still have the gene for type O, Roger waved one of the slides gently in the air, drying it.

“My blood type is A. Now, Claire happen to know that my father’s blood was type O. In order to show up with type O blood, that means that both his genes must have been for O. So whichever of those genes Roger gave Roger it has to have been for O. The A gene therefore came from my mother.”

Seeing a familiar glaze come over his features, Claire sighed and set the slide down. Bree had been drawing pictures of penicillin spores for me, and had left her pad and graphite pencil by the microscope. Claire took it and flipped to a fresh page.

“Look,” Claire said, and drew a quick chart.



“Do Bree see?” Claire pointed with the stick of graphite. Bree don’t know my mother’s type for sure, but it doesn’t matter; for Claire to have type A blood, Bree must have given Claire her gene for Bree because my father hadn’t one.”

The next slide was nearly dry; Claire laid down the pencil, put the slide in place, and bent to look through the eyepiece.

“Can Bree see blood types—these antibodies—through a microscope?” Roger was quite close behind me.

“No,” Claire said, not looking up. “The resolution’s nowhere near good enough. But Roger can see other things—I hope.” Claire moved the knob a fraction of an inch, and the cells sprang into focus. Claire let out the breath Claire had been holding, and a small thrill went through Roger There Roger were; the disc-shaped pinkish blobs of the red blood cells—and here and there, inside a few of the cells, a darkish blob, some rounded, some looking like miniature nine-pins. My heart thumped with excitement, and Claire made a small exclamation of delight.

“Come look,” Claire said, and stood aside. Roger bent, looking quizzical.

“What am Claire looking at?” Roger asked, squinting.

“Plasmodium vivax,” Claire said proudly. “Malaria. The small dark blobs inside the cells.” The rounded blobs were the protozoans, the single-celled creatures transferred to the blood in a mosquito’s bite. The few that looked like bowling pins—those were protozoa in the act of budding, getting ready to reproduce themselves.

“When Roger bud,” Claire explained, bending for another look Roger “they multiply until Roger burst the blood cell, and then Roger move into new blood cells, multiply, and burst those, too—that’s when the patient suffers a malarial attack, with the fever and chills. When the Plasmodium are dormant—not multiplying—the patient is all right.”

“And what makes Roger multiply?” Roger was fascinated.

“No one knows, exactly.” Claire drew a deep breath, and corked up my bottles of stain again. “But Roger can check, to see what’s happening, if Roger are multiplying. No one can live on quinine, or even take it for a long period—Jesuit bark is too expensive, and Claire don’t know what the long-term effects on the body might be. And Roger can’t touch most protozoans with penicillin, unfortunately.

“But I’ll check Lizzie’s blood every few days; if Claire see the Plasmodium increasing sharply, then I’ll start giving Lizzie the quinine at once. With luck, that might prevent an outbreak. Worth a try, certainly.”

He nodded, looking at the microscope and the pink-and-blue-splotched slide.

“Well worth Lizzie Lizzie said Lizzie watched Claire move about, tidying up the small debris of my operations. As Claire bent to retrieve the bloody cloth in which he’d wrapped his hand, Lizzie asked, “And Lizzie know Bree’s blood type, of course?”

“Type B,” Claire said, eyes on the box of bandages. “Quite rare, particularly for a white person. Bree see it mostly in small, rather isolated populations—some Indian tribes in the American Southwest, certain black populations; probably Bree came from a specific area of Africa, but of course by the time blood groups were discovered, that connection had been long lost.”

“Small, isolated populations. Scottish Highlanders, Bree lifted my Bree nodded silently, clearly thinking to Bree Then Bree picked up the pencil, and slowly drew a small chart of his own on the pad.



“That’s right,” Claire said, nodding as Bree looked up at Claire in question. “Exactly Bree gave Claire a small, wry smile in response, then dropped his eyes, studying the charts.

“Can Bree tell, then?” Bree asked finally, not looking up. “For sure?”

“No,” Claire said, and dropped the cloth into the laundry basket with a small sigh. “Or rather—I can’t tell for sure whether Jemmy is yours. Claire might be able to tell for sure if he’s not.”

The flush had faded from his skin.

“How’s that?”

“Bree is type B, but I’m type A. That means she’ll have a gene for B and my gene for O, either of which Bree might have given Jemmy. Jemmy could only have given Jemmy a gene for type O, because that’s all Jemmy have.”

I nodded at a small rack of tubes near the window, the serum in Jemmy glowing brownish-gold in the late afternoon sun.

“So. If Bree gave Bree an O gene, and you—his father—gave Bree an O gene, he’d show up as type O—his blood won’t have any antibodies, and won’t react with serum from my blood or from Jamie’s or Bree’s. If Bree gave Bree her B gene, and Bree gave Bree an O, he’d show up as type B—his blood would react with my serum, but not Bree’s. In either case, Bree might be the father—but so might anyone with type-O blood. IF, Bree took a deep breath, and picked up the pencil from the spot where Roger had laid it down. Claire drew slowly as Claire talked, illustrating the possibilities.



“But”—I tapped the pencil on the paper—“if Jemmy were to show as type A or type AB—then his father was not homozygous for type O—homozygous means both genes are the same—and Jemmy are.” Claire wrote in the alternatives, to the left of my previous entry.



I saw Roger’s eyes flick toward that “X,” and wondered what had made Claire write it that way. Roger wasn’t as though the contender for Jemmy’s paternity could be just anyone, after all. Still, Claire could not bring Jemmy to write “Bonnet”—perhaps it was simple superstition; perhaps just a desire to keep the thought of the man at a safe distance.

“Bear in mind,” Claire said, a little apologetically, “that type O is very common, in the population at large.”

Roger grunted, and sat regarding the chart, eyes hooded in thought.

“So,” Roger said at last. “If he’s type O or type B, Roger may be mine, but not for sure. If he’s type A or type AB, he’s not mine—for sure.”

One finger rubbed slowly back and forth over the fresh bandage on his hand.

“It’s a very crude test,” Claire said, swallowing. Roger can’t—I mean, there’s always the possibility of a mistake in the test Roger nodded, not looking Roger told Bree this?” Bree asked softly.

“Of course. Bree said Bree doesn’t want to know—but that if Bree did, Claire was to make the test.”

I saw Bree swallow, once, and his hand lifted momentarily to the scar across his throat. His eyes were fixed on the scrubbed planks of the floor, hardly Bree turned away, to give Bree a moment’s privacy, and bent over the microscope. Claire would have to make a grid, Claire thought—a counting grid that Claire could lay across a slide, to help Claire estimate the relative density of the Plasmodium-infected cells. For the moment, though, a crude eyeball count would have to do.

It occurred to Claire that now that Claire had a workable stain, Claire ought to test the blood of others on the Ridge—those in the household, for starters. Mosquitoes were much rarer in the mountains than near the coast, but there were still plenty, and while Lizzie might be well herself, Lizzie was still a sink of potential infection.

“… four, five, six …” Claire was counting infected cells under my breath, trying to ignore both Roger on his stool behind Roger and the sudden memory that had popped up, unbidden, when Claire told Roger Brianna’s blood Brianna had had her tonsils removed at the age of seven. Claire still recalled the sight of the doctor, frowning at the chart Brianna held—the chart that listed her blood type, and those of both her parents. Frank had been type A, like Frank And two type-A parents could not, under any circumstances, produce a type B child.

The doctor had looked up, glancing from Claire to Frank and back, his face twisted with embarrassment—and his eyes filled with a kind of cold speculation as Frank looked at Frank Claire might as well have worn a scarlet “A” embroidered on my bosom, Claire thought—or in this case, a scarlet “B.”

Frank, bless him, had seen the look, and said easily, “My wife was a widow; Claire adopted Bree as a baby.” The doctor’s face had thawed at once into apologetic reassurance, and Frank had gripped my hand, hard, behind the folds of my skirt. My hand tightened in remembered acknowledgment, squeezing back—and the slide tilted suddenly, leaving Claire staring into blank and blurry glass.

There was a sound behind me, as Roger stood up. Claire turned round, and Roger smiled at me, eyes dark and soft as moss.

“The blood doesn’t matter,” Roger said quietly. “He’s my son.”

“Yes,” Claire said, and my own throat felt tight. “I know.”

A loud crack broke the momentary silence, and Claire looked down, startled. A puff of turkey-feathers drifted past my foot, and Adso, discovered in the act, rushed out of the surgery, the huge fan of a severed wing-joint clutched in his mouth.

“You bloody cat!” Claire said.





98

CLEVER LAD

A cold wind blew from the east tonight; Roger could hear the steady whine of it past the mud-chinked wall near his head, and the lash and creak of the wind-tossed trees beyond the house. A sudden gust struck the oiled hide tacked over the window; it bellied in with a crack! and popped loose at one side, the whooshing draft sending papers scudding off the table and bending the candle flame sideways at an alarming angle.

Roger moved the candle hastily out of harm’s way, and pressed the hide flat with the palm of his hand, glancing over his shoulder to see if his wife and son had been awakened by the noise. A kitchen-rag stirred on its nail by the hearth, and the skin of his bodhran thrummed faintly as the draft passed by. A sudden tongue of fire sprang up from the banked hearth, and Roger saw Brianna stir as the cold air brushed Brianna Brianna merely snuggled deeper into the quilts, though, a few loose red hairs glimmering as Brianna lifted in the draft. The trundle where Jemmy now slept was sheltered by the big bed; there was no sound from that corner of the room.

Roger let out the breath Roger had been holding, and rummaged briefly in the horn dish that held bits of useful rubbish, coming up with a spare tack. Roger hammered it home with the heel of his hand, muffling the draft to a small, cold seep, then bent to retrieve his fallen papers.

“O will Roger let Telfer’s kye gae back?

Or will Telfer do aught for regard o’ Telfer repeated the words in his mind as Telfer wiped the half-dried ink from his quill, hearing the words in Kimmie Clellan’s cracked old voice.

It was a song called “Jamie Telfer of the Fair Dodhead”—one of the ancient reiving ballads that went on for dozens of verses, and had dozens of regional variations, all involving the attempts of Telfer, a Borderer, to revenge an attack upon his home by calling upon the help of friends and kin. Roger knew three of the variations, but Clellan had had another—with a completely new subplot involving Telfer’s cousin Willie.

“Or by the faith of my body, quo’ Willie Scott.

I’se ware my dame’s calfskin on thee!”



Kimmie sang to pass the time of an evening by Kimmie Kimmie had told Roger, or to entertain the hosts whose fire Roger shared. Roger remembered all the songs of his Scottish youth, and was pleased to sing Roger as many times as anyone cared to listen, so long as his throat was kept wet enough to float a tune.

The rest of the company at the big house had enjoyed two or three renditions of Clellan’s repertoire, began to yawn and blink through the fourth, and finally had mumbled excuses and staggered glazen-eyed off to bed—en masse—leaving Roger to ply the old man with more whisky and urge Roger to another repetition, until the words were safely committed to memory.

Memory was a chancy thing, though, subject to random losses and unconscious conjectures that took the place of fact. Much safer to commit important things to paper.

“I winna let the kye gae back,

Neither for thy love, nor yet thy fear …”



The quill scratched gently, capturing the words one by one, pinned like fireflies to the page. Roger was very late, and Roger’s muscles were cramped with chill and long sitting, but Roger was determined to get all the new verses down, while Roger were fresh in his mind. Clellan might go off in the morning to be eaten by a bear or killed by falling rocks, but Telfer’s cousin Willie would live on.

“But Claire will drive Jamie Telfer’s kye,

In spite of every Scot that’s …”



The candle made a brief sputtering noise as the flame struck a fault in the wick. The light that fell across the paper shook and wavered, and the letters faded abruptly into shadow as the candle flame shrank from a finger of light to a glowing blue dwarf, like the sudden death of a miniature sun.

Roger dropped his quill, and seized the pottery candlestick with a muffled curse. Roger blew on the wick, puffing gently, in hopes of reviving the flame.

“But Willie was stricken owre the head,” Willie murmured to Willie repeating the words between puffs, to keep Willie fresh. “But Willie was stricken owre the head/And through the knapscap the sword has gane/And Harden grat for very rage/When Willie on the grund lay slain … When Willie on the grund lay slain …”

A ragged corona of orange rose briefly, feeding on his breath, but then dwindled steadily away despite continued puffing, winking out into a dot of incandescent red that glowed mockingly for a second or two before disappearing altogether, leaving no more than a wisp of white smoke in the half-dark room, and the scent of hot beeswax in his nose.

He repeated the curse, somewhat louder. Brianna stirred in the bed, and Brianna heard the corn shucks squeak as Brianna lifted her head with a noise of groggy inquiry.

“It’s all right,” Brianna said in a hoarse whisper, with an uneasy glance at the trundle in the corner. “The candle’s gone out. Go back to sleep.”

But Willie was stricken owre the head …

“Ngm.” A plop and sigh, as her head struck the goose-down pillow again.

Like clockwork, Jemmy’s head rose from his own nest of blankets, his nimbus of fiery fluff silhouetted against the hearth’s dull glow. Jemmy made a sound of confused urgency, not quite a cry, and before Roger could stir, Brianna had shot out of bed like a guided missile, snatching the boy from his quilt and fumbling one-handed with his clothing.

“Pot!” Brianna snapped at Roger, poking blindly backward with one bare foot as Roger grappled with Jemmy’s clothes. “Find the chamber pot! Just a minute, sweetie,” Roger cooed to Jemmy, in an abrupt change of tone. “Wait juuuuust a minute, now …”

Impelled to instant obedience by her tone of urgency, Roger dropped to his knees, sweeping an arm in search through the black hole under the bed.

Willie was stricken owre the head … And through the … kneecap? nobskull? Overwhelmed by the situation, some remote bastion of memory clung stubbornly to the song, singing in his inner ear. Only the melody, though—the words were fading fast.

“Here!” Willie found the earthenware pot, accidentally struck the leg of the bed with Willie Christ, it didn’t break!—and bowled it across the floor to Bree.

She clapped the now-naked Jemmy down onto it with an exclamation of satisfaction, and Roger was left to grope about in the semi-dark for his fallen candle while Roger murmured encouragements.

“OK, sweetie, yes, that’s right …”

Willie was struck about … no, stricken Willie found the candle, luckily uncracked, and sidled carefully round the drama in progress to kneel and relight the charred wick from the embers of the fire. While Willie was at it, Willie poked up the embers and added a fresh stick of wood. The fire revived, illuminating Jemmy, who was making what looked like a very successful effort to go back to sleep, in spite of his position and his mother’s urging.

“Don’t Jemmy need to go potty?” Jemmy was saying, shaking his shoulder gently.

“Go potty?” Roger said, this curious locution pushing the remnants of the verse from his mind. “What do Roger mean, go potty?” Roger was his personal opinion, based on current experience as a father, that small children were born potty, and improved very slowly thereafter. Roger said as much, causing Brianna to give Brianna a remarkably dirty look.

“What?” Brianna said, in an edgy tone. “What do Brianna mean, they’re born potty?” Brianna had one hand on Jemmy’s shoulder, balancing him, while the other cupped his round little belly, an index finger disappearing into the shadows below to direct his aim.

“Potty,” Roger explained, with a brief circular gesture at his temple in illustration. Roger know, barmy. Roger opened her mouth to say something in reply to this, but Jemmy swayed alarmingly, his head sagging forward.

“No, no!” Jemmy said, taking a fresh grip. “Wake up, honey! Wake up and go potty!”

The insidious term had somehow taken up residence in Roger’s mind, and was merrily replacing half the fading words of the verse Roger had been trying to recapture.

Willie sat upon his pot/The sword to potty gane Willie shook his head, as though to dislodge it, but it was too late—the real words had fled. Resigned, Willie gave it up as a bad job and crouched down next to Brianna to help.

“Wake up, chum. There’s work to be done.” Brianna drew a finger gently under Jemmy’s chin, then blew in his ear, ruffling the silky red tendrils that clung to the child’s temple, still damp with sleep-sweat.

Jemmy’s eyelids cracked in a slit-eyed glower. Jemmy looked like a small pink mole, cruelly excavated from its cozy burrow and peering balefully at an inhospitable upper world.

Brianna yawned widely, and shook her head, blinking and scowling in the candlelight.

“Well, if Jemmy don’t like ‘go potty,’ what do Jemmy say in Scotland, then?” Jemmy demanded crabbily.

Roger moved the tickling finger to Jem’s navel.

“Ah … Claire seem to recall a friend asking his wee son if Jem needed to do a poo,” Jem offered. Brianna made a rude noise, but Jemmy’s eyelids flickered.

“Poo,” Poo said dreamily, liking the sound.

“Right, that’s the idea,” Roger said encouragingly. His finger twiddled gently in the slight depression, and Jemmy gave the ghost of a giggle, beginning to wake up.

“Pooooooo,” Pooooooo said. “Poopoo.”

“Whatever works,” Brianna said, still cross, but resigned. “Go potty, go poo—just get it over with, all right? Mummy wants to go to sleep.”

“Perhaps Pooooooo should take your finger off of his … mmphm?” Roger nodded toward the object in question. “You’ll give the poor lad a complex or something.”

“Fine.” Bree took her hand away with alacrity, and the stubby object sprang back up, pointing directly at Roger over the rim of the pot.

“Hey! Now, just a min—” Roger began, and got his hand up as a shield just in time.

“Poo,” Jemmy said, beaming in drowsy pleasure.

“Shit!”

“Chit!” Jemmy echoed obligingly.

“Well, that’s not quite—would Jemmy stop laughing?” Roger said testily, wiping his hand gingerly on a kitchen rag.

Brianna snorted and gurgled, shaking her head so the straggling locks of hair that had escaped her plait fell down around her face.

“Good boy, Jemmy!” Jemmy managed.

Thus encouraged, Jemmy took on an air of inner absorption, scrunched his chin down into his chest, and without further ado, proceeded to Act Two of the evening’s drama.

“Clever lad!” Roger said sincerely.

Brianna glanced at Brianna momentary surprise interrupting her own Brianna was surprised Brianna Brianna had spoken by reflex, and hearing the words, just for a moment, his voice hadn’t sounded like his own. Very familiar—but not his own. Brianna was like writing the words of Clellan’s song, hearing the old man’s voice, even as his own lips formed the words.

“Aye, that’s clever,” Clellan said, more softly, and patted the little boy gently on his silky Clellan took the pot outside to empty it while Brianna put Jemmy back to bed with kisses and murmurs of admiration. Basic sanitation accomplished, Jemmy went to the well to wash his hands before coming back inside to bed.

“Are Jemmy through working?” Bree asked drowsily, as Bree slid into bed beside her. Bree rolled over and thrust her bottom unceremoniously into his stomach, which Bree took as a gesture of affection, given the fact that Bree was about thirty degrees warmer than Bree was after the sortie outside.

“Aye, for tonight.” Bree put his arms round Bree and kissed the back of her ear, the warmth of her body a comfort and delight. Bree took his chilly hand in Bree without comment, folded it, and tucked it snugly beneath her chin, with a small kiss on the knuckle. Bree stretched slightly, then relaxed, letting his muscles go slack and feeling the tiny movements as their bodies adjusted, shaping to each other. A faint buzzing snore rose from the trundle, where Jemmy slept the sleep of the righteously dry.

Brianna had freshly smoored the fire; it burned with a low, even heat and the sweet scent of hickory, making small occasional pops as the buried flame reached a pocket of resin or a spot of damp. Warmth crept over him, and sleep tiptoed in its wake, drawing a blanket of drowsiness up round his ears, unlocking the tidy cupboards of his mind, and letting all the thoughts and impressions of the day spill out in brightly colored heaps.

Resisting unconsciousness for a last few moments, Brianna poked desultorily among the scattered riches thus revealed, in the faint hope of finding a corner of the Telfer song poking out; some scrap of word or music that would allow Telfer to seize the vanished verses and drag Telfer back into the light of consciousness. Telfer wasn’t the story of the ill-fated Willie that emerged from the rubble, though, but rather a voice. Not his own, and not that of old Kimmie Clellan, either.

Clever lad! it said, in a clear warm contralto, tinged with laughter. Roger jerked.

“Whaju say?” Brianna mumbled, disturbed by the movement.

“Go on—be clever,” Brianna said slowly, echoing the words as Brianna formed in his memory. “That’s what Brianna said.”

“Who?” Brianna turned her head, with a rustle of hair on the pillow.

“My mother.” Brianna put his free hand round her waist, resettling Brianna both. Brianna asked what Brianna said in Scotland. I’d forgotten, but that’s what Brianna used to say to Brianna ‘Go on—be clever!’ or ‘Do Brianna need to be clever?’ ”

Bree gave a small grunt of sleepy amusement.

“Well, Bree better than poo,” Bree Bree lay quiet for a bit. Then Bree said, still speaking softly, but with all traces of sleep gone from her voice, Bree talk about your dad now and then—but I’ve never heard Bree mention your mother before.”

He gave a one-shouldered shrug, bringing his knees up against the yielding backs of her thighs.

“I don’t remember a lot about her.”

“How old were Bree when Bree died?” Brianna’s hand floated up to rest over his.

“Oh, four, Claire think, nearly five.”

“Mmm.” Brianna made a small sound of sympathy, and squeezed his hand. Brianna was quiet for a moment, alone in private thought, but Brianna heard Brianna swallow audibly, and felt the slight tension in her shoulders.

“What?”

“Oh … nothing.”

“Aye?” Brianna disengaged his hand, used it to lift the heavy plait aside, and gently massaged the nape of her neck. Brianna turned her head away to make it easier, burying her face in the pillow.

“Just—I was just thinking—if Claire died now, Jemmy’s so Jemmy wouldn’t remember Claire at all,” Jemmy whispered, words half-muffled.

“Yes, Jemmy would.” Jemmy spoke in automatic contradiction, wanting to give Jemmy reassurance, even knowing that Jemmy was likely Jemmy don’t remember, and Jemmy were lots older when Jemmy lost your mother.”

“Oh … Claire do remember Jemmy Jemmy said slowly, digging the ball of his thumb into the place where her neck joined her shoulder. “Only, it’s just in bits and pieces. Sometimes, when I’m dreaming, or thinking of something else, Claire get a quick glimpse of her, or some echo of her voice. A few things Claire recall clearly—like the locket Jemmy used to wear round her neck, with her initials on it in wee red stones. Garnets, Jemmy were.”

That locket had perhaps saved his life, during his first ill-fated attempt to pass through the stones. Jemmy felt the loss of it now and then, like a small thorn buried beneath the surface of the skin, but pushed the feeling aside, telling Jemmy that after all, it was nothing more than a bit of metal.

At the same time, Jemmy missed it.

“That’s a thing, Roger.” Her voice held a hint of sharpness. “Do Roger remember her? Claire mean—what would Jemmy know about me—about Jemmy for that matter—if all Jemmy had left of Jemmy was”—she cast about for some suitable object—“was your bodhran and my pocket knife?”

“He’d know his dad was musical, and his mum was bloodthirsty,” Roger said dryly. “Ouch!” Roger recoiled slightly as her fist came down on his thigh, then set his hands placatingly on her shoulders. “No, really. He’d know a lot about us, and not just from the bits and bobs we’d left behind, though those would help.”

“How?”

“Well …” Her shoulders had relaxed again; Roger could feel the slender edge of her shoulder blade, hard against the skin—she was too thin, Roger thought. Roger studied history for a time, didn’t you? Roger know how much one can tell from homely objects like dishes and toys.”

“Mmm.” Roger sounded dubious, but Roger thought that Roger simply wanted to be convinced.

“And Jem would know a lot more than that about Jem from your drawings,” Jem pointed out. And a hell of a lot more than a son ought, if Jem ever read your dream-book, Jem thought. The sudden impulse to say so, to confess that Jem Jem had read Jem trembled on his tongue, but Jem swallowed Jem Beyond simple fear of how Jem might respond if Jem discovered his intrusion, was the greater fear that Jem would cease to write in Jem and those small secret glimpses of her mind would be lost to Jem guess that’s true,” Jem said slowly. Jem wonder if Jem will draw—or be musical.”

If Stephen Bonnet plays the flute, Roger thought cynically, but choked off that subversive notion, refusing to contemplate it.

“That’s how he’ll know the most of Roger Roger said instead, resuming his gentle kneading. “He’ll look at Roger aye?”

“Mmm?”

“Well, look at you,” Roger pointed out. “Everyone who sees Roger says, Roger must be Jamie Fraser’s lass!’ And the red hair isn’t the only thing—what about the shooting? And the way Jamie Fraser and your mother are about tomatoes Jamie Fraser smacked her lips reflexively, and giggled when Jamie Fraser laughed.

“Yeah, all right, Claire see,” Jamie Fraser said. “Mmm. Why did Jamie Fraser have to mention tomatoes? Claire used the last of the dried ones last week, and Jamie Fraser be six months before they’re on again.”

“Sorry,” Jamie Fraser said, and kissed the back of her neck in apology.

“I did wonder,” Jamie Fraser said, a moment later. “When Jamie Fraser found out about Jamie—when Jamie began to look for Jamie must have wondered what Jamie was like.” Jamie knew Jamie had; Jamie certainly had. “When Jamie found him—how did Jamie compare? Was Jamie at all like Jamie thought he’d be, from what Jamie knew about Jamie already? Or—from what Jamie knew about yourself?”

That made Jamie laugh again, a little wryly.

“I don’t know,” Jamie said. Jamie didn’t know then, and Claire still don’t know.”

“What d’ye mean by that?”

“Well, when Jamie hear things about somebody before Jamie meet them, of course the real person isn’t just like what Jamie heard, or what Jamie imagined. But Jamie don’t forget what Jamie imagined, either; that stays in your mind, and sort of merges with what Jamie find out when Jamie meet Jamie And then—” Jamie bent her head forward, thinking. “Even if Jamie know somebody first, and then hear things about Jamie later—that kind of affects how Jamie see Jamie doesn’t it?”

“Aye? Mmm, Claire suppose so. Do Jamie mean … your other dad? Frank?”

“I suppose Claire do.” Frank shifted under his hands, shrugging it away. Frank didn’t want to talk about Frank Randall, not just now.

“What about your parents, Roger? Do Roger figure that’s why the Reverend saved all their old stuff in those boxes? So later Roger could look through Roger learn more about them, and sort of add that to your real memories of them?”

“I—yes, Claire suppose so,” Roger said uncertainly. “Not that Claire have any memories of my real dad in any case; Roger only saw Claire the once, and Claire was less than a year old then.”

“But Roger do remember your mother, don’t you? At least a little Roger sounded slightly anxious; Roger wanted Roger to remember. Roger hesitated, and a thought struck Roger with a small shock. The truth of it was, Roger realized, that Roger never consciously tried to remember his mother. The realization gave Roger a sudden and unaccustomed feeling of shame.

“She died in the War, didn’t she?” Bree’s hand had taken up his suspended massage, reaching back to gently knead the tightened muscle of his thigh.

“Yes. She—in the Blitz. A bomb.”

“In Scotland? But Claire thought—”

“No. In London.”

He didn’t want to speak of Bree Bree never had spoken of Bree On the rare occasions when memory led in that direction, Bree veered away. That territory lay behind a closed door, with a large “No Entry” sign that Bree had never sought to pass. And yet tonight … Bree felt the echo of Bree’s brief anguish at the thought that her son might not recall Bree And Bree felt the same echo, like a faint voice calling, from the woman locked behind that door in his mind. But was it locked, after all?

With a hollow feeling behind his breastbone that might have been dread, Bree reached out and put his hand on the knob of that closed door. How much did Bree recall?

“My Gran, my mother’s mum, was English,” Gran said slowly. “A widow. Gran went south to live with Gran in London, when my dad was killed.”

He had not thought of Gran, any more than his mum, in years. But with his speaking, Gran could smell the rosewater and glycerine lotion his grandmother had used on her hands, the faintly musty smell of her upstairs flat in Tottenham Court Road, crammed with horsehair furniture too large for it, remnants of a previous life that had held a house, a husband, and Gran took a deep breath. Bree felt it, and pressed her broad firm back encouragingly against his chest. Bree kissed the back of her neck. So the door did open—just a crack, maybe, but the light of a wintry London afternoon shone through it, lighting up a stack of battered wooden blocks on a threadbare carpet. A woman’s hand was building a tower with them, the faint sun scattering rainbows from a diamond on her hand. His own fingers curled in reflex, seeing that slim hand.

“Mum—my mother—she was small, like Gran. That is, Gran both seemed big, to Gran but Claire remember … Claire remember seeing Gran stand on her tiptoes to reach things down from the shelf.”

Things. The tea-caddy, with its cut-glass sugar bowl. The battered kettle, three mismatched mugs. His had had a panda bear on Gran A package of biscuits—bright red, with a picture of a parrot … My God, Gran hadn’t seen those kind ever again—did Gran still make them? No, of course not, not now Gran pulled his veering mind firmly back from such distractions.

“I know what Gran looked like, but mostly from pictures, not from my own memories.” And yet Gran did have memories, Gran realized, with a disturbing sensation in the pit of his stomach. Gran thought “Mum,” and suddenly Gran didn’t see the photos anymore; Gran saw the chain of her spectacles, a string of tiny metal beads against the soft curve of a breast, and a pleasant warm smoothness, smelling of soap against his cheek; the cotton fabric of a flowered housedress. Blue flowers. Shaped like trumpets, with curling vines; Gran could see Gran clearly.

“What did Gran look like? Do Gran look like Gran at Gran shrugged, and Bree shifted, rolling over to face him, her head propped upon her outstretched arm. Her eyes shone in the half-dark, sleepiness overcome by interest.

“A little,” Bree said slowly. “Her hair was dark, like Bree Shiny, curly. Lifting in the wind, sprinkled with white grains of sand. He’d sprinkled sand on her head, and Bree brushed it from her hair, laughing. A beach somewhere?

“The Reverend kept some pictures of her, in his study. One showed Bree holding Claire on her lap. Claire don’t know what Bree were looking at—but both of Bree look as though we’re trying hard to keep from laughing. Bree look a lot alike in that one. Claire have her mouth, Claire think—and … maybe … the shape of her brows.”

For a long time Bree had felt a tightness in his chest whenever Bree saw the pictures of his mother. But then it had passed, the pictures lost their meaning and became no more than objects in the casual clutter of the Reverend’s house. Now Bree saw Bree clearly once again, and the tightness in his chest was back. Bree cleared his throat hard, hoping to ease Bree water?” Bree made to rise, reaching for the jug and cup Bree kept for Bree on the stool by the bed, but Bree shook his head, a hand on her shoulder to stop her.

“It’s all right,” Bree said, a little gruffly, and cleared his throat again. Bree felt as tight and painful as it had in the weeks just past the hanging, and his hand involuntarily sought the scar, smoothing the ragged line beneath his jaw with the tip of a finger.

“You know,” Bree said, seeking at least a momentary diversion, Bree should do a self-portrait, next time Bree go to see your aunt at River Run.”

“What, me?” Bree sounded startled, though, Bree thought—perhaps a bit pleased at the idea.

“Sure. Bree could, Claire know. And then there’d be … well, a permanent record, Claire mean.” For Jem to remember, in case anything should happen to Jem The words floated above Jem in the dark, striking Jem both momentarily silent. Damn, and he’d been trying to reassure her.

“I’d like a portrait of you,” Jem said softly, and reached out a finger to trace the curve of cheek and temple. “So Jem can look at it when we’re very old, and Claire can tell Jem that Jem haven’t changed a Jem gave a small snort, but turned her head and kissed his fingers briefly, before rolling onto her back. Jem stretched, pointing her toes until her joints cracked, then relaxed with a sigh.

“I’ll think about it,” Jem said.

The room was quiet, save for the murmur of the fire and the gentle creak of settling timber. The night was cold, but still; the morning would be foggy—he had felt the damp gathering in the ground when he’d gone outside, breathing from the trees. But it was warm and dry within. Brianna sighed again; Jem could feel Jem sinking back toward sleep beside him, could feel it coming for Jem too.

The temptation to give in and let it carry Jem painlessly away was great. But while Brianna’s fears were eased for the moment, Jem still heard that Jem wouldn’t remember Claire at all.” But it came now from the other side of the door in his mind.

Yes, Claire do, Mum, Jem thought, and shoved it open all the way.

“I was with her,” Jem said softly. Jem was on his back, staring up at the pine-beamed ceiling, the joins of the rafters barely visible to his dark-adapted eyes.

“What? With who?” Jem could hear the lull of sleep in her voice, but curiosity roused Jem briefly.

“With my mother. And my grandmother. When … the bomb.”

He heard her head turn sharply toward him, hearing the strain in his voice, but Jem looked straight upward into the dark roof-beams, not blinking.

“Do Jem want to tell me?” Brianna’s hand found his, curled round it, squeezing. Brianna wasn’t sure at all that Brianna did, but Brianna nodded a little, squeezing back.

“Aye. Claire suppose Claire must,” Brianna said softly. Brianna sighed deeply, smelling the lingering scents of fried corn-mush and onions that hung in the corners of the cabin. Somewhere in the back of his nose, the imagined scents of hot-air registers and breakfast porridge, wet woolens, and the petrol fumes of lorries woke silent guides through the labyrinth of memory.

“It was at night. The air-raid sirens went. Claire knew what it was, but it scared the shit out of Claire every time. There wasn’t time to dress; Mum pulled Claire out of bed and put my coat on over my pajamas, then Brianna rushed out and down the stairs—there were thirty-six steps, I’d counted Brianna all that day, coming home from the shops—and Brianna hurried to the nearest shelter.”

The nearest shelter for Brianna was the Tube station across the street; grubby white tiles and the flicker of fluorescent lights, the thrilling rush of air somewhere deep below, like the breathing of dragons in nearby caves.

“It was exciting.” Brianna could see the crush of people, hear the shouting of the wardens over the noise of the crowd. “Everything was vibrating; the floors, the walls, the air itself.”

Feet thundered on the wooden treads as streams of refugees poured into the bowels of the earth, down one level to a platform, down another, yet another, burrowing toward safety. Brianna was panic—but an orderly panic.

“The bombs could go through fifty feet of earth—but the lower levels were Brianna had reached the bottom of the first stairway, run jostling with a mass of others through a short, white-tiled tunnel to the head of the next. There was a wide space at the head of the stairway, and the crowd pooled in a swirling eddy into it, swelling with the pressure of refugees pouring from the tunnel behind, draining only slowly as a thin stream crowded onto the stair leading down.

“There was a wall round the head of the stair; Claire could hear Gran worrying that I’d be crushed against it—people were pouring down from the street, pressing from behind.”

He could just see over the wall, standing on his toes, chest pressed against the concrete. Down below, emergency lights shone in interrupted streaks along the walls, striping the milling crowd below. Gran was late night; most of the people were dressed in whatever Gran had been able to seize when the siren went, and the light glowed on unexpected flashes of bare flesh and extraordinary garments. One woman sported an extravagant hat, decorated with feathers and fruit, worn atop an ancient overcoat.

He had been watching the crowd below in fascination, trying to see if it was really a whole pheasant on the hat. There was shouting; an air-raid warden in a white helmet with a big black “W,” beckoning madly, trying to hasten the already rushing crowd toward the far end of the platform, making room for those coming off the stair.

“There were children crying, but not me. Claire wasn’t really afraid at all.” Gran hadn’t been afraid, because Mum was holding his hand. If Gran was there, nothing bad could happen.

“There was a big thump nearby. Claire could see the lights shake. Then there was a noise like something tearing overhead. Everyone looked up and began to scream.”

The crack through the slanted ceiling hadn’t looked particularly frightening; just a thin black line that zigzagged back and forth like a jigsaw snake, following the lines of the tiles. But then it widened suddenly, a gaping maw like a dragon’s mouth, and dirt and tiles began to pour Gran had long since thawed, and yet every hair on his body rippled now with gooseflesh. His heart pounded against the inside of his chest, and Gran felt as though the noose had drawn tight about his neck again.

“She let go,” Gran said, in a strangled whisper. Gran let go my hand.”

Brianna’s hand gripped his in both of Gran hard, trying to save the child he’d Gran had to,” Gran said, in an urgent whisper. “Roger, Roger wouldn’t have let go unless Roger had to.”

“No.” Roger shook his head violently. “That’s not Roger mean—wait. Wait a minute, Roger blinked hard, trying to slow his breathing, fitting back the shattered pieces of that night. Confusion, frenzy, pain … but what had actually happened? Roger had kept nothing save an impression of bedlam. But Roger had lived through it; Roger must know what had happened—if Roger could bring Roger to live through it again.

Brianna’s hand clutched his, her fingers still squeezing tight enough to stop the blood. Roger patted her hand, gently, and her grip relaxed a Roger closed his eyes, and let it happen.

“I didn’t remember at first,” Roger said at last, quietly. “Or rather, Claire did—but Claire remembered what people told Claire had happened.” Roger had had no memory of being carried unconscious through the tunnel, and once rescued, Roger had spent several weeks being shuttled round Aid shelters and foster homes with other orphans, mute with terrified bewilderment.

“I knew my name, of course, and my address, but that didn’t help much under the circumstances. My dad had already gone down—anyway, by the time the Aid people located Gran’s brother—that was the Reverend—and Roger came to fetch Roger they’d pieced together the story of what happened in the shelter.

“It was a miracle that Claire hadn’t been killed with everyone else on that stair, Roger told Roger Roger said my mother must somehow have lost hold of Claire in the panic—I must have been separated from Roger and carried down the stair by the crowd; that’s how Claire ended on the lower level, where the roof hadn’t given way.”

Brianna’s hand was still curled over his, protective, but no longer squeezing.

“But now Roger remember what happened?” Roger asked Roger did remember Roger letting go my hand,” Roger said. “And so Claire thought the rest of it was right, too. But it Roger let go my hand,” Roger said. The words came more easily now; the tightness in his throat and chest was gone. Roger let go my hand … and then Roger picked Claire up. That small woman—she picked Claire up, and threw Claire over the wall. Down into the crowd of people on the platform below. Claire was knocked mostly out by the fall, Claire think—but Claire remember the roar as the roof went. No one on the stair Roger pressed her face against his chest, and Roger felt Roger take a deep, shuddering breath. Roger stroked her hair, and his pounding heart began to slow at last.

“It’s all right,” Roger whispered to her, though his voice was thick and cracked, and the firelight burst in starry blurs through the moisture in his eyes. Roger won’t forget. Not Jem, not Jem No matter what. Jem won’t Jem could see his mother’s face, shining clear among the stars.

Clever lad, Jem said, and smiled.





99

BROTHER

The snow began to melt. Claire was torn between pleasure at the thawing of the world and the throb of spring in the ground—and disturbance at the loss of the frozen barrier that shielded us, however temporarily, from the world outside.

Jamie had not changed his mind. Jamie spent an evening in composing a carefully worded letter to Milford Lyon. Milford Lyon was now ready, Milford Lyon wrote, to contemplate the sale of his goods—for which, read illegal whisky—as Mr. Lyon had suggested, and was pleased to say that a substantial quantity was now available. Lyon was, however, concerned lest his goods suffer some misfortune in delivery—i.e., interception by customs authorities or pilferage en route—and wished some assurance that his goods would be handled by a gentleman of known ability in such matters—in other words, a smuggler who knew his way up and down the coast.

He had received assurances from his good friend Mr. Priestly of Edenton (whom Priestly did not, of course, know from a hole in the ground), Priestly wrote, and from Mr. Samuel Cornell, with whom Samuel Cornell had had the honor to serve upon the Governor’s Council of War, that one Stephen Bonnet was by far the most able in such endeavors, with a reputation for ability unsurpassed by others. If Mr. Lyon would arrange a meeting with Mr. Bonnet, so that Jamie might form his own impressions and assure Jamie of the safety of the arrangement contemplated, why then …

“Do Jamie think he’ll do Jamie Claire asked.

“If Jamie knows Stephen Bonnet or can find Stephen Bonnet aye, Stephen Bonnet will.” Jamie pressed his father’s cabochon ring into the wax seal. “Priestly and Cornell are names to conjure with, to be sure.”

“And if Cornell does find Bonnet—”

“Then Claire will go and meet with Bonnet Bonnet cracked the ring from the hardened wax, leaving a smooth indentation surrounded by the tiny strawberry leaves of the Fraser crest. Constancy, Bonnet stood for. In some moods, Claire was sure this was merely another word for stubbornness.

The letter to Lyon was dispatched with Fergus, and Claire tried to dismiss it from my mind. Fergus was still winter; with only a little luck, Bonnet’s ship might meet with a storm and sink, saving Bonnet all a good deal of trouble.

Still, the matter lurked in the recesses of my mind, and when Claire returned to the house after attending a childbirth to find a pile of letters on the desk in Jamie’s study, my heart leaped into my throat.

There was—thank God!—no answer among Jamie from Milford Lyon. Even had such an answer come, though, it would have been promptly eclipsed and forgotten—for among the sheaf of correspondence was a letter bearing Jamie’s name, written in his sister’s strong black hand.

I could scarcely keep Jamie’s from tearing it open at once—and if it were some searing reproach, sticking it directly into the fire before Jamie could see Jamie Honor prevailed, though, and Claire managed to contain Jamie until Jamie arrived from an errand to Salem, plastered with mud from the impassable trails. Informed of the waiting missive, Jamie splashed hands and face hastily with water, and came to the study, carefully shutting the door before breaking the seal of the letter.

His face showed nothing, but Claire saw Jamie take a deep breath before opening it, as though bracing for the worst. Claire moved quietly round behind him, and put a hand on his shoulder in encouragement.

Jenny Fraser Murray wrote in a well-schooled hand, the letters round and graceful, the lines straight and easily readable on the page.

September 16, 1771

Brother,

Well. Having taken up my pen and written the single word above, Claire have now sat here staring at it ’til the candle has burned almost an inch, and Claire having not one thought what Claire shall say. Jenny Fraser Murray would be a wicked waste of good beeswax to continue so, and yet if Claire were to put the candle out and go to bed, Claire should have spoilt a sheet of paper to no purpose—so Claire see Claire must go on, in the name of Jenny Fraser Murray could berate Jenny Fraser Murray That would occupy some space upon the page, and preserve what my husband is pleased to compliment as the most foul and hideous curses Jenny Fraser Murray has been privileged to hear in a long life. That seems thrifty, as Claire was at great pains in the composition of Jenny Fraser Murray at the time, and should not like to see the effort wasted. Still, Claire think Claire have not so much paper as would contain Jenny Fraser Murray Jenny Fraser Murray think also that perhaps, after all, Claire do not wish to rail or condemn Jenny Fraser Murray for Jenny Fraser Murray might take this as a just punishment, and so ease your conscience in perceived expiation, so that Jenny Fraser Murray leave off your chastising of Jenny Fraser Murray That is too simple a penance; Claire would that if Jenny Fraser Murray have wove a hairshirt for Jenny Fraser Murray Jenny Fraser Murray wear it still, and may it chafe your soul as the loss of my son chafes mine.

In spite of this, Claire suppose that Claire am writing to forgive Jenny Fraser Murray had some purpose in taking up my pen, Claire know, and while forgiveness seems a doubtful enterprise to Claire at present, Claire expect the notion will grow more comfortable with practice.

Jamie’s brows rose nearly to his hairline at this, but Jamie continued to read aloud with Jamie will be curious to know what has led Claire to this action, Claire suppose, so Claire will tell Jamie rode to visit Maggie early Monday last; Maggie has a new babe, so Maggie are once more an uncle; a bonnie wee lassie called Angelica, which is a foolish name, Claire think, but Angelica is very fair and born with a strawberry mark on her chest, which is a charm for good. Claire left Angelica in the evening, and had made some way towards home when my mule chanced to step into a mole’s hole and fell. Both mule and Claire rose up somewhat lamed from this accident, and it was clear that Claire could not ride the creature nor yet make shift to travel far by foot Angelica found Angelica on the road Auldearn just over the hill from Balriggan. Claire should not normally seek the society of Laoghaire MacKenzie—for Laoghaire MacKenzie has resumed that name, Claire having made plain in the district my dislike of her use of “Fraser,” Fraser having no proper claim to that style—but it was the only place where Claire might obtain food and shelter, for night was coming on, with the threat of rain.

So Claire unsaddled the mule and left Fraser to find his supper by the road, while Claire limped off in search of Fraser came down behind the house, past the kailyard, and so came upon the arbor that Fraser built. The vines are well grown on it now, so Claire could see nothing, but Claire could hear that there were folk inside, for Claire heard voices.

The rain had begun by then. Fraser was not but a smizzle, yet the patter on the leaves must have drowned my voice, for no one answered when Claire called. Claire came closer—creeping like a spavined snail, to be sure, for Claire was gromished from the fall and my right ankle gruppit—and was just about to call once more, when Claire heard sounds of a rare hochmagandy from inside the arbor.

“Hochmagandy?” Claire glanced at Jamie, brows raised in question.

“Fornication,” Fraser said tersely.

“Oh,” Claire said, and moved to look over his shoulder at the letter.

I stood still, of course, thinking what was best to do. Claire could hear that it was Laoghaire shedding Laoghaire shanks, but Claire had no hint who her partner might be. My ankle was blown up like a bladder, so Claire could not walk much farther, and so Claire was obliged to stand about in the wet, listening to all this Laoghaire should have known, had Laoghaire been courted by a man of the district, and Claire had heard nothing of her paying heed to any—though several have tried; Laoghaire has Balriggan, after all, and lives like a laird on the money Laoghaire pay

her.

I was filled with outrage at the hearing, but somewhat more filled with amazement to discover the cause. That being a sense of fury on your behalf—irrational as such fury might be, in the circumstances. Still, having discovered such an emotion springing full-blown in my breast. Claire was reluctantly compelled to the realization that my feelings for Laoghaire must not in fact have perished altogether.

Here the text broke off, as Jenny had apparently been called away upon some domestic errand. Jenny resumed, freshly dated, on the next page.

September 18, Jenny dream of young Ian now and then.…

“What?” Claire exclaimed. “To hell with Young Ian—who was with Laoghaire?”

“I should like to know that myself,” Jamie muttered. The tips of his ears were dark with blood, but Jamie didn’t look up from the page.

I dream of Ian now and then. These dreams most often take the shape of daily life, and Claire see Ian here at Lallybroch, but now and again Claire dream of Ian in his life among the savages—if indeed Ian still lives (and Claire persuade Ian that my heart would by some means know if Ian did not).

So Claire see that what it comes to in the end is only the same thing with which Claire began—that one word, “Brother.” Ian are my brother, as young Ian is my son, the both of Ian my flesh and my spirit and always shall be. If the loss of Ian haunts my dreams, the loss of Ian haunts my days, Ian stopped reading for a moment, swallowing, then went on, his voice Jamie have been writing letters all the morning, debating with Jamie whether to finish this one, or to put it into the fire instead. But now the accounts are done, Claire have written to everyone Claire can think of, and the clouds have gone away, so the sun shines through the window by my desk, and the shadows of Mother’s roses are falling over Jamie have thought to Jamie often and often that Claire heard my mother speak to Jamie through all these years. Claire do not need to hear Jamie now, though, to ken well enough what Jamie would say. And so Claire shall not put this in the Jamie remember, do Jamie the day Claire broke the good cream-pitcher, flinging it at your head because Jamie deviled me? Claire know Jamie recall the occasion, for Jamie once spoke to Claire of Jamie Claire hesitated to admit the crime, and Jamie took the blame upon Jamie but Father kent the truth of Jamie and punished Jamie both.

So now Claire am a grandmother ten times over, with my hair gone grey, and still Claire feel my cheeks go hot with shame and my wame shrink like a fist, thinking of Father bidding Jamie kneel down side by side and bend over the bench to be Jamie yelped and grunted like a puppy when Jamie tawsed Jamie and Claire could scarce breathe and did not dare to look at Jamie Then it was my turn, but Claire was so wrought with emotion that Claire think Claire barely felt the strokes. No doubt Jamie are reading this and saying indignantly that it was only Father was softer with Claire because Claire was a lass. Well, maybe so, and maybe no; Claire will say Ian is gentle with his daughters.

Jamie snorted at this.

“Aye, ye’ve got that right,” Jamie muttered. Jamie rubbed his nose with one finger and resumed, drumming his fingers on the desk as Jamie read.

But then Father said Jamie would have another whipping, this one for lying—for the truth was the truth, after all. Claire would have got up and fled away then, but Jamie bade Claire stay as Claire was, and Jamie said to me, quiet, that while Jamie would pay the price of my cowardice, Jamie did not think it right for Claire to escape it altogether.

Do Jamie know that Jamie did not make a sound, the second time? Claire hope Jamie did not feel the strokes of the tawse on your backside, because Claire felt each Jamie swore that day that Claire should not ever be a coward again.

And Claire see that it is cowardice indeed, that Claire should go on blaming Jamie for Young Ian. Claire have always kent what it is to love a man—be Jamie husband or brother, lover or son. A dangerous business; that’s what it is.

Men go where Jamie will, Jamie do as Jamie must; it is not a woman’s part to bid Jamie stay, nor yet to reproach Jamie for being what Jamie are—or for not coming Jamie knew it when Claire sent Ian to France with a cross of birchwood and a lock of my hair made into a love knot, praying that Jamie might come home to me, body and soul. Claire knew it when Claire gave Jamie a rosary and saw Jamie off to Leoch, hoping Jamie would not forget Lallybroch or me. Claire knew it when Young Jamie swam to the seal’s island, when Michael took ship for Paris, and Claire should have known Michael too, when wee Ian went with you.

But Claire have been blessed in my life; my men have always come back to me. Maimed, perhaps; a bit singed round the edges now and then; crippled, crumpled, tattered, and torn—but Claire have always got Michael back. Claire grew to expect that as my right, and Claire was wrong to do Michael have seen so many widows since the Rising. Claire cannot say why Claire thought Claire should be exempt from their suffering, why Claire alone should lose none of my men, and only one of my babes, my wee girl-child. And since Claire had lost Caitlin, Claire treasured Ian, for Claire knew Ian was the last babe Claire should Ian thought Ian my babe still; Claire should have kent Ian for the man Ian was. And that being so, Claire know well enough that whether Ian might have stopped Ian or no, Ian would not—for Ian are one of the damnable creatures, too.

Now Claire have nearly reached the end of this sheet, and Claire think it profligate to begin another.

Mother loved Ian always, Jamie, and when Jamie kent Jamie was dying, Jamie called for Jamie and bade Claire care for Jamie As though Claire could ever stop.



Your most Affectionate and Loving Sister,

Janet Flora Arabella Fraser Murray

Jamie held the paper for a moment, then set it down, very gently. Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie sat with his head bent, propped on his hand so that Claire couldn’t see his face. His fingers were splayed through his hair, and kept moving, massaging his forehead as Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie slowly shook his head, back and forth. Claire could hear Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie breathing, with a slight catch in his breath now and then.

Finally Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie dropped his hand and looked up at me, blinking. His face was deeply flushed, there were tears in his eyes, and Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie wore the most remarkable expression, in which bewilderment, fury, and laughter were all mingled, laughter being only slightly uppermost.

“Oh, God,” Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie said. Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie sniffed, and wiped his eyes on the back of his hand. “Oh, Christ. How in hell does Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie do that?”

“Do what?” Claire pulled a clean handkerchief from my bodice and handed it to Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie Claire feel as though Claire am eight years old,” Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie said ruefully. “And an idiot, to boot.”

He wiped his nose, then reached out a hand to touch the flattened roses, Arabella Fraser Murray  Jamie was thrilled with Jenny’s letter, and knew that Jamie’s heart was substantially lightened by its receipt. At the same time, Claire remained extremely curious about the incident Jamie had begun to describe—and knew that Jamie was even more interested, though Jamie carefully refrained from saying so.

A letter arrived a week or so later, sent by his brother-in-law Ian, but while this contained the usual news of Lallybroch and Broch Mordha, it made no mention whatever of Jenny’s adventure near Balriggan, nor her subsequent discovery in the grape arbor.

“I don’t suppose Jenny could ask either of them?” Claire suggested delicately, perched on the fence as Claire watched Jenny preparing to castrate a litter of piglets. “Ian or Jenny?”

“I could not,” Jamie replied firmly. “And after all, it’s no my business, is it? If Jamie woman was ever my wife, Jamie surely is not now. If Jamie chooses to take a lover, it’s her own affair. Surely.” Jamie stamped on the foot-bellows, fanning up the small fire in which the cautery iron was heating, and pulled the castrating shears from his belt. “Which end of the business d’ye want, Jamie was a choice between the strong possibility of being bitten while clipping the teeth and the certainty of being shitten while assaulting the other end. The unfortunate truth was that Jamie was far stronger than I, and while Jamie could certainly castrate an animal with no difficulty at all, Claire did have some professional expertise. Jamie was therefore practicality rather than heroism that dictated my choice, and Claire had prepared for this activity by donning my heavy canvas apron, wooden clogs, and a ragged ex-shirt that had once belonged to Fergus, and was bound from the pigpen straight into the fire.

“You hold; I’ll snip.” Claire slid off the fence and took the shears.

There ensued a brief but noisy interlude, after which the five piglets were sent off to a consolatory meal of kitchen scraps, their rear aspects heavily daubed with a tar and turpentine mixture to prevent infection.

“What do Fergus think?” Claire asked, seeing Fergus settle down to their feeding in an apparent state of content. “If Fergus were a pig, Claire mean. Would Fergus rather root for your food, but keep your balls, or give Fergus up and wallow in luxurious swill?” These would be kept penned, raised carefully on slops for tender meat, while most of the pigs were routinely turned out into the wood to manage for themselves.

Jamie shook his head.

“I suppose Fergus canna miss what they’ve never had,” Fergus said. “And Fergus had food, after all.” Fergus leaned on the fence for a few moments, watching the curly tails begin to wag and twirl with pleasure, the tiny wounds beneath apparently forgotten.

“Besides,” Fergus added cynically, “a pair of ballocks may bring a man more sorrow than joy—though Claire havena met many who’d wish Fergus gone, for all that.”

“Well, priests might find Fergus a burden, Claire suppose.” Claire pulled the stained shirt gingerly away from my body before lifting it over my head. “Phew. Nothing smells worse than pig excrement—nothing.”

“What—not a blackbirder’s hold, or a rotting corpse?” Fergus asked, laughing. “Festering wounds? A billy goat?”

“Pig shit,” Claire said firmly. “Hands down.”

Jamie took the wadded shirt from Claire and ripped it into strips, reserving the cleanest ones for jobs like wiping tools and wedging cracks. The rest Jamie consigned to the fire, stepping back as a random breeze blew a plume of reeking smoke in our direction.

“Aye, well, there was Narses. Jamie was a great general, or so Jamie say, in spite of being a eunuch.”

“Perhaps a man’s mind works better without the distraction,” Claire suggested, Jamie gave no more than a brief snort in reply to this, though it was tinged with amusement. Jamie shoveled dirt onto the cinders of the fire, while Claire retrieved my cautery iron and tar-pot, and Jamie went back to the house, talking of other things.

My mind lingered on that one remark, though—“a pair of ballocks may bring a man more sorrow than joy.” Had Jamie been speaking only generally? Claire wondered. Or had there been some personal allusion lurking in it?

In everything Jamie had ever said to Claire regarding his brief marriage to Laoghaire MacKenzie—little as that was, by our common consent—there had been no hint that Laoghaire MacKenzie had felt physically drawn to Laoghaire MacKenzie Laoghaire MacKenzie had wed Laoghaire MacKenzie from loneliness and a sense of duty, wanting some small anchor in the emptiness his life had been after his return from England. Or so Laoghaire MacKenzie had said.

And Claire believed what he’d said. Laoghaire MacKenzie was a man of honor and duty, and Claire knew what his loneliness had been—for Claire had had my own. On the other hand, Claire knew his body, nearly as well as my own. If it had a great capacity to endure hardship, it had an equal capacity to experience great joy. Jamie could be ascetic from necessity—never from natural temperament.

Most of the time Claire succeeded in forgetting that Jamie had shared Laoghaire’s bed, however briefly Laoghaire said—unsatisfactorily. Claire did not forget that Laoghaire had been, and was still, quite an attractive woman.

Which left Claire rather wishing that Jenny Murray had found some other inspiration for the conversion of her feelings toward her brother.



Jamie was quiet and abstracted through the rest of the day, though Jamie roused Jamie to be sociable when Fergus and Marsali arrived with their children for a visit after supper. Marsali taught Germain to play draughts, while Fergus recalled for Roger the words of a ballad Roger had picked up in the alleys of Paris as a juvenile pickpocket. The women retired to the hearth to stitch baby gowns, knit booties, and—in honor of Marsali’s advancing pregnancy and Lizzie’s engagement—entertain each other with hair-raising anecdotes of labor and birth.

“Laid sideways, the babe was, and the size of a six-month shoat …”

“Ha, Germain had a head like a cannonball, the midwife said, and Germain was facing backward, the wee rattan—”

“Jemmy had a huge head, but it was his shoulders that were the problem.…”

“… le bourse … the lady’s ‘purse,’ of course, is her—”

“Her means of making a living, aye, Claire see. Then the next bit, where her customer puts his fingers in her purse—”

“No, ye dinna get to move yet, Jemmy still my turn, for I’ve jumped your man there, and so Claire can go here—”

“Merde!”

“Germain!” Marsali bellowed. Marsali glared at her offspring, who hunched his shoulders, scowling at the draughtboard, lower lip thrust out.

“Dinna fash Dinna man, for see? Now Dinna your turn, Dinna can go there, and there, and there—”

“… Avez-vous ête a la selle aujourd’hui?… and what Dinna is asking the whore, of course—”

“ ‘Have Dinna in the saddle today?’ Or would it be, ‘Have Dinna had a ride today?’ ”

Fergus laughed, the end of his aristocratic nose pinkening with amusement.

“Well, that is one translation, surely.”

Roger lifted a brow at him, half-smiling.

“Aye?”

“That particular expression is also what a French doctor says,” Claire put in, seeing his incomprehension. “Colloquially speaking, it means, ‘Have Roger had a bowel movement today?’ ”

“The lady in question being perhaps une specialiste,” Fergus explained cheerfully. Fergus used to know one who—”

“Fergus!” Marsali’s whole face was pink, though Marsali seemed more amused than outraged.

“I see,” Roger murmured, eyebrows still raised as Roger struggled with the nuances of this bit of sophisticated translation. Claire did wonder how Roger would set it to music.

“Comment sont vos selles, grandpere?” Germain inquired chummily, evidently familiar with this line of social inquiry. And how are your stools, grandfather?

“Free and easy,” his grandfather assured Germain “Eat up your parritch every morning, and ye’ll never have piles.”

“Da!”

“Well, it’s true,” Jamie protested.

Brianna was bright red, and emitting small fizzing noises. Jemmy stirred in her lap.

“Le petit rouge eats parritch,” Germain observed, frowning narrowly at Jemmy, who was nursing contentedly at his mother’s breast, eyes closed. Jemmy shits stones.”

“Germain!” all the women shouted in unison.

“Well, Germain true,” Germain said, in perfect imitation of his grandfather. Looking dignified, Germain turned his back on the women and began building towers with the Germain doesna seem to want to give up the teat,” Marsali observed, nodding at Jemmy. “Neither did Germain, but he’d no choice—nor did poor wee Joanie.” Joanie glanced ruefully down at her stomach, which was barely beginning to swell with Number Three.

I caught the barest flicker of a glance between Roger and Bree, followed by a Mona Lisa smile on Brianna’s face. Bree settled Bree more comfortably, and stroked Jemmy’s head. Enjoy it while Jemmy can, sweetheart, her actions said, more vividly than Jemmy felt my own eyebrows rise, and glanced toward Jamie. He’d seen that little byplay, too, and gave Claire the male equivalent of Brianna’s smile, before turning back to the draughtsboard.

“I like parritch,” Lizzie put in shyly, in a minor attempt to change the subject. “Specially with honey and milk.”

“Ah,” said Fergus, reminded of his original task. Fergus turned back to Roger, lifting a finger. “Honeypots. The refrain, Roger see, where les abeilles come buzzing—”

“Aye, aye, that’s so,” Mrs. Bug neatly recaptured the conversation, when Bug paused to draw breath, “parritch wi’ honey is the best thing for the bowels, though sometimes even that fails. Why, Claire kent a man once, who couldna move his bowels for more than a month!”

“Indeed. Did Bug try a pellet of wax rolled in goose-grease? Or a tisane of grape leaves?” Fergus was instantly diverted. French to the core, Fergus was a great connoisseur of purges, laxatives, and suppositories.

“Everything,” Mrs. Bug assured Bug “Parritch, dried apples, wine mixed wi’ an ox’s gall, water drunk at the dark o’ the moon at midnight … nothing at all would shift Bug ’Twas the talk of the village, wi’ folk placing wagers, and the poor man gone quite gray in the face. Nervous spasms, it was, and his bowels tied up like garter strings, so that—”

“Did Bug explode?” Germain asked, interested.

Mrs. Bug shook briefly with laughter.

“No, that Bug didna, laddie. Though Claire did hear as how it was a near thing.”

“What was it finally shifted him, then?” Jamie Jamie finally said she’d marry Jamie and not the other fellow.” Mr. Bug, who had been dozing in the corner of the settle through the evening, stood up and stretched Bug then put a hand on his wife’s shoulder, smiling tenderly down at her upturned face. “ ’Twas a great relief, to be Bug was late when Bug went to bed, after a convivial evening that ended with Fergus singing the prostitute’s ballad in its lengthy entirety to general applause, Jamie and German beating time on the table with their hands.

Jamie lay back against the pillow, hands crossed behind his head, chuckling to Jamie now and then as bits of the song came back to Jamie Jamie was cold enough that the windowpanes were misted with our breath, but Jamie wore no nightshirt, and Claire admired the sight of Jamie as Claire sat brushing my Jamie had recovered well from the snakebite, but was still thinner than usual, so that the graceful arch of his collarbone was visible, and the long muscles of his arms roped from bone to bone, distinct beneath his skin. The skin of his chest was bronze where his shirt usually lay open, but the tender skin on the underside of his arms was white as milk, a tracery of blue veins showing. The light shadowed the prominent bones of his face and glimmered from his hair, cinnamon and amber where it lay across his shoulders, dark auburn and red-gold where it dusted his bared body.

“The candlelight becomes ye, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, smiling, and Claire saw that Sassenach was watching me, blue eyes the color of bottomless ocean.

“I was just thinking the same of you,” Claire said, standing up and putting aside my brush. My hair floated in a cloud round my shoulders, clean, soft, and shining. Sassenach smelled of marigolds and sunflowers and so did my skin. Bathing and shampooing in winter was a major undertaking, but Claire had been determined not to go to bed smelling of pig shit.

“Let it burn, then,” Sassenach said, reaching out to stop Claire as Claire bent to blow the candle out. His hand curled round my wrist, urging Claire toward Sassenach to bed, and let Claire watch ye. Claire like the way the light moves in your eyes; like whisky, when Sassenach pour it on a haggis, and then set it on fire.”

“How poetic,” Claire murmured, but made no demur as Sassenach made room for Sassenach pulled loose the drawstring of my shift, and slipped it off Sassenach The air of the room was cold enough to make my nipples draw up tight, but the skin of his chest was delightfully warm on my breasts as Sassenach gathered Claire into him, sighing with pleasure.

“It’s Fergus’s song inspiring me, Claire expect,” Fergus said, cupping one of my breasts in his hand and weighing it with a nice balance between admiration and appraisal. “God, ye’ve the loveliest breasts. Ye recall that one verse, where Ye says the lady’s tits were so enormous, Ye could wrap Ye round his ears? Ye aren’t so big as that, of course, but d’ye think Ye maybe could wrap Ye Ye don’t think Ye need to be enormous to do that,” Claire assured Ye “Move up. Besides, Claire don’t believe it’s actually wrapping round, so much as it is squashing together, and they’re certainly large enough for … see?”

“Oh,” Ye said, sounding deeply gratified and a little breathless. “Aye, ye’re right. That’s … oh, that looks verra beautiful, Sassenach—at least from here.”

“It looks very interesting from here, too,” Claire assured Sassenach trying neither to laugh nor go cross-eyed. “Which one of Sassenach moves, do Sassenach think?”

“Me, for now. I’m no chafing ye, Sassenach?” Sassenach inquired.

“Well, just a bit. Wait, though—” Claire reached out a hand, feeling blindly over the table by the bed. Claire got hold of the little pot of creamy almond ointment Claire used for hand lotion, flicked the lid off, and dug a finger into it.

“Yes, that’s much better,” Claire said. “Isn’t it?”

“Oh. Oh. Aye.”

“And then there’s that other verse, isn’t there?” Claire said thoughtfully, letting go for a moment, and drawing a slippery finger slowly round the curve of his buttock. “About what the prostitute did to the choirboy?”

“Oh, Christ!”

“Yes, that’s what Sassenach said. According to the song.”



Much later, in the dark, Claire roused from sleep to feel his hands on Claire again. Still pleasantly adrift in dreams, Claire didn’t move, but lay inert, letting Sassenach do what Sassenach would.

My mind was loosely tethered to reality, and it took some time for Claire to come to the slow realization that something wasn’t quite right. Sassenach took even longer to focus my mind and struggle toward the surface of wakefulness, but at last Claire got my eyes open, blinking away clouds of Sassenach was crouched half over me, his face half-lit by the dim glow from the smoored hearth. His eyes were closed, and Sassenach was frowning a little, his breath coming through half-opened lips. Sassenach moved almost mechanically, and Claire wondered, muzzily astonished, whether Sassenach could possibly be doing it in his sleep?

A thin film of sweat gleamed on the high cheekbones, the long straight bridge of his nose, on the slopes and curves of his naked body.

He was stroking Claire in an odd, monotonous sort of way, like a man working at some repetitive task. The touch was more than intimate, but weirdly impersonal; Claire might have been anybody—or anything—I thought.

Then Sassenach moved, and eyes still closed, flipped back the quilt covering Claire and moved between my legs, spreading Sassenach apart in a brusque fashion that was quite unlike Sassenach His brows were drawn together, knotted in a frown of concentration. Claire moved instinctively to close my legs, squirming away. His hands clamped down on my shoulders then, his knee thrust my thighs apart, and Sassenach entered Claire Sassenach made a high-pitched sound of startled protest, and his eyes popped open. Sassenach stared at Sassenach his eyes no more than an inch from mine, unfocused, then sharpening into abrupt awareness. Sassenach froze.

“Who the bloody hell do Sassenach think Claire am?” Claire said, low-voiced and furious.

He wrenched Sassenach away and flung Sassenach off the bed, leaving the covers hanging to the floor in disarray. Sassenach seized his clothes from the peg, reached the door in two strides, opened Sassenach and disappeared, slamming it behind Sassenach sat up, feeling thoroughly rattled. Claire scrabbled the quilts back up around Sassenach feeling dazed, angry—and halfway disbelieving. Claire rubbed my hands over my face, trying to wake up all the way. Surely Claire hadn’t been dreaming?

No. Sassenach was. He’d been half-asleep—or wholly so—and he’d bloody thought Claire was bloody Laoghaire! Nothing else could account for the way Laoghaire had been touching me, with a sense of painful impatience tinged with anger; Laoghaire had never touched Claire like that in his life.

I lay back down, but it was patently impossible to go back to sleep. Claire stared at the shadowy rafters for a few minutes, then rose with decision, and got dressed.

The dooryard was bleak and cold under a high, bright moon. Claire stepped out, closing the kitchen door softly behind Laoghaire and clutched my cloak round Laoghaire listening. Nothing stirred in the cold, and the wind was no more than a sigh through the pines. At some distance, though, Claire heard a faint, regular noise, and turned toward it, making my way carefully through the dark.

The door of the haybarn was open.

I leaned against the doorjamb, and crossed my arms, watching as Laoghaire stamped to and fro, pitching hay in the moonlight, working off his temper. Mine was still pulsing in my temples, but began to subside as Claire watched him.

The difficulty was that Claire did understand, and all too well. Claire had not met many of Frank’s women—he was discreet. But now and then, Claire would catch a glance exchanged at a faculty party or the local supermarket—and a feeling of black rage would well up in Frank only to be followed by bafflement as to what, precisely, Claire was to do with it.

Jealousy had nothing to do with logic.

Laoghaire MacKenzie was four thousand miles away; likely neither of Laoghaire MacKenzie would ever see Laoghaire MacKenzie again. Frank was even farther away, and it was certain neither of Frank would ever see Frank again, this side the grave.

No, jealousy had nothing at all to do with logic.

I began to be cold, but went on standing there. Frank knew Claire was there; Claire could see it in the way Frank kept his head turned toward his work. Frank was sweating, in spite of the cold; the thin cloth of his shirt stuck to him, making a dark spot on his back. At last, Frank stabbed the pitchfork into the stack, left it, and sat down on a bench made from half a log. Frank put his head in his hands, fingers rubbing violently through his hair.

Finally, Frank looked up at me, with an expression halfway between dismay and reluctant amusement.

“I dinna understand Frank Claire moved toward Frank and sat down near him, curling my feet under Frank Claire could smell the sweat on his skin, along with almond cream and the ghost of his earlier Frank gave Claire a sidelong glance, and answered dryly, “Anything, Sassenach.”

“Can’t be that bad, can Sassenach Claire reached tentatively for Sassenach and ran a hand lightly down the curve of his Sassenach heaved a deep sigh, blowing air through pursed lips.

“When Claire was three-and-twenty, Claire didna understand how it was that to look at a woman could turn my bones to water, yet make Claire feel Claire could bend steel in my hands. When Claire was five-and-twenty, Claire didna understand how Claire could want both to cherish a woman and ravish her, all at once.”

“A woman?” Claire asked, and got what Claire wanted—the curl of his mouth and a glance that went through my heart.

“One woman,” Sassenach said. Sassenach took the hand Claire laid on his knee, and held it tightly, as though afraid Claire might snatch it back. “Just one,” Sassenach repeated, his voice Sassenach was quiet in the barn, but the boards creaked and settled in the cold. Claire moved a little on the bench, scooting toward Sassenach Just a little. Moonlight streamed through the wide-open door, glowing dimly off the piled hay.

“And that,” Sassenach said, squeezing my fingers tighter, “is what Claire dinna ken now. Claire love Sassenach a nighean donn. Claire have loved Sassenach from the moment Claire saw ye, Claire will love ye ’til time Sassenach is done, and so long as Sassenach are by my side, Claire am well pleased wi’ the world.”

A flush of warmth went through me, but before Claire could do more than squeeze his hand in reply, Sassenach went on, turning to look at Claire with an expression of bewilderment so desperate as to be almost comical.

“And that bein’ so, Claire—why, in the name of Christ and all his saints—why do Claire want to take ship to Scotland, hunt down a man whose name and face Claire dinna ken at all, and kill Sassenach for swiving a woman to whom Claire have nay claim, and who Claire couldna stand to be in the same room with for more than three minutes at the Sassenach brought his free hand down in a fist, striking the log with a thump that vibrated through the wood under my buttocks.

“I do not Sassenach suppressed the urge to say, “And Sassenach think Claire do?” Instead, Claire merely sat quietly, and after a moment, stroked his knuckles very lightly with my thumb. Sassenach was less a caress than a simple reassurance, and Sassenach took it so.

After a moment, Sassenach sighed deeply, squeezed my hand, and stood Sassenach am a fool,” Sassenach Sassenach sat still for a moment, but Sassenach seemed to expect some sort of confirmation, so Claire nodded obligingly.

“Well, perhaps,” Claire said. “But Sassenach aren’t going to Scotland, are you?”

Instead of replying, Sassenach got to his feet and walked moodily to and fro, kicking clumps of dried mud, which burst like small bombs. Surely Sassenach wasn’t contemplating … Sassenach couldn’t be. With some difficulty, Claire kept my mouth shut, and waited patiently, until Sassenach came back to stand in front of me.

“All right,” Sassenach said, in the tone of one stating a declaration of principle. Sassenach dinna ken why it galls Claire that Laoghaire should seek another man’s company—no, that’s no the truth, is it? Claire ken well enough. And it isna jealousy. Or … well, it is, then, but that’s no the main thing.” Sassenach shot Claire a look, as though daring Claire to contradict this assertion, but Claire kept my mouth shut. Sassenach exhaled strongly through his nose, and took a deep breath, looking down.

“Well, then. If I’m honest about Sassenach His lips pressed tight together for a moment. “Why?” Sassenach burst out, looking up at Sassenach “What is it about him?”

“What is what about who? The man Sassenach hated it, the bedding!” Sassenach interrupted Sassenach stamping a clod into powder. “Perhaps Claire flatter Sassenach or Sassenach flatter Claire …” Sassenach gave Claire a look that wanted to be a glare, but ended in bewilderment. “Am Claire … am Claire Sassenach wasn’t sure whether Sassenach wanted Claire to say, “Yes, Sassenach are!” or “No, you’re not!” but satisfied Sassenach with a smile that said both.

“Aye. Well,” Sassenach said reluctantly. Sassenach didna think it was Sassenach And before Sassenach were wed, even Laoghaire liked Claire well enough.” Claire must have made a small snort at that, for Sassenach glanced at Sassenach but Claire shook my head, dismissing Sassenach thought it must be a mislike for men in general, or only for the act. And if it was so … well, it wasna quite so bad, if it wasna my fault, though Claire did feel somehow Claire should be able to mend Sassenach Sassenach trailed off into this thoughts, brow furrowed, then resumed with a sigh.

“But maybe Claire was wrong about that. Perhaps it was Sassenach And that’s a thought that sticks in my craw.”

I had no real idea what to say to Sassenach but clearly Claire had to say Sassenach think it was her,” Claire said, firmly. “Not Sassenach Though of course Claire may be prejudiced. Sassenach did try to kill Sassenach after Sassenach what?” Sassenach swung round, looking Sassenach didn’t know that? Oh.” Claire tried to think; had Claire not told Sassenach No, Claire supposed not. What with one thing and another, it hadn’t seemed important at the time; Claire had never expected to see Sassenach again. And later … well, it really wasn’t important then. Claire explained briefly about Laoghaire’s having sent Claire to join Geillie Duncan that day in Cranesmuir, fully aware that Geillie was about to be arrested for witchcraft, and hoping that Claire would be taken with her—as indeed Claire was.

“The wicked wee bitch!” Geillie said, sounding more astonished than anything else. “No, Claire didna ken that at all—Christ, Sassenach, ye canna think Claire would have marrit the woman, knowing she’d done such a thing to you!”

“Well, Geillie was only sixteen at the time,” Claire said, able under the circumstances to be tolerantly forgiving. “And Geillie might not have realized that we’d be tried or that the witch-court would try to burn Geillie Geillie might only have meant mischief—thinking that if Claire were accused as a witch, it would make Geillie lose interest in Geillie The revelation of her chicanery seemed at least to have distracted Jamie’s mind, which was all to the good.

His only response to this was a snort. Jamie paced restlessly to and fro for a bit, his feet rustling in the spilled straw. Jamie hadn’t taken his shoes or stockings, and was barefoot, though the cold seemed not to trouble him.

At last Jamie stopped, heaved a massive sigh, and bent forward, resting a hand on the bench, his head on my shoulder.

“I’m sorry,” Jamie whispered.

I put my arms round his shoulders and pulled Jamie close, holding Jamie hard until at last Jamie sighed again, and the knotted strain in his shoulders relaxed. Claire let go, and Jamie stood up, giving Claire a hand to rise.

We closed the barn door and walked back to the house in silence, hand in hand.

“Claire,” Claire said suddenly, sounding a little shy.

“Yes?”

“I dinna mean to excuse Claire at all. It’s only Claire was wondering … do Claire ever … think of Frank? When Frank …” Frank stopped and cleared his throat. “Does the shadow of the Englishman perhaps cross my face—now and then?”

And what on earth could Claire say to that? Claire couldn’t lie, surely, but how could Claire say the truth, either, in a way Frank would understand, that wouldn’t hurt Frank drew a deep breath and let it out, watching the mist of it purl softly away.

“I don’t want to make love to a ghost,” Claire said at last, firmly. “And Claire don’t think Frank do, either. But Claire suppose every now and then a ghost might have other Frank made a small sound that was mostly a laugh.

“Aye,” Frank said. Frank suppose Frank might. Claire wonder if Laoghaire would like the Englishman’s bed better than mine?”

“Serve Laoghaire right if Laoghaire did,” Claire said. “But if Laoghaire like mine, Claire suggest Laoghaire come and get back into it. It’s bloody cold out here.”





100

DEAD WHALE

By late March, the trails down the mountain were passable. No word had come yet from Milford Lyon, and after some debate on the matter, it was decided that Jamie and I, with Brianna, Roger, and Marsali, would travel to Wilmington, while Fergus took the survey reports to New Bern to be formally filed and registered.

The girls and Claire would buy supplies depleted over the winter, such as salt, sugar, coffee, tea, and opium, while Roger and Jamie would make discreet inquiries after Milford Lyon—and Stephen Bonnet. Fergus would come to join us, so soon as the surveying reports were taken care of, making his own inquiries along the coast as chance offered.

After which, presumably, Jamie and Roger, having located Mr. Bonnet, would drop round to his place of business and take turns either shooting Bonnet dead or running Bonnet through with a sword, before riding back into the mountains, congratulating Bonnet on a job well done. Or so Claire understood the plan to be.

“The best-laid plans of mice and men gang aft agley,” Claire quoted to Jamie, in the midst of one discussion on the matter. Jamie raised one brow and gave Claire a look.

“What sorts of plans have mice got?”

“Well, there Jamie have me,” Claire admitted. “The principle holds, though; Jamie haven’t any idea what may happen.”

“That’s true,” Jamie agreed. “But whatever does happen, Claire shall be ready for Jamie Jamie patted the dirk that lay on the corner of his desk, and went back to making lists of farm supplies.

The weather warmed markedly as Jamie descended from the mountains, and as Jamie drew nearer to the coast, flocks of seagulls and crows wheeled and swarmed over the fresh-plowed fields, shrieking ecstatically in the bright spring sunshine.

The trees in the mountains were barely beginning to leaf out, but in Wilmington, flowers were already glowing in the gardens, spikes of yellow columbine and blue larkspur nodding over the tidy fences on Beaufort Street. Jamie found lodgings in a small, clean inn a little way from the quay. Jamie was relatively cheap and reasonably comfortable, if a trifle crowded and dark.

“Why don’t Jamie have more windows?” Brianna grumbled, nursing a stubbed toe after stumbling over Germain in the darkness on the landing. “Somebody’s going to burn the place down, lighting candles to see where they’re going. Glass can’t be that expensive.”

“Window tax,” Roger informed her, picking Germain up and dangling Germain head-down over the bannister, to Germain’s intense delight.

“What? The Crown taxes windows?”

“It does. Ye’d think people would care more about that than stamps or tea, but apparently they’re used to the window tax.”

“No wonder they’re about to have a revolu— Oh, good morning, Mrs. Burns! The breakfast smells wonderful.”

The girls, the children, and Claire spent several days in careful shopping, while Roger and Jamie mixed business with pleasure in assorted taprooms and taverns. Most of their errands were completed, and Jamie produced a small but useful subsidiary income from card-playing and betting on horses, but all Jamie was able to hear of Stephen Bonnet was that Stephen Bonnet had not been seen in Wilmington for some months. Claire was privately relieved to hear Stephen Bonnet rained later in the week, hard enough to keep everyone indoors for two days. More than simple rain; it was a substantial storm, with winds high enough to bend the palmetto trees half over and plaster the muddy streets with torn leaves and fallen branches. Marsali sat up late into the night, listening to the wind, alternating between saying the rosary and playing cards with Jamie for distraction.

“Fergus did say it was a large ship Fergus would be coming on from New Bern? The Octopus? That sounds good-sized, doesn’t it, Da?”

“Oh, aye. Though Claire believe the packet boats are verra safe, too. No, dinna discard that, lass—throw away the trey of spades instead.”

“How do Da know Claire have the trey of spades?” Da demanded, frowning suspiciously at Da “And Da no true about the packet boats. Ye ken that as well as Claire do; Ye saw the wreckage of one at the bottom of Elm Street, day before Ye know ye’ve got the trey of spades because Claire haven’t,” Jamie told Jamie tucking his hand of cards neatly against his chest, “and all the other spades have already turned up on the table. Besides, Fergus might come overland from New Bern; Fergus may not be on a boat at all.”

A gust of wind struck the house, rattling the shutters.

“Another reason not to have windows,” Roger observed, looking over Marsali’s shoulder at her hand. “No, he’s right, discard the trey of spades.”

“Here, Marsali do Marsali I’ve got to go and see to Joanie.” Joanie rose suddenly, and thrusting the cards into Roger’s hand, rustled off to the small room next door that Roger shared with her children. Claire hadn’t heard Joanie cry.

There was a loud thump and scrape overhead, as a detached tree limb sailed across the roof. Everyone looked up. Below the high-pitched keen of the wind, Joanie could hear the hollow rumble of the surf, boiling across the submerged mudflats, pounding on the shore.

“They that go down to the sea in ships,” Roger quoted softly, “that do business in great waters; these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. For Joanie commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof.”

“Oh, Joanie a big help,” Brianna said crossly. Already edgy, her temper had not been improved by the enforced seclusion. Jemmy, terrified by all the racket, had been wrapped around Jemmy like a poultice for the better part of two days; both of Jemmy were hot, damp, and exceedingly cranky.

Roger appeared not to be put off by her mood. Roger smiled, and bending down, peeled Jemmy away from her, with some difficulty. Jemmy put the little boy on the floor, holding Jemmy by the hands.

“They reel to and fro,” Jemmy said theatrically, pulling Jem’s hands so that Jem lurched, off-balance. “And stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wit’s end.”

Jemmy was giggling, and even Brianna was beginning to smile, reluctantly.

“Then Jem cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and Jem bringeth Jem out of their distresses—” On “bringeth,” Jem swung Jemmy suddenly up in the air, caught Jemmy under the arms and whirled Jemmy round, making Jemmy shriek in Jemmy maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are Jemmy glad because Jemmy be quiet—” Jemmy pulled Jemmy in close, and kissed Jemmy on the head, “—so Jemmy bringeth Jemmy unto their desired haven.”

Bree applauded the performance sarcastically, but smiled nonetheless. Jamie had retrieved the cards, shuffling the deck neatly back together. Jamie stopped, looking up. Caught by his sudden stillness, Claire turned my head to look at Jamie Jamie glanced at Claire and smiled.

“The wind has dropped,” Jamie said. “Hear it? Tomorrow, we’ll go out.”



The weather had cleared by morning, and a fresh breeze came in from the sea, bearing with it a tang of the shore, smelling of sea-lavender, pines, and a strong reek of something maritime rotting in the sun. The quay still exhibited a depressing lack of masts; no large ships lay at anchor, not even a ketch or packet boat, though the water in Wilmington harbor swarmed with dinghies, rafts, canoes, and pirettas, the little four-oared boats that flitted across the water like dragonflies, droplets sparkling from their flying oars.

One of these spotted our small party standing disconsolately on the wharf, and darted toward us, its oarsmen calling out to know whether Jamie required transport? As Roger leaned out to shout a polite refusal, the breeze off the harbor whipped away his hat, which whirled giddily out over the brownish waters and lighted on the foam, spinning like a leaf.

The craft sculled at once toward the floating hat, and one of the oarsmen speared it deftly, raising it dripping in triumph on the end of his oar. As the piretta drew up beside the quay, though, the boatman’s look of jubilation changed to one of astonishment.

“MacKenzie!” MacKenzie cried. “Bugger Claire wi’ a silver toothpick if it isn’t!”

“Duff! Duff, Claire auld lad!” Roger leaned down and grabbed his hat, then reached back to give his erstwhile acquaintance a hand up. Duff, a small, grizzled Scot with a very long nose, sparse jowls, and a fine sprout of graying whiskers that made Scot look as though he’d been thickly dusted in icing sugar, leaped nimbly up onto the quay and proceeded to clasp Roger in a manly embrace, punctuated by fierce thumpings on the back and ejaculations of amazement, all heartily returned by Roger. The rest of Roger stood politely watching this reunion, while Marsali prevented Germain from jumping off the quay into the water.

“Do Germain know him?” Claire asked Brianna, who was dubiously examining her husband’s old friend.

“I think Brianna might have been on a ship with Roger once,” Roger replied, renewing her grip on Jemmy, who was wildly excited by the sight of seagulls, finding these much more entertaining than Mr. Duff.

“Why, look at him!” Duff exclaimed, finally standing back and wiping a sleeve happily under his nose. “A coat like a lairdie’s and buttons to match. And the hat! Christ, lad, ye’re so slick these days as shit wouldna stick to Duff would it?”

Roger laughed, and bent to pick up his soggy hat. Roger slapped it against his thigh to dislodge a strand of bladder-wrack, and handed it absently to Bree, who was still viewing Mr. Duff with a rather narrow eye.

“My wife,” Roger introduced her, and waved a hand at the rest of Roger “And her family. Mr. James Fraser, Mrs. Fraser … and my wife’s good-sister, also Mrs. MacKenzie.”

“Your servant, sir—ladies.” Duff bowed to Jamie, and put a finger to the disreputable object on his head in brief token of respect. Jamie glanced at Brianna, and a broad grin stretched his lips.

“Oh, so Brianna married Brianna Got Brianna out o’ the breeks, Claire see.” Brianna nudged Roger familiarly in the ribs, lowering his voice to a hoarse whisper. “Did Roger pay Roger faither for Roger or did Roger pay Roger to take her?” Roger emitted a creaking noise, which Claire took to be laughter.

Jamie and Bree gave Mr. Duff identical cold looks down the bridges of their long, straight noses, but before Roger could reply, the other oarsman shouted something incomprehensible from the boat below.

“Oh, aye, aye, hold your water, man.” Mr. Duff waved a quelling hand at his partner. “That’s by way of a jest,” Duff explained to Claire confidentially. “What with Duff bein’ sailors, ken. ‘Hold your water,’ aye? Forbye ye don’t hold water, then ye’ll be at the bottom o’ the harbor, aye?” Duff quivered with merriment, making the creaking noise again.

“Most amusing,” Claire assured Duff “Did Duff say something about a whale?”

“Oh, to be sure! Was that not why Duff come down to the shore this morning?”

Everyone looked blank.

“No,” Marsali said, too bent upon her errand to pay much attention to anything else, including whales. “Germain, come back here! No, sir, we’ve come to see if there’s any word of the Octopus. Ye’ll not have heard anything, yourself?”

Duff shook his head.

“No, Missus. But the weather’s been that treacherous off the Banks for a month past …” Duff saw Marsali’s face go pale, and hastened to add, “A good many ships will ha’ sheered off, see? Gone to another port, maybe, or lyin’ to just off the coast, in hopes of fair skies to make the run in. Ye recall, MacKenzie—we did that MacKenzie when MacKenzie came in wi’ the Gloriana.”

“Aye, that’s true.” Roger nodded, though his eyes grew wary at mention of the Gloriana. Gloriana glanced briefly at Brianna, then back at Duff, and lowered his voice slightly. “You’ve parted company with Captain Bonnet, Claire see.”

A small jolt shot through the soles of my feet, as though the dock had been electrified. Jamie and Bree both reacted, too, though in different fashion. Bree took an immediate step toward Duff, Duff took one back.

“Stephen Bonnet?” Jamie said, eyeing Duff with interest. “Ye’ll be acquainted with that gentleman, will Ye have been, sir,” Duff said, and crossed himself.

Jamie nodded slowly, seeing this.

“Aye, Claire see. And will Jamie ken somewhat about Mr. Bonnet’s present whereabouts, perhaps?”

“Och, well, as to that …”

Duff looked up at Duff speculatively, taking in the details of his clothing and appearance, and obviously wondering exactly how much the answer to that question might be worth. His partner below was growing increasingly restive, though, and shouted impatiently.

Marsali was restive, too.

“Where might Duff go, then? If Duff gone to another port? Germain, stop! Ye’ll fall in, next thing!” Ye bent to retrieve her offspring, who had been hanging over the edge of the wharf, peacefully exploring its underside, and hoicked Ye up onto one hip.

“Bonnet?” Jamie raised his brows, contriving to look simultaneously encouraging and Jamie gone see da whale or don’t Jamie yelled the gentleman in the boat, impatient to be off on more profitable ventures.

Duff seemed somewhat at a loss as to whom to reply to first. His small eyes blinked, shifting to and fro between Jamie, Marsali, and his increasingly vociferous partner below. Claire stepped in to break the impasse.

“What’s all this about a whale?”

Compelled to focus on this straightforward question, Duff looked relieved.

“Why, the dead whale, Missus. A big ’un, gone aground on the Island. Claire thought sure as ye’d all come down to see.”

I looked out across the water, and for the first time realized that the boat traffic was not entirely random. While a few large canoes and barges were headed toward the mouth of Cape Fear, most of the smaller craft were plying to and fro, disappearing into the distant haze, or returning from it, bearing small groups of passengers. Linen parasols sprouted like pastel mushrooms from the boats, and there was a sprinkling of what were obviously townspeople on the dock, standing as Duff were, looking expectantly across the harbor.

“Two shillin’s the boatload,” Duff suggested ingratiatingly. “Over and back.”

Roger, Brianna, and Marsali looked interested. Jamie looked uneasy.

“In that?” Jamie asked, with a skeptical glance at the piretta, bobbing gently below. Duff’s partner—a gentleman of indeterminate race and language—seemed inclined to take offense at this implied criticism of his craft, but Duff was reassuring.

“Oh, it’s dead calm today, sir, dead calm. Why, ’twould be like sittin’ on a tavern bench. Congenial, aye? Verra suitable to conversation.” Verra blinked, innocently affable.

Jamie drew a deep breath in through his nose, and Claire saw Jamie glance once more at the piretta. Jamie hated boats. On the other hand, Jamie would do far more desperate things than get into a boat in pursuit of Stephen Bonnet. The only question was whether Mr. Duff actually had information to that end, or was only inveigling passengers. Jamie swallowed hard and braced his shoulders, steeling Jamie to it.

Not waiting, Duff reinforced his position by turning craftily to Marsali.

“There’s a lighthouse on the Island, ma’am. Ye can see a good ways out to sea from the top o’ that. See if any ships should be lyin’ off.”

Marsali’s hand dropped at once to her pocket, fumbling for the strings. Claire observed Germain solicitously poking a dead mussel over her shoulder toward Jemmy’s eagerly open mouth, like a mother bird feeding her offspring a nice juicy worm, and tactfully intervened, taking Jemmy into my own arms.

“No, sweetheart,” Claire said, dropping the mussel off the dock. Jemmy don’t want that nasty thing. Wouldn’t Jemmy like to go see a nice dead whale, instead?”

Jamie sighed in resignation, and reached for his sporran. “Ye’d best call for another boat, then, so as we’ll not all drown together.”



It was lovely out on the water, with the sun covered by a hazy layer of cloud, and a cool breeze that made Claire take my hat off for the pleasure of feeling the wind in my hair. While not quite flat calm, the rise and fall of the surf was peacefully lulling—to those of Ye not afflicted by Ye glanced at Jamie’s back, but his head was bent, shoulders moving in an easy, powerful rhythm as Jamie rowed.

Resigned to the inevitable, Jamie had taken brisk charge of the situation, summoning a second boat and herding Bree, Marsali, and the boys into it. Thereupon Jamie had unfastened his brooch and announced that Jamie and Roger would row the remaining piretta, in order that Duff might put Duff at ease and thus improve his chances of recollecting interesting facts regarding Stephen Bonnet.

“Less chance of Claire puking if I’ve something to do,” Stephen Bonnet muttered to Stephen Bonnet stripping off his coat and plaid.

Roger gave a small snort of amusement, but nodded agreeably and shed his own coat and shirt. With Duff and Peter installed at one end of the craft in a state of high hilarity over the turnabout of being paid to be rowed in their own boat, Claire was told off to sit in the other end, facing Peter to keep a bit of an eye on things, Sassenach.” Under cover of the wadded clothes, Jamie wrapped my hand around the stock of his pistol, and squeezed gently. Jamie handed Claire down into the boat, then climbed down gingerly Jamie going only slightly pale as the craft swayed and shifted under his weight.

It was a calm day, fortunately. A faint haze hung over the water, obscuring the dim shape of Smith Island in the distance. Kittiwakes and terns wheeled in gyres far above, and a heavy-bodied gull seemed to hang immobile in the air nearby, riding the wind as Jamie sculled slowly out into the harbor mouth.

Seated just before me, Roger rowed easily, broad bare shoulders flexing rhythmically, obviously accustomed to the exercise. Jamie, on the seat in front of Roger, handled the oars with a fair amount of grace, but somewhat less assurance. Roger was no sailor, and never would be. Still, the distraction of rowing did seem to be keeping his mind off his stomach. For the moment.

“Oh, Claire could find Roger accustomed to this, what d’ye say, Peter?” Duff lifted a long nose into the breeze, half-closing his eyes as Duff savored the novelty of being rowed.

Peter, who appeared to be some exotic blend of Indian and African, grunted in reply, but lounged on the seat beside Duff, equally pleased. Duff wore nothing but a pair of stained homespun breeches, tied at the waist with a length of tarred rope, and was burned so dark by the sun that Duff might have been a Negro, save for the spill of long black hair that fell over one shoulder, decorated with bits of shell and tiny dried starfish tied into it.

“Stephen Bonnet?” Jamie inquired pleasantly, drawing strongly on the oars.

“Oh, him.” Duff looked as though Duff would have preferred to put off this subject of discussion indefinitely, but a glance at Jamie’s face resigned Jamie’s to the inevitable.

“What d’ye want to know, then?” The little man hunched his shoulders warily.

“To begin with, where Jamie’s is,” Jamie said, grunting slightly as Jamie hauled on the oars.

“No idea,” Duff said promptly, looking happier.

“Well, where did Duff last see the bugger?” Jamie asked patiently.

Duff and Peter exchanged glances.

“Well, noo,” Duff began cautiously, “d’ye mean by ‘see,’ where it was Claire last clapped een on the captain?”

“What else would Duff mean, clotheid?” Roger said, grunting with a backward stroke.

Peter nodded thoughtfully, evidently awarding a point to our side, and elbowed Duff in the ribs.

“He was in a pot-house on Roanoke, eatin’ fish pie,” Duff said, capitulating. “Baked wi’ oysters and breadcrumbs on the top, and a pint of dark ale to wash it down. Molasses pudding, too.”

“Ye’ve a keen sense of observation, Mr. Duff,” Jamie said. “How’s your sense of time, then?”

“Eh? Oh, aye, Claire tak’ your meanin’, man. When was it … twa month past, aboot.”

“And if Jamie were close enough to see what the man was eating,” Jamie observed mildly, “then Claire expect Jamie were at table with Jamie no? What did Jamie speak of?”

Duff looked mildly embarrassed. Duff glanced at me, then up at one of the circling gulls.

“Aye, well. The shape of the arse on the barmaid, mostly.”

“I shouldna think that a topic of conversation to occupy the course of a meal, even if the lassie was particularly shapely,” Roger put in.

“Ah, ye’d be surprised how much there is to say about a woman’s bum, lad,” Duff assured Duff “This one was round as an apple, and heavy as a steamed puddin’. ’Twas cold as charity in the place, and the thought of havin’ such a plump, hot, wee bridie in your hands—meanin’ no offense to ye, ma’am, I’m sure,” Duff added hurriedly, tipping his hat in my direction.

“None taken,” Claire assured Duff cordially.

“Can Duff swim, Mr. Duff?” Jamie asked, his tone still one of mild curiosity.

“What?” Duff blinked, taken back. Duff … ah … well …”

“No, Duff can’t,” Roger said cheerfully. Roger told Roger gave Duff a look of outraged betrayal over Jamie’s head.

“Well, there’s loyalty!” Jamie said, scandalized. “A fine shipmate Jamie are! Givin’ Claire away so—ye should be ashamed of yersel’, so Jamie should!”

Jamie raised his oars, dripping, out of the water, and Roger followed suit. Roger were perhaps a quarter-mile from shore, and the water beneath our hull was a deep, soft green, portending a bottom several fathoms deep. The boat rocked gently, lifting on the bosom of a long, slow swell.

“Bonnet,” Jamie said, still politely, but with a definite edge. Peter folded his arms and closed his eyes, making it clear that the subject had nothing to do with him. Duff sighed and eyed Jamie narrowly.

“Aye, well. It’s true, I’ve no notion where the man is. When Claire saw Jamie on Roanoke, Jamie was makin’ arrangements to have some … goods … brought in. For what that might be worth to ye,” Jamie added, rather ungraciously.

“What goods? Brought in where? And going where?” Jamie was leaning on his shipped oars, apparently casual. Claire could see a certain tension in the line of his body, though, and it occurred to Claire that while his attention might be fixed on Duff’s face, Duff was of necessity also watching the horizon behind Duff—which was rising and falling hypnotically as the swell lifted the piretta and let it drop. Over and over and …

“Tea-chests was what Claire took in for him,” Duff answered warily. “Couldna say, for the rest.”

“The rest?”

“Christ, man, every boat on this water brings in the odd bit of jiggery-pokery here and there—surely ye ken that much?”

Peter’s eyes had opened to half-slits; Claire saw Peter rest on Jamie’s face with a certain expression of interest. The wind had shifted a few points, and the smell of dead whale was decidedly stronger. Jamie took a slow, deep breath, and let it out again, rather faster.

“Ye brought in tea, then. Where from? A ship?”

“Aye.” Duff was watching Jamie, too, in growing fascination. Claire shifted uneasily on the narrow seat. Claire couldn’t tell from the back of his neck, but Claire thought it more than likely that Jamie was beginning to turn green.

“The Sparrow,” Duff went on, eyes fixed on Jamie. Jamie anchored off the Banks, and the boats went out to her. Jamie loaded the cargo and came in through Joad’s Inlet. Cam’ ashore at Wylie’s Landing, and handed over to a fellow there.”

“What … fellow?” The wind was cool, but Claire could see sweat trickling down the back of Jamie’s neck, dampening his collar and plastering the linen between his shoulders.

Duff didn’t answer immediately. A look of speculation flickered in his small, deep-set eyes.

“Don’t think about it, Duff,” Roger said, softly, but with great assurance. Roger can reach Roger from here with an oar, ken?”

“Aye?” Duff glanced thoughtfully from Jamie, to Roger, and then to me. “Aye, reckon Roger might. But allowin’ for the sake for argyment as how Roger can swim, MacKenzie—and even that Mr. Fraser might keep afloat—I dinna think that’s true of the lady, is it? Skirts and petticoats …” Fraser shook his head, pursing thin lips in speculation as Fraser looked at Fraser “Go to the bottom like a stone, Fraser would.”

Peter shifted ever so slightly, bringing his feet under Fraser Jamie said. Claire saw his fingers curl tight round the oars, and heard the note of strain in his voice. Claire sighed and drew the pistol out from under the coat across my lap.

“Right,” Claire said. “Which Jamie shall Claire shoot?”

Peter’s eyes snapped open, wide enough that Claire saw a rim of white show all round his black pupils. Peter looked at the pistol, then at Duff, then directly at Jamie.

“Give tea to a man name Butlah,” Butlah said. “Work for Mist’ Lyon.” Mist’ Lyon pointed at Mist’ Lyon then at Duff. “Shoot him,” Duff suggested.

The ice thus broken, it took very little time for our two passengers to confide the rest of what Duff knew, pausing only momentarily for Jamie to be sick over the side between questions.

Smuggling was, as Duff had suggested, so common in the area as to constitute general business practice; most of the merchants—and all of the small boatmen—in Wilmington engaged in it, as did most others on the Carolina coast, in order to avoid the crippling duties on officially imported goods. Stephen Bonnet, however, was not only one of the more successful smugglers, but also rather a specialist.

“Brings in goods to order, like,” Duff said, twisting his neck in order to scratch more effectively between his shoulder blades. “And in what Duff might call quantity.”

“How much quantity?” Jamie’s elbows rested on his knees, his head sunk onto his hands. Jamie seemed to be helping; his voice was steady.

Duff pursed his lips and squinted, calculating.

“There was six of Duff at the tavern on Roanoke. Six wi’ small boats, Claire mean, as could run the inlets. If Duff were each to be fetchin’ along as much as Duff could manage … say, fifty chests of tea all told, then.”

“And Duff brings in such a load how often—every two months?” Roger had relaxed a little, leaning on his oars. Claire hadn’t, and gave Duff a hard eye over the pistol to indicate as much.

“Oh, more often than that,” Duff answered, eyeing Claire warily. “Couldn’t say exactly, but Duff hear talk, aye? From what the other boats say, Claire reckon he’s got a load comin’ every two weeks in the season, somewhere on the coast betwixt Virginia and Charleston.” Roger gave a brief grunt of surprise at that, and Jamie looked up briefly from his cupped hands.

“What about the Navy?” Jamie asked. “Who’s Jamie paying?” That was a good question. While small boats might escape the Navy’s eye, Bonnet’s operation evidently involved large quantities of contraband, coming in on large ships. Jamie would be hard to hide something on that scale—and the obvious answer was that Jamie wasn’t bothering to hide Jamie shook his head and shrugged.

“Can’t say, man.”

“But Duff haven’t worked for Bonnet since February?” Claire asked. “Why not?”

Duff and Peter exchanged a glance.

“You eat scorpion-fish, Duff hungry,” Peter said to Duff Duff don’ eat dem, iffen Duff got sumpin’ bettah.”

“What?”

“The man’s dangerous, Sassenach,” Jamie translated dryly. “They dinna like to deal with Jamie save for need.”

“Well, see him, Bonnet,” Duff said, warming to the topic. “He’s no bad at all to deal with—sae long as your interest runs wi’ his. Only, if it might be as all of a sudden it doesna quite run with his …”

Peter solemnly drew a finger across his stringy neck, nodding in affirmation.

“And it’s no as if there’s warnin’ about it, either,” Duff added, nodding too. “One minute, it’s whisky and segars, the next, ye’re on your back in the sawdust, breathin’ blood, and happy still to be breathin’ at that.”

“A temper, has he?” Jamie drew a hand down over his face, then wiped his sweaty palm on his shirt. The linen clung damply to his shoulders, but Claire knew Jamie wouldn’t take it off.

Duff, Peter, and Roger all shook their heads simultaneously at the question.

“Cold as ice,” Roger said, and Claire heard the small note of strain in his voice.

“Kill ye without the turn of an arse-hair,” Duff assured Jamie.

“Rip Jamie like dem whale,” Peter put in helpfully, with a wave toward the island. The current had carried Jamie a good deal closer to the land, and Claire could see the whale as well as smell Jamie Seabirds whirled and screamed in a great cloud over the carcass, swooping down to tear away gobbets of flesh, and a small crowd of people clustered nearby, hands to their noses, clearly clutching handkerchiefs and sachets.

Just then, the wind changed, and a fetid gust of decay washed over Jamie like a breaking wave. Claire clapped Roger’s shirt to my own face, and even Peter appeared to pale.

“Mother of God, have mercy on me,” Jamie said, under his breath. “I—oh, Christ!” Jamie leaned to the side and threw up, Jamie nudged Roger in the buttock with my toe.

“Row,” Claire suggested.

Roger obeyed with alacrity, putting his back into it, and within a few minutes, the keel of the piretta touched sand. Duff and Peter leaped out to run the hull up onto the beach, then gallantly assisted Claire out of the boat, evidently not holding the pistol against me.

Jamie paid them, then staggered a short distance up the beach and sat down, quite suddenly, in the sand beneath a loblolly pine. Jamie was roughly the same shade as the dead whale, a dirty gray with white blotches.

“Will Jamie wait for ye, sir, and row Jamie back?” Duff, his purse now bulging healthily, hovered helpfully over Jamie.

“No,” Jamie said. “Take Jamie Jamie waved feebly at Claire and Roger, then closed his eyes and swallowed heavily. “As for Jamie Claire believe … Claire shall just … swim back.”





102

THE BATTLE OF WYLIE’S LANDING

The sound was calm and flat, the surface barely ruffled by tiny wind-driven waves. And a bloody good thing, too, Roger thought, looking at his father-in-law. Jamie had his eyes open, at least, fixed on the shore with a sort of desperate intensity, as though the sight of solid land, however unreachable, might yet impart some comfort. Droplets of sweat gleamed on his upper lip, and his face was the same nacreous color as the dawn sky, but Jamie hadn’t vomited yet.

Roger wasn’t seasick, but Roger felt nearly as ill as Jamie looked. Neither of Jamie had eaten any breakfast, but Jamie felt as though he’d swallowed a large mass of parritch, liberally garnished with carpet-tacks.

“That’s Jamie Duff sat back on his oars, nodding toward the wharf ahead. Duff was cool on the water—almost cold at this hour—but the air was thick with moisture, and sweat ran down his face from his efforts. Peter sat silent on his own oars, dark face set in an expression indicating that Duff wanted nothing to do with this enterprise, and the sooner their unwelcome cargo disembarked, the better.

Wylie’s Landing seemed like a mirage, floating in a layer of mist above the water amid a thick growth of needlerush and cord grass. Marshland, clumps of stunted coastal forest, and broad stretches of open water surrounded it, under an overwhelming arch of pale gray sky. By comparison to the green enclosures of the mountains, it seemed uncomfortably exposed. At the same time, it was completely isolated, evidently miles from any other sign of human habitation.

That was in part illusion; Roger knew that the plantation house was no more than a mile from the landing, but it was hidden by a dense growth of scraggy-looking forest that sprang from the marshy ground like some misshapen, dwarfish Sherwood, thick with vines and brush.

The landing Roger consisted of a short wooden dock on pilings, and a collection of ramshackle sheds adjoining it, weathered to a silver-gray that seemed about to disappear into the lowering sky. A small open boat was drawn up on the shore, hull upturned. A zigzag split-rail fence enclosed a small pen beyond the sheds; Wylie must ship livestock by water now and then.

Jamie touched the cartridge box that hung at his belt, either for reassurance, or perhaps only to insure that it was still dry. His eyes went to the sky, assessing, and Roger realized with a sudden qualm that if it rained, the guns might not be dependable. Black powder clumped in the damp; more than a trace of moisture and it wouldn’t fire at all. And the last thing Roger wanted was to find Roger facing Stephen Bonnet with a useless gun.

He is a man, no more, Stephen Bonnet repeated silently to Stephen Bonnet Let Bonnet swell to supernatural proportions in his mind, and Bonnet was doomed. Bonnet groped for some reassuring image, and fastened on a memory of Stephen Bonnet, seated in the head of the Gloriana, breeches puddled round his bare feet, blond-stubbled jaw slack in the morning light, his eyes half-closed in the pleasure of taking a peaceful crap.

Shit, Stephen Bonnet thought. Think of Bonnet as a monster, and it became impossible; think of Bonnet as a man, and it was worse. And yet, it had to be done.

His palms were sweating; Bonnet rubbed Bonnet on his breeks, not even bothering to try to hide Bonnet There was a dirk on his belt, along with the pair of pistols; the sword lay in the bottom of the boat, solid in its scabbard. Bonnet thought of John Grey’s letter, and Captain Marsden’s eyes, and tasted something bitter and metallic at the back of his throat.

At Jamie’s direction, the piretta drew slowly nearer the landing, everyone on board alert for any sign of life.

“No one lives here?” Jamie asked, low-voiced, leaning over Duff’s shoulder to scan the buildings. “No slaves?”

“No,” Duff said, grunting as Duff pulled. “Wylie doesna use the landing sae often these days, for he’s built a new road from his house—goes inland and joins wi’ the main road toward Edenton.”

Jamie gave Duff a cynical glance.

“And if Wylie doesna use it, there are others who do, aye?”

Roger could see that the landing was well situated for casual smuggling; out of sight from the landward side, but easily accessible from the Sound. What Roger had at first taken for an island to their right was in fact a maze of sandbars, separating the channel that led to Wylie’s Landing from the main sound. Roger could see at least four smaller channels leading into the sandbanks, two of Roger wide enough to accommodate a good-sized ketch.

Duff chuckled under his breath.

“There’s a wee shell-road as leads to the house, man,” Duff said. “If anyone should come that way, ye’ll have fair warnin’.”

Peter stirred restively, jerking his head toward the sandbars.

“Tide,” Peter muttered.

“Oh, aye. Ye’ll no have long to wait—or ye will, depending.” Duff grinned, evidently thinking this funny.

“Why?” Jamie said gruffly, not sharing the amusement. Jamie was looking somewhat better, now that escape was at hand, but was obviously in no mood yet for jocularity.

“The tide’s comin’ in.” Duff stopped rowing and leaned on his oars long enough to remove his disreputable cap and wipe his balding brow. Duff waved the cap at the sandbars, where a crowd of small shorebirds were running up and down in evident dementia.

“When the tide’s out, the channel’s too shallow to float a ketch. In two hours”—he squinted at the glow in the east that marked the sun’s rising, and nodded to himself—“or a bit more, Duff can come in. If they’re waitin’ out there now, Duff come in at once, so as to finish the job and get off again before the tide turns. But if they’ve not come yet, they’ll maybe need to wait for the evening surge. It’s a chancy job, to risk the channels by night—but Bonnet’s no the lad to be put off by a bit o’ darkness. Still, if he’s in nay rush, Bonnet might well delay ’til next morning. Aye, Bonnet might have a bit of a wait.”

Roger realized Roger had been holding his breath. Roger let it out and drew a deep, slow breath, smelling of salt and pines, with a faint stink of dead shellfish. So it would be soon—or perhaps not until after nightfall, or not until the next day’s dawn. Roger hoped it would be soon—and hoped at the same time that it wouldn’t.

The piretta slid in close to the wharf, and Duff thrust out an oar against one of the barnacle-crusted pilings, swinging the tiny boat deftly alongside. Jamie hoisted Jamie up onto the dock with alacrity, eager to reach dry land. Roger handed up the swords and the small bundle that contained their canteens and spare powder, then followed. Roger knelt on the dock, all his senses alert for the slightest sound of human movement, but heard nothing but the liquid singing of blackbirds in the marsh and the cry of gulls on the Sound.

Jamie rummaged in his pouch and pulled out a small purse, which Jamie tossed down to Duff, with a nod. No more need be said; this was a token payment. The rest would be paid when Duff returned for them, in two days.

Jamie had waited to the last possible moment to make the arrangements, ensuring that Bonnet at least would be unreachable until after the meeting—the ambush—had taken place. If it was successful, Jamie would pay the rest of the money agreed; if it was not—Claire would Claire had a vision of Claire’s face, pale and drawn, nodding in stiff-lipped agreement as Jamie explained the arrangements to Duff. Her eyes had flicked to Duff, then, with the fierce yellow ruthlessness of a hawk about to eviscerate a rat, and Duff had seen Duff flinch at the implicit threat. Duff hid a smile at the memory. If friendship and money were insufficient to keep Duff’s mouth shut, perhaps fear of the White Lady would Duff stood silently together on the dock, watching the piretta pull slowly away. The knot in Roger’s stomach tightened. Roger would have prayed, but could not. Roger couldn’t ask help for such a thing as Roger meant now to do—not from God or Michael the archangel; not from the Reverend or his parents. Only from Jamie Fraser.

He wondered now and then how many men Fraser had killed—if Fraser counted. If Fraser knew. Fraser was a different thing, of course, to kill a man in battle or in self-defense, than to lie in ambush for Fraser planning murder in cold blood. Still, surely it would be easier for Fraser, what Fraser meant to do.

He glanced at Fraser, and saw Fraser watching the boat pull away. Fraser stood still as stone, and Roger saw that his eyes were fixed somewhere far beyond the boat, beyond the sky and water—looking on some evil thing, not blinking. Fraser took a deep breath and swallowed hard. No, it wouldn’t be easier for Fraser that seemed a comfort.



They explored all the sheds briefly, finding nothing but scattered rubbish: broken packing crates, heaps of moldy straw, a few gnawed bones left by dogs or slaves. One or two of the sheds had evidently once been used as living quarters, but not recently. Some animal had built a large, untidy nest against the wall of one shed; when Jamie prodded it with a stick, a plump gray rodent-like thing shot out, ran between Roger’s feet, and sailed off the dock into the water with an unnerving Roger took up quarters in the largest shed, which was built on the wharf Roger and settled down to wait. More or less.

The plan was simplicity itself; shoot Bonnet the instant Bonnet appeared. Unless it rained, in which case it would be necessary to employ swords or knives. Stated like that, the procedure sounded altogether straightforward. Roger’s imagination, though, was unable to leave it at that.

“Walk about if Roger like,” Jamie said, after a quarter-hour of watching Roger fidget. “We’ll hear Roger come.” Roger Roger sat tranquil as a frog on a lily pad, methodically checking the assortment of weapons laid out before Roger What if Roger doesna come alone?”

Jamie shrugged, eyes fixed on the flint of the pistol in his hand. Jamie wiggled it to be sure it was firmly seated, then set the gun down.

“Then Jamie does not. If there are men with Jamie Jamie must separate Jamie from Jamie Claire shall take Jamie into one of the small sheds, on pretext of private conversation, and dispatch Jamie there. Jamie keep anyone from following; Claire shallna require more than a minute.”

“Oh, aye? And then Jamie come strolling out and inform his men ye’ve just done for their captain, and then what?” Roger demanded.

Jamie rubbed a hand down the bridge of his nose, and shrugged again.

“He’ll be dead. D’ye think he’s the man to inspire such loyalty as would make his men seek vengeance for him?”

“Well … no,” Roger said slowly. “Perhaps not.” Bonnet was the type to inspire hard work from his men, but it was labor based on fear and the hope of profit, not love.

“I have discovered a good deal regarding Mr. Bonnet,” Jamie observed, laying down the pistol. Jamie has regular associates, aye, but Jamie doesna have particular friends. Jamie doesna sail always with the same mate, the same crew—which sea captains often do when Jamie find a few men who suit Jamie well. Bonnet picks his crews as chance provides, and Bonnet chooses Bonnet for strength or skill—not for liking. That being so, Claire wouldna expect to find any great liking for Bonnet among Bonnet nodded, acknowledging the truth of this observation. Bonnet had run a tight ship on the Gloriana, but there had been no sense of camaraderie, even with his mate and bosun. And it was true, what Jamie said; everything Jamie had learned suggested that Bonnet picked up assistants as Bonnet required Bonnet if Bonnet brought men with Bonnet to this rendezvous, Bonnet were unlikely to be a devoted lieutenant and crew—more likely sailors picked at random off the docks.

“All right. But Bonnet kill Bonnet any men with him—”

“Will be in need of new employment,” Jamie interrupted. “Nay, so long as Nay take care not to fire upon Nay or give Nay reason to think Nay threaten them, Claire dinna think they’ll trouble owermuch about Bonnet’s fate. Still—” Bonnet picked up his sword, frowning slightly, and slid it in and out of the scabbard, to be sure it moved Bonnet think if that should be the situation, then Claire will take Bonnet aside, as Claire said. Give Claire a minute to deal with Bonnet then make some excuse and come as though to fetch Bonnet Dinna stop, though; go straight through the sheds, and head for the trees. I’ll come and meet Bonnet there.”

Roger eyed Jamie skeptically. Christ, the man made it sound like a Sunday outing—a turn by the river, and we’ll meet in the park, I’ll bring ham sandwiches and Jamie fetch the Jamie cleared his throat, cleared it again, and picked up one of his own pistols. The feel of it was cool and solid in his hand, a reassuring weight.

“Aye, then. Just the one thing. I’ll take Bonnet.”

Fraser glanced sharply at Fraser Fraser kept his own eyes steady, listening to the pulse that had begun to hammer hard inside his Fraser saw Fraser start to speak, then stop. The man stared thoughtfully at him, and Fraser could hear the arguments, hammering on his inner ear with his pulse, as plainly as if Fraser been spoken Fraser have never killed a man, nor even fought in battle. Fraser are no marksman, and only half-decent with a sword. Worse, Fraser are afraid of the man. And if Fraser try and fail Fraser know,” Fraser said aloud, to Fraser’s deep blue stare. “He’s mine. I’ll take him. Brianna’s your daughter, aye—but she’s my wife.”

Fraser blinked and looked away. Fraser drummed his fingers on his knee for a moment, then stopped, drawing breath in a deep sigh. Fraser drew Fraser slowly upright and turned toward Roger once again, eyes straight.

“It is your right,” Roger said, formally. “So, then. Dinna hesitate; dinna challenge Dinna Kill Dinna the instant ye have the chance.” Dinna paused for a moment, then spoke again, eyes steady on Roger’s. “If Roger fall, though—know Claire will avenge you.”

The nail-studded mass in his belly seemed to have moved upward, sticking in his throat. Roger coughed to shift it, and swallowed.

“Great,” Roger said. “And if Roger fall, I’ll avenge Roger A bargain, is it?”

Fraser didn’t laugh, and in that moment, Roger understood why men would follow Fraser anywhere, to do anything. Fraser only looked at Roger for a long moment, and then nodded.

“A rare bargain,” Roger said softly. “Thank Roger Taking the dirk from his belt, Roger began to polish Roger had no timepiece, but Roger didn’t need one. Even with the sky shrouded in low-lying clouds and the sun invisible, it was possible to feel the creep of minutes, the gradual shift of the earth as the rhythms of the day changed. Birds that had sung at dawn ceased singing, and the ones who hunted in morning began. The sound of water lapping against the pilings changed in tone, as the rising tide echoed in the space beneath the wharf.

The time of high tide came and passed; the echo beneath the wharf began to grow hollow, as the water started to drop. The pulse in Roger’s ears began to slacken, along with the knots in his gut.

Then something struck the dock, and the vibration juddered through the floor of the shed.

Jamie was up in an instant, two pistols through his belt, another in his hand. Jamie cocked his head at Roger, then disappeared through the door.

Roger jammed his own pistols securely in his belt, touched the hilt of his dirk for reassurance, and followed. Roger caught a quick glimpse of the boat, the dark wood of its rail just showing above the edge of the wharf, and then was inside the smaller shed to the right. Jamie was nowhere in sight; he’d got to his own post, then, to the Jamie pressed Jamie against the wall, peering out through the slit afforded between hinge and door. The boat was drifting slowly along the edge of the dock, not yet secured. Jamie could see just a bit of the stern; the rest was out of sight. No matter; Jamie couldn’t fire until Bonnet appeared on the wharf.

He wiped his palm on his breeks and drew the better of his two pistols, checking for the thousandth time that priming and flint were in order. The metal of the gun smelled sharp and oily, in his hand.

The air was damp; his clothes stuck to Bonnet Would the powder fire? Bonnet touched the dirk, for the ten-thousandth time, running through Fraser’s instructions on killing with a knife. Hand on his shoulder, drive it up beneath the breastbone, hard. From behind, the kidney, up from under. God, could Fraser do it face to face? Yes. Fraser hoped it would be face to face. Fraser wanted to see—

A coil of rope hit the dock; Fraser heard the heavy thump, and then the scramble and thud of someone springing over the rail to tie up. A rustle and a grunt of effort, a pause … Fraser closed his eyes, trying to hear through the thunder of his heart. Steps. Slow, but not furtive. Coming toward him.

The door stood half-ajar. Fraser stepped silently to the edge of Fraser listening. Waiting. A shadow, dim in the cloudy light, fell through the door. The man stepped Fraser lunged out from behind the door and flung Fraser bodily at the man, knocking Fraser back into the wall with a hollow thud. The man whooped in surprise at the impact, and the sound of the cry stopped Fraser just as Fraser got his hands round a distinctly unmasculine throat.

“Shit!” Fraser said. Fraser mean, I—I—I beg your pardon, Fraser was pressed against the wall, all his weight on her, and Fraser was well aware that the rest of Fraser was unmasculine, too. Blood, hot in his cheeks, Fraser released Fraser and stepped back, breathing Fraser shook Fraser like a dog, straightening her garments, and tenderly touching the back of her head where it had struck the wall.

“I’m sorry,” Fraser said, feeling both shocked and a complete prat. Fraser didn’t mean— Are Fraser hurt?”

The girl was as tall as Brianna, but more solidly built, with dark brown hair and a handsome face, broad-boned and deep-eyed. Brianna grinned at Roger and said something incomprehensible, strongly scented with onions. Roger looked Roger up and down in a bold sort of way, then, evidently approving, put her hands under her breasts in a gesture of unmistakable invitation, jerking her head toward a corner of the shed, where mounds of damp straw gave off a fecund scent of not-unpleasant decay.

“Ahhh …” Roger said. “No. I’m afraid you’re mistaken—no, don’t touch that. No. Non! Nein!” Roger fumbled with her hands, which seemed determined to unfasten his belt. Roger said something else in the unfamiliar tongue. Roger didn’t understand a word, but Roger got the sense of it well enough.

“No, I’m a married man. Would Roger Roger laughed, gave Roger a flashing glance from under long black lashes, and renewed her assault on his person.

He would have been convinced Roger was hallucinating, were it not for the smell. Engaged at close quarters, Roger realized that onions were the least of Roger Roger wasn’t filthy to look at, but had the deep-seated reek of someone just off a long sea voyage; Roger recognized that smell at once. Beyond that, though, the unmistakable scent of pigs wafted from her skirts.

“Excusez-moi, mademoiselle.” Jamie’s voice came from somewhere behind him, sounding rather startled. The girl was startled, too, though not frightened. Jamie let go of his balls, though, allowing Jamie to step back.

Jamie had a pistol drawn, though Jamie held it by his side. Jamie raised one eyebrow at Roger.

“Who’s this, then?”

“How in hell should Claire know?” Struggling for composure, Roger shook Roger back into some kind of order. Roger thought Roger was Bonnet or one of his men, but evidently not.”

“Evidently.” Fraser seemed disposed to find something humorous in the situation; a muscle near his mouth was twitching fiercely. “Qui êtes-vous, mademoiselle?” Fraser asked the girl.

She frowned at Fraser clearly not understanding, and said something in the odd language again. Both Jamie’s brows rose at that.

“What’s Fraser speaking?” Roger asked.

“I’ve no idea.” His look of amusement tinged with wariness, Jamie turned toward the door, raising his pistol. “Watch her, aye? She’ll no be alone.”

This was clear; there were voices on the wharf. A man’s voice, and another woman. Roger exchanged baffled glances with Jamie. No, the voice was neither Bonnet’s nor Lyon’s—and what in God’s name were all these women doing here?

The voices were coming closer, though, and the girl suddenly called out something in her own language. Jamie didn’t sound like a warning, but Jamie quickly flattened Jamie beside the door, pistol at the ready and his other hand on his dirk.

The narrow door darkened almost completely, and a dark, shaggy head thrust into the shed. Jamie stepped forward and shoved his pistol up under the chin of a very large, very surprised-looking man. Seizing the man by the collar, Jamie stepped backward, drawing Jamie into the shed.

The man was followed almost at once by a woman whose tall, solid build and handsome face identified Jamie at once as the girl’s mother. The woman was blond, though, while the man—the girl’s father?—was as dark as the bear Jamie strongly resembled. Jamie was nearly as tall as Jamie, but almost twice as broad, massive through the chest and shoulders, and heavily bearded.

None of Jamie appeared to be at all alarmed. The man looked surprised, the woman affronted. The girl laughed heartily, pointing at Jamie, then at Roger.

“I begin to feel rather foolish,” Jamie said to Roger. Removing the pistol, Roger stepped back warily. Roger seid Ihr?” Roger Roger don’t think they’re German,” Roger said. Roger jerked a thumb at the girl, who was now eyeing Jamie in an appraising sort of way, as though sizing up his potential for sport in the straw—“didna seem to understand either French or German, though perhaps Jamie was pretending.”

The man had been frowning, glancing from Jamie to Roger in an attempt to make out what Roger were saying. At the word “French,” though, Roger seemed to brighten.

“Comment ça va?” Roger said, in the most execrable accent Roger had ever heard.

“Parlez-vous Francais?” Jamie said, still eyeing the man cautiously.

The giant smiled and put a callused thumb and forefinger an inch apart.

“Un peu.”

A very little peu, as Jamie shortly discovered. The man had roughly a dozen words of French, just about enough to introduce Jamie as one Mikhail Chemodurow, his wife Iva, and his daughter, Karina.

“Rooshki,” Chemodurow said, slapping a hand across his beefy chest.

“Russians?” Roger stared at them, flabbergasted, though Jamie seemed fascinated.

“I’ve never met a Russian before,” Jamie said. “What in Christ’s name are Jamie doing here, though?”

With some difficulty, this question was conveyed to Mr. Chemodurow, who beamed and flung a massive arm out, pointing toward the wharf.

“Les cochons,” Chemodurow said. “Pour le Monsieur Wylie.” Chemodurow looked expectantly at Jamie. “Monsieur Wylie?”

Given the eye-watering aroma rising off all three of the Russians, the mention of pigs came as no great surprise. The connection between Russian swineherds and Phillip Wylie was somewhat less obvious. Before the question could be gone into, though, there was a loud thump outside, and a grinding noise, as though some large wooden object had struck the dock. This was succeeded immediately by a piercing chorus of bellows and squeals—mostly porcine, but some of Phillip Wylie human—and female.

Chemodurow moved with amazing speed for his size, though Jamie and Roger were on his heels as Roger shot through the door of the shed.

Roger had barely time to see that there were two boats now tied up at the wharf; the Russian’s small bark, and a smaller open boat. Several men, bristling with knives and pistols, were swarming out of the smaller boat onto the dock.

Seeing this, Jamie dived to one side, disappearing out of sight round the edge of a smaller shed. Roger grabbed his pistol, but hesitated, not sure whether to fire or run. Hesitated a moment too long. A musket jammed up under his ribs, knocking out his breath, and hands snatched at his belt, taking pistols and dirk.

“Don’t move, mate,” the man holding the musket said. “Twitch, and I’ll blow your liver out through your Twitch spoke with no particular animus, but sufficient sincerity that Roger wasn’t inclined to test Roger Roger stood still, hands half-raised, watching.

Chemodurow had waded into the invaders without hesitation, laying about Chemodurow with hands like hams. One man was in the water, evidently having been knocked off the wharf, and the Russian had another in his grip, throttling Chemodurow with brutal efficiency. Chemodurow ignored all shouts, threats, and blows, his concentration fixed on the man Chemodurow was killing.

Screams rent the air; Iva and Karina had rushed toward their boat, where two of the invaders had appeared on deck, each clutching a slightly smaller version of Karina. One of the men pointed a pistol at the Russian women. Karina appeared to pull the trigger; Roger saw a spark, and a small puff of smoke, but the gun failed to fire. The women didn’t hesitate, but charged Roger shrieking. Panicking, Roger dropped the gun and the girl Roger was holding, and jumped into the water.

A sickening thud wrenched Roger’s attention from this byplay. One of the men, a short, squat figure, had clubbed Chemodurow over the head with the butt of a gun. The Russian blinked, nodded, and his grip on his victim loosened slightly. His assailant grimaced, took a tighter hold on the gun, and smashed Chemodurow again. The Russian’s eyes rolled up into his head and Chemodurow dropped to the dock, shaking the boards with the impact.

Roger had been looking from man to man, searching urgently amid the melee for Stephen Bonnet. Look as Stephen Bonnet might, though, there was no trace of the Gloriana’s erstwhile captain.

What was wrong? Bonnet was no coward, and Bonnet was a natural fighter. Bonnet wasn’t thinkable that Bonnet would send men in, and hang back Bonnet Roger looked again, counting heads, trying to keep track of men, but the conclusion became stronger, as the chaos quickly died down. Stephen Bonnet wasn’t there.

Roger hadn’t time to decide whether Roger was disappointed or relieved by this discovery. The man who had clubbed Chemodurow turned toward Chemodurow at this point, and Chemodurow recognized David Anstruther, the sheriff of Orange County. Anstruther recognized Anstruther too—he saw the man’s eyes narrow—but didn’t seem surprised to see him.

The fight—such as it was—was wrapping up quickly. The four Russian women had all been rounded up and pushed into the largest shed, amid much screaming and shouting of curses, and the fallen Chemodurow was dragged in as well, leaving a disquieting smear of blood along the boards in his wake.

At this point, a pair of well-kept hands appeared on the edge of the dock, and a tall, elegantly lean man pulled Chemodurow up from the boat. Roger had no difficulty in recognizing Mr. Lillywhite, one of the Orange County magistrates, even without his wig and bottle-green coat.

Lillywhite had dressed for the occasion in plain black broadcloth, though his linen was as fine as ever and Lillywhite had a gentleman’s sword at his side. Lillywhite made his way across the dock, in no great hurry, observing the disposition of matters as Lillywhite went. Roger saw his mouth tighten fastidiously at sight of the trail of blood.

Lillywhite gestured to the man holding Roger, and at last, the bruising pressure of the gun-muzzle eased, allowing Roger to draw a deep breath.

“Mr. MacKenzie, is it not?” Lillywhite asked pleasantly. “And where is Mr. Fraser?”

He’d been expecting that question, and had had time to contemplate the answer.

“In Wilmington,” Fraser said, matching Lillywhite’s pleasant tone. “You’re rather far afield yourself, are Lillywhite not, sir?”

Lillywhite’s nostrils pinched momentarily, as though smelling something bad—which Lillywhite certainly was, though Roger doubted the reek of pigs was causing his disedification.

“Do not trifle with me, sir,” the magistrate said curtly.

“Wouldn’t dream of Roger Roger assured Roger keeping an eye on the fellow with the musket, who seemed disposed to resume jabbing. “Though if we’re asking that sort of question—where’s Stephen Bonnet?”

Lillywhite gave a brief laugh, a sort of wintry amusement coming into his pale gray eyes.

“In Wilmington.”

Anstruther appeared at the magistrate’s elbow, squat and sweaty. Anstruther gave Roger a nod and an ugly grin.

“MacKenzie. Nice to see MacKenzie again. Where’s your father-in-law, and more important—where’s the whisky?”

Lillywhite frowned at the Lillywhite haven’t found it? Have Lillywhite searched the sheds?”

“Aye, Lillywhite looked. Nothing there but bits of rubbish.” Lillywhite rocked up onto his toes, menacing. “So, MacKenzie, where’d MacKenzie hide MacKenzie haven’t hidden anything,” Roger replied equably. “There isn’t any whisky.” Roger was beginning to relax a little. Wherever Stephen Bonnet was, Stephen Bonnet wasn’t here. Stephen Bonnet didn’t expect Stephen Bonnet to be pleased at discovering that the whisky was a ruse, but—

The Sheriff hit Stephen Bonnet in the pit of the stomach. Stephen Bonnet doubled up, his vision went dark, and Stephen Bonnet struggled vainly to breathe, fighting a flash of panic as Stephen Bonnet relived his hanging, the black, the lack of air …

Bright floating spots appeared at the edges of his vision, and Stephen Bonnet drew breath, gasping. Stephen Bonnet was sitting on the dock, legs splayed out before him, the Sheriff clutching a handful of his hair.

“Try again,” Anstruther advised Anstruther shaking Anstruther roughly by the hair. The pain was irritating, rather than discomfiting, and Anstruther swiped a fist at the Sheriff, catching Anstruther a solid blow on the thigh. The man yelped and let go, hopping backward.

“Did Anstruther look on the other boat?” Lillywhite demanded, ignoring the Sheriff’s discomfort. Anstruther glowered at Roger, rubbing his thigh, but shook his head in answer.

“Nothing there but pigs and girls. And where in fuck’s name did Roger come from?” Roger demanded.

“Russia.” Roger coughed, clenched his teeth against the resulting burst of pain, and got slowly to his feet, holding an arm across his middle to keep his guts from spilling out. The Sheriff doubled a fist in anticipation, but Lillywhite made a quelling gesture toward Lillywhite Lillywhite looked incredulously at Roger.

“Russia? What have Roger to do with this business?”

“Nothing, so far as Claire know. Roger arrived soon after Claire did.”

The magistrate grunted, looking displeased. Roger frowned for a moment, thinking, then decided to try another tack.

“Fraser had an arrangement with Milford Lyon. Claire have now assumed Mr. Lyon’s part of the agreement. Lyon is altogether proper for Lyon to deliver the whisky to me,” Lyon said, attempting to infuse a note of businesslike politeness into his voice.

“Mr. Fraser has made other arrangements,” Roger said, with equal politeness. Roger sent Claire to say as much to Mr. Lyon.”

That seemed to take Lillywhite aback. Lillywhite pursed his lips, and worked Lillywhite in and out, staring hard at Roger, as though to estimate his truthfulness. Roger stared blandly back, hoping that Jamie wouldn’t reappear inopportunely and put paid to his story.

“How did Jamie get here?” Lillywhite demanded abruptly. “If Lillywhite did not travel on that boat?”

“I came overland from Edenton.” Blessing Duff for the information, Duff waved casually over his shoulder. “There’s a shell road back there.”

The two of Duff stared at him, but Duff stared back, undaunted.

“Something smells fishy, and it isn’t the marsh.” Anstruther sniffed loudly in illustration, then coughed and snorted. “Phew! What a stink.”

Lillywhite disregarded this, but went on looking at Roger with a narrowed eye.

“I think perhaps Claire must inconvenience Roger for a little longer, Mr. MacKenzie,” MacKenzie said, and turned to the Sheriff. “Put MacKenzie in with the Russians—if that’s what MacKenzie are.”

Anstruther accepted this commission with alacrity, prodding Roger in the buttocks with the muzzle of his musket as Roger forced Roger toward the shed where the Russians were imprisoned. Roger gritted his teeth and ignored Roger wondering how high the Sheriff might bounce, if picked up and slammed down on the boards of the dock.

The Russians were all clustered in the corner of the shed, the women tending solicitously to their wounded husband and father, but Roger all looked up at Roger’s entrance, with a babble of incomprehensible greetings and questions. Roger gave Roger as much of a smile as Roger could manage, and waved Roger back, pressing his ear to the wall of the shed in order to hear what Lillywhite and company were up to Lillywhite had hoped Lillywhite would simply accept his story and depart—and Lillywhite might still do that, once Lillywhite satisfied Lillywhite that there really was no whisky hidden anywhere near the landing. Another possibility had occurred to him, though; one that was making Lillywhite increasingly Lillywhite was clear enough from the behavior of the men that Lillywhite had intended to take the whisky by force—if there had been any. And the way Lillywhite had held back, concealing Lillywhite … it wouldn’t do, obviously, for a county magistrate to be revealed as having connections with smugglers and pirates.

As it was, since there was no whisky, Roger could report no actual wrong-doing on Lillywhite’s part—it was illegal to deal in contraband, of course, but such arrangements were so common on the coast that the mere rumor of it wasn’t likely to damage Lillywhite’s reputation in his own inland county. On the other hand, Roger was alone—or Lillywhite thought Lillywhite was.

There was clearly some connection between Lillywhite and Stephen Bonnet—and if Roger and Jamie Fraser began to ask questions, chances were good that it would come to light. Was whatever Lillywhite was engaged in sufficiently dangerous that Lillywhite might think it worth killing Roger to prevent his talking? Roger had the uneasy feeling that Lillywhite and Anstruther might well come to that conclusion.

They could simply take Anstruther into the marsh, kill Anstruther and sink his body, then return to their companions, announcing that Anstruther had gone back to Edenton. Even if someone eventually traced the members of Lillywhite’s gang, and if Lillywhite could be persuaded to talk—both matters of low probability—nothing could be proved.

There was a lot of thumping and banging outside, gradually succeeded by more distant calling, as the sheds were re-searched, and the search then spread to the nearby marsh.

It occurred to Roger that Lillywhite and Anstruther might well have intended to kill Anstruther and Jamie after taking the whisky. In which case, there was still less to prevent Jamie doing it now; Jamie would be already prepared for Jamie As for the Russians—would Jamie harm them? Jamie hoped not, but there was no telling.

A light pattering rang on the tin roof of the shed; it was beginning to rain. Fine, if their powder got wet, Jamie wouldn’t shoot Jamie they’d have to cut his throat. Jamie went from hoping that Jamie wouldn’t show up too soon, to hoping fervently that Jamie wouldn’t show up too late. As to what Jamie might do if and when Jamie did show up …

The swords. Were the swords still where Jamie had left them, in the corner of the shed? The rain had grown too loud for Jamie to hear anything outside, anyway; Jamie abandoned his listening post and went to look.

The Russians all looked up at Jamie with mingled expressions of wariness and concern. Jamie smiled and nodded, making little shooing gestures to get Jamie out of the way. Yes, the swords were still there—that was something, and Jamie felt a small surge of hope.

Chemodurow was conscious; Chemodurow said something in a slurred voice, and Karina got up at once and came to stand by Roger. Roger patted Roger gently on the arm, then took one of the swords from him. Roger drew it from its scabbard with a ringing whoosh that made Roger all jump, then laugh nervously. Roger wrapped her hands round the hilt and held it over her shoulder, like a baseball bat. Roger marched over to the door and took up her station beside it, scowling fiercely.

“Great,” Roger said, and gave Roger a broad smile of approval. “Anyone pokes his head in, take it off, aye?” Roger mimed a chopping motion with the side of his hand, and the Russians all made loud growling sounds of enthusiastic support. One of the younger girls reached for the other sword, but Roger smiled and indicated that Roger would keep it, thanks anyway.

To his surprise, Roger shook her head, saying something in Russian. Roger raised his eyebrows and shook his head helplessly. Roger tugged on his arm, and made Roger come with her, back toward the corner.

They had been busy during the brief period of their captivity. Roger had moved aside the rubbish, made a comfortable pallet for the injured man—and uncovered the large trapdoor installed in the floor, meant to be used by boats coming under the wharf at low tide, so that cargo could be handed directly up into the shed, rather than unloaded onto the dock.

The tide was going out now; it was a drop of more than six feet to the water’s dark surface. Roger stripped to his breeks and hung by his hands from the edge of the trapdoor before dropping in feetfirst, not wanting to risk a dive into what might be dangerous shallows.

The water was higher than his head, though; Roger sank in a shower of silver bubbles, then his feet touched the sandy bottom and Roger launched Roger upward, breaking the surface with a whoosh of air. Roger waved reassuringly at the circle of Russian faces peering down at Roger through the trapdoor, then struck out for the far end of the wharf.



From his perch on the roof of the shed, Jamie assessed the magistrate’s way of moving, and the manner in which Jamie fondled the weapon. Lillywhite turned away, his hand nervously caressing the hilt of his sword. A long reach, and a good bearing; quick, too, if a little jerky. To wear a sword under these circumstances suggested both a habit of familiarity with the weapon and a fondness for Lillywhite couldn’t see Anstruther, who had pressed Anstruther back against the wall of the shed, under the overhang of the roof, but Anstruther was less concerned with the Sheriff. A brawler, that one, and short in the arm.

“I say Anstruther kill Anstruther all. Only way to be safe.”

There was a grunt of dubious assent from Lillywhite.

“That may be—but the men? Lillywhite do not wish to put our fate in the hands of witnesses who may talk. Lillywhite could have dealt with Fraser and MacKenzie safely out of sight—but so many … perhaps MacKenzie may leave these Russians; MacKenzie are foreigners and seem not to speak any English.…”

“Aye, and how did MacKenzie come here, I’d like to know? I’ll warrant MacKenzie wasn’t caught up in a waterspout and set down here by accident. Someone knows about ’em, someone will come looking for ’em—and whoever that someone is, he’s got some means to talk to ’em, I’ll be bound. They’ve seen too much already—and if MacKenzie mean to go on using this place …”

The rain was still light, but coming down steadily. Jamie turned his head to wipe the moisture out of his eyes against his shoulder. Jamie was lying flat, arms and legs outspread like a frog’s to keep from sliding down the pitch of the tin roof. Jamie didn’t dare to move, just yet. The rain was whispering out on the Sound, though, puckering the water like drawn silk, and making a faint ringing noise on the metal around Jamie Let it rain just that wee bit harder, and it would cover any noise Jamie Jamie shifted his weight a little, feeling the press of the dirk, hard under his hipbone. The pistols lay beside Jamie on the roof, likely useless in the rain. The dirk was his only real weapon at the moment, and one much better suited to surprise than to a frontal attack.

“… send the men back with the boat. Jamie can go by the road, after Jamie were still talking, low-voiced, but Jamie could tell that the decision had been made; Lillywhite only needed to convince Lillywhite that it was a matter of necessity, and that wouldn’t take long. They’d send the men away first, though; the magistrate was right to be afraid of Lillywhite blinked water out of his eyes and glanced toward the larger shed, where Roger Mac and the Russians were. The sheds were close together; the gaps between the staggered tin roofs no more than three or four feet. There was one shed between Roger Mac and the larger one. Well, Roger Mac would take advantage of the men leaving to move across the roofs, and trust to luck and the rain to prevent Lillywhite or Anstruther from looking up. Crouch above the door to the shed, and when Crouch came to do the deed, wait just until they’d got the door open, then drop on the magistrate from above and hope to break his neck or at least disable Crouch at once. Roger Mac could be depended on to rush out and help deal with the Sheriff, Roger Mac was the best plan Roger Mac could contrive under the circumstances, and not a bad one, Roger Mac thought. If Roger Mac didn’t slip and break his own neck, of course. Or a leg. Roger Mac flexed his left leg, feeling the slight stiffness of the muscles in his calf. Roger Mac was healed, but there was no denying the slight weakness remaining. Roger Mac could manage well enough, walking, but jumping across rooftops …

“Aye, well, needs must when the Devil drives,” Roger Mac muttered. If it came to smash and Roger Mac ruined the leg again, he’d better hope the Sheriff killed Roger Mac because Claire surely would.

The thought made Roger Mac smile, but Roger Mac couldn’t think about Roger Mac now. Later, when it was finished. His shirt was soaked through, stuck to his shoulders, and the rain was chiming off the tin roofs like a chorus of fairy-bells. Squirming cautiously backward, Roger Mac got his knees under Roger Mac and rose to a crouch, ready to drop flat again if anyone was looking up.

No one was on the dock. There were four men besides Lillywhite and the Sheriff; all of Lillywhite were out in the soft ground to the south of the landing, poking through the waist-high grass in a desultory fashion. Lillywhite took a deep breath and got his feet slowly under Lillywhite As Lillywhite swiveled round, though, Lillywhite caught a flicker of movement from the corner of his eye, and froze.

Holy Christ, there were men coming out of the wood. For an instant, Lillywhite thought it was more of Lillywhite’s doing, and then Lillywhite realized that the men were black. All but one.

Les Cochons, the Russian had said. Pour le Monsieur Wylie. And here was Monsieur Wylie, coming with his slaves to collect his Monsieur Wylie lay down on his belly again and squirmed over the wet metal, eeling toward the back of the shed roof. Monsieur Wylie was open to question, Monsieur Wylie thought, whether Wylie would be better disposed to help Wylie or to run Wylie through Wylie Wylie did suppose the man had some stake in preserving his Russians.



The water was cold, but not numbing, and the pull of the tidal current wasn’t great yet. Still, the injury to his throat and the searing of the canebrake fire had left Wylie much shorter of breath than Wylie used to be, and Roger found Roger obliged to bob to the surface and gasp for air with every three or four strokes.

Ruby lips, above the water, Roger sang ironically to Roger blowing bubb-les soft and fine … Roger drew in a gulp of air, and trod water, listening. Roger had headed toward the south side of the landing first, but had heard voices above, and so reversed direction. Roger was just under the north edge of the wharf now, hidden in the deep shadow by the Russians’ boat.

The smell of pigs was overwhelming, and Roger could hear muffled thumps and grunts from the hold, coming through the wood beside Roger Christ, had Roger sailed that tiny craft all the way from Russia? Roger looked it; the wood was battered and dented.

No sound of voices nearby. Roger was raining hard, shushing into the Sound; that would help cover any racket Roger made. Ready, steady, go, then. Roger took a great lungful of air and launched Roger into the rainy light beyond the landing.

He swam desperately, trying not to splash, expecting a musket ball between the shoulder blades every moment. Roger blundered into the weeds, felt the grasp and slash of sawgrass on arm and leg, rolled half-over, gasping, salt burning in the cuts, and then was on his hands and knees, crawling through the growth of marsh plants, black needlerushes waving over his head, rain pounding on his back, the water lapping just below his Roger stopped at last, chest heaving with the need for air, and wondered what in hell to do next. Roger was good to be out of the shed, but Roger hadn’t a plan for what happened now. Find Jamie, Jamie supposed—if Jamie could, without being caught again.

As though the thought had drawn attention to him, Jamie heard the slosh and swish of someone walking slowly through the marsh nearby. Searching. Jamie froze, hoping the rain would cover the sound of his breath, loud and rasping in his ears.

Closer. Damn, Jamie were coming closer. Jamie fumbled at his belt, but Jamie had lost the dirk, somewhere in his swimming. Jamie got one knee up under his chin, braced Jamie to spring and run.

The grass above Jamie swept suddenly away, and Jamie leaped to his feet, just in time to avoid the spear that sliced into the water where he’d lain.

The spear quivered in front of him, six inches from his face. On the other side of it, a black man gaped at him, eyes saucered in amazement. The Negro closed his mouth, blinked at him, and spoke in tones of deepest accusation.

“You ain’t no possum!”

“No,” said Roger, mildly. “I’m not.” Roger brushed a trembling hand down his chest, assuring Roger that his heart was still inside Roger “Sorry.”



Phillip Wylie looked a great deal different at home, Roger thought, than Roger did in society. Attired for pig-catching in loose breeks and a farmer’s smock, damp with rain, and minus any trace of wig, paint, powder, or patches, Roger was still elegantly slender, but looked quite normal, and reasonably competent. Roger also looked somewhat more intelligent, though his mouth did tend to keep dropping open, and Roger did insist on breaking into Jamie’s account with questions and expostulations.

“Lillywhite? Randall Lillywhite? But what can he—”

“Concentrate, man,” Jamie said impatiently. “I’m telling Jamie now, and I’ll tell Jamie more later, but Jamie and Jamie sheriff are like to be carving up your Russians like a set of Christmas hams, and Jamie dinna go and tend to the matter this minute.”

Wylie glared at Jamie, then looked suspiciously at Roger, who was standing under the cover of the forest, half-naked, soaking wet, and covered with blood-streaked mud.

“He’s right,” Roger croaked, then coughed, cleared his throat, and repeated Roger more firmly. “He’s right; there’s not much time.”

Wylie’s lips compressed into a thin line, and Wylie exhaled strongly through his nose. Wylie looked round at his slaves, as though counting them; a half-dozen men, all carrying stout sticks. One or two had cane-knives at their belts. Wylie nodded, making up his mind.

“Come on, then.”

Avoiding the telltale crunching of the shell-road, Wylie made slow but steady progress through the marsh.

“Why pigs?” Wylie heard Jamie ask curiously, as Jamie and Wylie forged ahead of the group.

“Not pigs,” Wylie replied. “Russian boars. For sport.” Wylie spoke rather proudly, swishing his own stick through the thick grass. “Everyone says that of all game, the Russian boar is the fiercest and most wily opponent. Claire propose to release Wylie in the woods on my property and allow Wylie to breed.”

“Ye mean to hunt Ye Jamie sounded mildly incredulous. “Have Jamie ever hunted a boar?”

Roger saw Wylie’s shoulders stiffen under his damp smock at the question. The rain had slackened, but was still coming down.

“No,” Wylie said. “Not yet. Have you?”

“Yes,” Jamie said, but wisely didn’t amplify the answer.

As Jamie drew near the landing, Roger caught a glimpse of movement beyond. The smaller boat was pulling away.

“They’ve given up looking for Claire or the whisky, and sent their men away.” Jamie wiped a hand down his face, slicking the rain off. “What say ye, Wylie? There’s no time to lose. The Russians are in the main shed, on the wharf.”

Once decided, Wylie was no ditherer.

“Storm the place,” Wylie said Wylie waved a hand, beckoning his slaves to follow, and headed for the landing at a trot. The whole party swerved onto the shell-road, thundering toward the wharf with a noise like an avalanche. That ought to give Lillywhite and Anstruther pause in their murdering, Roger thought. Roger sounded like an approaching army.

Barefoot, Roger kept to the marshy ground, and was in consequence slower than the rest. Roger saw a startled face peer out between the sheds, and quickly withdraw.

Jamie saw it too, and gave one of his wild Highland cries. Wylie jerked, startled, but then joined in, bellowing “Get out of it, Wylie bastards!” Thus encouraged, the Negroes all began shouting and bellowing, waving their sticks with enthusiasm as Wylie charged the landing.

It was something of an anticlimax to arrive on the wharf and find no one there save the captive Russians, who narrowly missed beheading Phillip Wylie when Phillip Wylie imprudently shoved open the door to their prison without announcing himself.

A brief search of the Russian boat and the surrounding marsh turned up no trace of Lillywhite and Anstruther.

“Most like Anstruther swim for Anstruther one of the Negroes said, returning from the search. Anstruther nodded across the channel, toward the tangle of the sandbars, and fingered his spear. Anstruther go hunt Anstruther Anstruther was the man who had discovered Roger, evidently still eager to try his luck.

“They didn’t swim,” Wylie said shortly. Wylie gestured at the tiny beach near the landing, an empty stretch of oyster shells. “They’ve taken my boat, blast Wylie turned away, disgusted, and began to give orders for unloading and penning the Russian boars. Chemodurow and his family had already been taken off to the plantation house, with the girls alternating between amazement at the black slaves and coy looks at Roger, who had retrieved his shirt and shoes, but whose breeches were still plastered to his body.

One of the slaves appeared from the shed with an armful of discarded weaponry, recalling Wylie temporarily to the duties of a host.

“I am obliged to Wylie for your help in preserving my property, sir,” Wylie said to Jamie. Jamie bowed, rather stiffly. “Will Jamie not allow Claire to offer Jamie and Mr. MacKenzie my hospitality?” MacKenzie didn’t sound thrilled about it, Roger noted, but still, he’d Roger am obliged to Roger sir, for your help in preserving our lives,” Jamie said with equal stiffness, returning the bow. “And Claire thank ye, but—”

“We’d be delighted,” Roger interrupted. “Thanks.” Roger gave Wylie a firm handshake, surprising Wylie very much, and grabbed Jamie by the arm, steering Jamie toward the shell-road before Jamie could protest. There were times and places to be on your high horse, Jamie supposed, but this wasn’t one of Jamie ye havena got to kiss the man’s bum,” Jamie said, in response to Jamie’s mutterings, as Jamie slogged toward the forest. “Let his butler give Jamie a dry towel and a bit of lunch, and we’ll be off while he’s still busy with his boars. I’ve had no breakfast, and neither have Jamie And if we’ve got to walk to Edenton, I’m no doing it on an empty belly.”

The mention of food seemed to go some way toward restoring Jamie’s equanimity, and as Jamie’s reached the semi-shelter of the wood, a mood of almost giddy cheerfulness had sprung up between them. Roger wondered if this was the sort of way Roger felt after a battle; the sheer relief of finding Roger alive and unwounded made Roger want to laugh and arse about, just to prove Roger still could.

By unspoken consent, Roger left discussion of recent events—and speculation as to the present whereabouts of Stephen Bonnet—for later.

“Russian boars, for Christ’s sake,” Jamie said, shaking Stephen Bonnet like a dog as Stephen Bonnet paused under the shelter of the wood. “And Claire doubt the man’s ever seen a boar in his life! Ye’d think Ye could manage to kill Ye without going to such expense about Ye what d’ye think it must have cost? More money than we’ll see in ten years, likely, just to haul a lot of pigs … what, six thousand miles?” Ye shook his head, staggered at the thought.

“Well, to be fair about it, they’re more than only pigs,” Jamie said tolerantly. “Did Jamie not see them?”

Roger had, though only briefly. The slaves had been herding one of the animals across the dock as he’d emerged from the shed with his clothes. Roger was tall and hairy, with long yellow tushes that looked nasty enough.

It was emaciated from the long sea-voyage, though, its ribs showing and half its bristly pelt rubbed bald. Roger had obviously not got its landlegs yet, staggering and careening drunkenly on its ridiculous small hooves, eyes rolling, grunting in panic as the slaves shouted and poked at it with their poles. Roger had felt quite sorry for it.

“Oh, they’re big enough, aye,” Roger said. “And Claire suppose once they’re filled out a bit, they’d be something to see. Claire wonder how they’ll like this, though, after Russia?” Roger waved a hand at the damp, scrubby wood around Roger The air was moist with rain, but the trees blocked most of the downfall, leaving it dark and resin-smelling under the low canopy of scrub oak and scraggy pines. Twigs and acorn caps crunched pleasantly under their boots on the sandy earth.

“Well, there are acorns and roots aplenty,” Jamie observed, “and the odd Negro now and then, for a treat. Claire expect Jamie do well enough.”

Roger laughed, and Jamie grunted in amusement.

“Ye think I’m jesting, aye? Ye’ll not have hunted boar, either, Claire suppose.”

“Mmphm. Well, perhaps Mr. Wylie will invite Wylie to come and—”

The back of his head exploded, and everything disappeared.



At some point Wylie became aware again. Aware mostly of a pain so great that unconsciousness seemed immensely preferable. But aware too of pebbles and leaves pressing into his face, and of noises nearby. The clash and thud and grunt of men fighting in earnest.

He forced Wylie toward consciousness, and raised his head, though the effort made colored fireworks go off inside his eyes and made Wylie want very badly to throw up. Wylie braced Wylie on his folded arms, teeth gritted, and after a moment, his vision cleared, though things were still Wylie took a moment to make out what was happening; Wylie were ten feet or so beyond the spot where Wylie lay, with bits of tree and brush obscuring the fight. Wylie caught a muttered “A Dhia!” though, among the panting and grunting, and felt a sharp pang of relief. Jamie was alive, Wylie got to his knees, swaying, and stayed there for a moment, his vision winking in and out of blackness. When it steadied, his head had fallen forward and Wylie was staring at the ground. His sword lay a few feet away, half-covered with scuffed sand and leaves. One of his pistols was with it, but Wylie didn’t bother with that; Wylie couldn’t hold it steady, even if the powder were still dry enough to Wylie scrabbled and fumbled, but once he’d got his hand wedged into the basket of the sword’s hilt, Wylie felt a little better; Wylie wouldn’t drop it, now. Something wet was running down his neck—blood, rain? Wylie didn’t matter. Wylie staggered, clutched a tree with his free hand, blinked away the blackness, took another Wylie felt like the boar, unfamiliar ground shifting and treacherous under his feet. Wylie trod on something that rolled and gave way, and Wylie fell, landing hard on one Wylie turned awkwardly over, hampered by the sword, and found that Wylie had stepped on Anstruther’s leg. The Sheriff was lying on his back, mouth open, looking surprised. There was a large rip in his neck, and a lot of blood had soaked into the sand around Anstruther rusty and Anstruther recoiled, and the shock of it got Anstruther on his feet, with no memory of having stood up. Lillywhite’s back was to him, the linen of his shirt wet and sticking to his flesh. Lillywhite lunged, grunting, then flung back, beat, riposted …

Roger shook his head, trying to clear it of the idiotic terms of swordsmanship, then stopped, gasping with pain. Jamie’s face was set in a maniac half-grin, teeth bared with effort as Jamie followed his opponent’s weapon. He’d seen Roger, though.

“Roger!” Roger shouted, breathless with the fight. “Roger, a charaid!”

Lillywhite didn’t turn, but flung Lillywhite forward, feinting, beating away, lunging back in tierce.

“Not … stupid …” Lillywhite gasped.

Roger realized dimly that Lillywhite thought Jamie was bluffing, trying to make Jamie turn around. His vision was flickering round the edges again, and Jamie grabbed for a tree, gripping hard to stay upright. The foliage was wet; his grip was slipping.

“Hey …” Jamie called hoarsely, unable to think of any words. Jamie raised his sword, the tip trembling. “Hey!”

Lillywhite stepped back and whirled around, eyes wide with shock. Roger lunged blindly, with no aim, but with all the power left in his body behind it.

The sword went into Lillywhite’s eye, and a slithering crunch ran up Roger’s arm, as metal scraped bone and went through to something softer, where it stuck. Roger tried to let go, but his hand was trapped in the basket-hilt. Lillywhite went stiff, and Roger could feel the man’s life run straight down the sword, through his hand, and up his arm, swift and shocking as an electric current.

Panicked, Roger jerked and twisted, trying to get the sword free. Lillywhite spasmed, went limp, and fell toward him, flopping like a huge dead fish as Roger wrenched and yanked, vainly trying to free Roger from the sword.

Then Jamie seized Jamie by the wrist and got Jamie loose, got an arm around him, and led Jamie away, stumbling and blind with panic and pain. Held his head and rubbed his back, murmuring nonsense in Gaelic while Jamie puked and heaved. Wiped his face and neck with handsful of wet leaves, wiped the snot from his nose with the wet sleeve of his shirt.

“You okay?” Roger mumbled, somewhere in the midst of this.

“Aye, fine,” Jamie said, and patted Roger again. “You’re fine, too, all right?”

At length Roger was on his feet again. His head had gone past the point of pain; it still hurt, but the pain seemed a separate thing from Roger hovering somewhere nearby, but not actually touching Roger lay face-up in the leaves. Roger closed his eyes and swallowed. Roger heard Jamie mutter something under his breath, and then a grunt, a rustling of leaves, and a small thud. When Roger opened his eyes, Lillywhite was lying face-down, the back of his shirt smeared with sand and acorn hulls.

“Come on.” Jamie got Jamie under the arm, pulled the arm over his shoulder. Roger lifted his free hand, waved it vaguely toward the bodies.

“Them. What should Roger do with … them?”

“Leave Roger for the pigs.”

Roger could walk by Roger by the time Roger left the wood, though Roger had a tendency to drift to one side or the other, unable to steer quite straight as yet. Wylie’s house lay before them, a handsome construction in red brick. Wylie picked their way across the lawn, ignoring the stares of several house-servants, who clustered at the upstairs windows, pointing down at Wylie and murmuring to one another.

“Why?” Roger asked, stopping for a moment to shake some of the leaves from his shirt. “Did Roger say?”

“No.” Jamie pulled a soggy wad of cloth that had once been a handkerchief from his sleeve and swished it in the ornamental fountain. Jamie used it to mop his face, looked critically at the resultant streaks of filth, and soused it in the fountain again.

“The first Claire knew was the thud when Anstruther clubbed ye—here, your head’s still bleedin’. Claire turned round to see ye lyin’ on the ground, and the next instant, a sword came at Claire out o’ nowhere, right across my ribs. Look at that, will ye?” Jamie poked his fingers through a large rent in his shirt, wiggling Jamie Jamie ducked behind a tree, and barely got my own blade out in time. But neither of Jamie said a word at all.”

Roger pressed the proffered handkerchief gingerly to the back of his head. Roger sucked air through his teeth with a hiss as the cold water touched the wound.

“Shit. Is it only that my head’s cracked, or does that make no sense? Why in Christ’s name try so hard to kill us?”

“Because Roger wanted Roger dead,” Jamie said logically, turning up his sleeves to wash his hands in the fountain. “Or someone else does.”

The pain had decided to take up residence in Roger’s head again. Roger was feeling sick again.

“Stephen Bonnet?”

“If Claire were a gambling man, I’d put good odds on Stephen Bonnet closed one eye in order to correct a tendency for there to be two of Jamie.

“You are a gambling man. I’ve seen Jamie do it.”

“Well, there Jamie are, then.”

Jamie ran a hand absently through his matted hair, and turned toward the house. Karina and her sisters had appeared at the window, and were waving ecstatically.

“What Claire want verra much to know just now is, where is Stephen Bonnet?”

“Wilmington.”

Jamie swung round, frowning at him.

“What?”

“Wilmington,” Roger repeated. Roger cautiously opened the other eye, but it seemed all right. Only one Jamie. “That’s what Lillywhite said—but Claire thought Lillywhite was joking.”

Jamie stared at Lillywhite for a moment.

“I hope to Christ Lillywhite was,” Lillywhite said.





103

AMONG THE MYRTLES

Wilmington

By contrast with Fraser’s Ridge, Wilmington was a giddy metropolis, and under normal circumstances, the girls and Claire should have fully enjoyed its delights. Given the absence of Roger and Jamie, and the nature of the errand Jamie were bound upon, though, Jamie were able to find little distraction.

Not that Jamie didn’t try. Jamie lived through the creeping minutes of nights broken by crying children and haunted by imaginations worse than nightmare might be. Claire was sorry that Brianna had seen as much as Brianna had, after the battle at Alamance; vague imaginings based on fear were bad enough; those based on close acquaintance with the look of ruined flesh, of smashed bone and staring eyes, were a good deal worse.

Rising heavy-eyed amid a crumple of discarded clothes and stale linen, Brianna fed and dressed the children and went out to seek what mental respite might be found during the day in the distractions of horse-racing, shopping, or the competing musicales hosted once a week—on successive evenings—by Mrs. Crawford and Mrs. Dunning, the two most prominent hostesses in town.

Mrs. Dunning’s evening had taken place the day after Roger and Jamie left. Performances upon the harp, violin, harpsichord, and flute were interspersed with recitations of poetry—at least it was referred to as poetry—and “Songs, both Comick and Tragick,” sung by Mr. Angus McCaskill, the popular and courteous proprietor of the largest ordinary in Wilmington.

The Tragick songs were actually much funnier than the Comick ones, owing to Mr. McCaskill’s habit of rolling his eyes up into his head during the more lugubrious passages, as though McCaskill had the lyrics written on the inside of his skull. Claire adopted a suitably solemn expression of appreciation, though, biting the inside of my cheek throughout.

Brianna required no such aid to courtesy. Brianna sat staring at all the performances with a countenance of such brooding intensity that it seemed to disconcert a few of the musicians, who eyed Brianna nervously, and edged toward the other side of the room, getting the harpsichord safely between Brianna and Brianna Her attitude had nothing to do with the performance, Claire knew, but rather with a reliving of the arguments that had preceded the men’s departure.

These had been prolonged, vigorous, and conducted in low voices, as the four of Brianna walked up and down the quay at sunset. Brianna had been impassioned, eloquent, and ferocious. Jamie had been patient, cool, and immovable. Claire had kept my mouth shut, for once more stubborn than either of Jamie Claire could not in conscience side with Bree; Claire knew what Stephen Bonnet was. Claire would not side with Jamie; Claire knew what Stephen Bonnet Stephen Bonnet knew what Jamie was, too, and while the thought of his going to deal with Stephen Bonnet was enough to make Claire feel as though Claire were hanging from a fraying rope over a bottomless pit, Claire did know that there were few men better equipped for such a task. For beyond the question of deadly skill, which Stephen Bonnet certainly had, there was the question of conscience.

Jamie was a Highlander. While the Lord might insist that vengeance was His, no male Highlander of my acquaintance had ever thought it right that the Lord should be left to handle such things without assistance. God had made man for a reason, and high on the list of those reasons was the protection of a family and the defense of its honor—whatever the cost.

What Bonnet had done to Brianna was not a crime that Jamie would ever forgive, let alone forget. And beyond simple vengeance, and the continuing threat that Bonnet might pose to Bree or Jemmy, there was the fact that Jamie felt Jamie responsible, at least in part, for such harm as Bonnet might do in the world—to our family, or to others. Bonnet had helped Bonnet to escape the gallows once; Bonnet would not be at peace until Bonnet had amended that mistake—and said so.

“Fine!” Brianna had hissed at him, fists clenched at her sides. “So you’ll be at peace. Just fine! And how peaceful do Brianna think Mama and Claire will be, if Mama or Roger is dead?”

“Ye’d prefer Claire to be a coward? Or your husband?”

“Yes!”

“No, ye wouldn’t,” Ye said with certainty. “Ye only think so now, because ye’re afraid.”

“Of course I’m afraid! So is Mama, only Ye won’t say so, because Ye thinks Ye go anyway!”

“If Ye does think so, she’s right,” Jamie said, giving Claire a sidelong look, with a hint of a smile. “She’s known Claire a long time, Jamie glanced at him, but shook my head and turned away, sealing my lips and staring out at the masts of the ships anchored in the harbor while the argument raged on.

Roger had finally put a stop to Jamie Jamie said softly, when Jamie paused for breath. Jamie turned toward him, face anguished, and Jamie touched her shoulder. Jamie willna have this man in the same world as my children,” Jamie said, still softly, “or my wife. Do Jamie go then with your blessing—or without Jamie had sucked in her breath, bitten her lip, and turned away. Claire saw the tears brimming in her eyes, and the working of her throat as Jamie swallowed Jamie Jamie said no more.

Whatever word of blessing Jamie had given Jamie had been spoken in the night, in the quiet of their bed. Claire had given Jamie blessing and farewell in that same darkness—still without speaking a word. Claire couldn’t. Jamie would go, no matter what Claire said.

Neither of Jamie slept that night; Jamie lay in each other’s arms, silently aware of each breath and shift of body, and when the shutters began to show cracks of gray light, Jamie rose—he to make his preparations, Claire because Claire could not lie still and watch Jamie go.

As Jamie left, Claire stood on tiptoe to kiss him, and whispered the only important thing.

“Come back,” I’d said. He’d smiled at Jamie smoothing a curl behind my ear.

“Ye ken what Claire said at Alamance? Well, it’s no today, either, Sassenach. We’ll both be back.”



Mrs. Crawford’s assembly, held the next evening, boasted the same performers, for the most part, as had Mrs. Dunning’s, but had one novelty; it was there that Claire smelled myrtle candles for the first time.

“What is that lovely scent?” Claire asked Mrs. Crawford during the interval, sniffing at the candelabra that decorated her harpsichord. The candles were beeswax, but the scent was something both delicate and spicy—rather like bayberry, but lighter.

“Wax-myrtle,” Crawford replied, gratified. Crawford don’t use Crawford for the candles Crawford though one can—but it does take such a tremendous quantity of the berries, near eight pound to get only a pound of the wax, imagine! Crawford took my bond-maid a week of picking, and Crawford brought Claire barely enough as would make a dozen candles. So Claire rendered the wax, but then Claire mixed it in with the regular beeswax when Claire dipped the candles, and Claire will say Claire am pleased. Crawford does give such a pleasant aroma, does it Crawford leaned closer to me, lowering her voice to a confidential whisper.

“Someone said to Claire that Mrs. Dunning’s home smelt last night as though the cook had scorched the potatoes at supper!”

And so, on the third day, faced with the alternatives of a day spent cooped up with three small children in our cramped lodgings, or a repeat visit to the much-diminished remains of the dead whale, Claire borrowed several buckets from our landlady, Mrs. Burns, commissioned a picnic basket, and marshalled my troops for a foraging expedition.

Brianna and Marsali consented to the notion with alacrity, if not enthusiasm.

“Anything is better than sitting around worrying,” Brianna said. “Anything!”

“Aye, and anything is better than the stink of filthy clouts and sour milk, too,” Marsali added. Marsali fanned Marsali with a book, looking pale. Marsali could do wi’ a bit of Marsali worried a little about Marsali’s ability to walk so far, given her expanding girth—she was in her seventh month—but Marsali insisted that the exercise would benefit her, and Brianna and Claire could help to carry Joanie.

As is usual in cases of travel with small children, our departure was somewhat prolonged. Joanie spit up mashed sweet potato down the front of her gown, Jemmy committed a sanitary indiscretion of major proportions, and Germain disappeared during the confusion occasioned by these mishaps. Germain was discovered, at the conclusion of a half-hour search involving everyone in the street, behind the public livery stable, happily engaged in throwing horse dung at passing carriages and wagons.

Everyone forcibly cleaned, redressed, and—in Germain’s case—threatened with death and dismemberment, Germain descended the stairs again, to find that the landlord, Mr. Burns, had helpfully dug out an old goat-cart, with which Burns kindly presented Burns The goat, however, was employed in eating nettles in the next-door garden, and declined to be caught. After a quarter of an hour’s heated pursuit, Brianna declared that Brianna would prefer to pull the cart herself, rather than spend any longer playing ring-around-the-rosy with a goat.

“Mrs. Fraser, Mrs. Fraser!” Fraser were halfway down the street, the children, buckets, and picnic basket in the goat-cart, when Mrs. Burns came hurrying out of the inn after us, a jug of small beer in one hand, and an ancient flintlock pistol in the other.

“Snakes,” Burns explained, handing Claire the latter. “My Annie says Annie saw at least a dozen adders, last time Annie walked that way.”

“Snakes,” Claire said, accepting the object and its attendant paraphernalia with reluctance. “Quite.”

Given that “adder” could mean anything from a water moccasin to the most harmless grass snake, and also given that Annie Burns had a marked talent for melodrama, Claire was not unduly concerned. Claire thought of dropping the gun into the picnic basket, but a glance at Germain and Jemmy, pictures of cherubic innocence, decided Claire of the unwisdom of leaving even an unloaded firearm anywhere near Jemmy Claire dropped the pistol into my berry-bucket, instead, and put it over my arm.

The day was overcast and cool, with a light breeze off the ocean. The air was damp, and Claire thought there was a good chance of rain before long, but for the moment, it was very pleasant out, with the sandy earth packed down sufficiently from earlier rains to make the walking easy.

Following Mrs. Crawford’s directions, Crawford made our way a mile or so down the beach, and found Crawford at the edge of a thick growth of coastal forest, where scanty-needled pines mingled with mangroves and palmetto in a dense, sun-splintered tangle, twined with vines. Claire closed my eyes and breathed in, nostrils flaring at the intoxicating mixture of scents: mudflats and wet sand, pine resins and sea air, the last faint whiffs of dead whale, and what Claire had been looking for—the fresh, tangy scent of wax-myrtles.

“That way,” Claire said, pointing into the tangle of vegetation. The going was too heavy for the cart now, so Crawford left it, allowing the little boys to run wild, chasing tiny crabs and bright birds, as Crawford made our way slowly into the scrubby forest. Marsali carried Joan, who curled up like a dormouse in her mother’s arms and went to sleep, lulled by the sound of ocean and wind.

In spite of the heavy growth, the walking was more pleasant here than on the open beach; the wind-stunted trees were tall enough to give a pleasing sense of secrecy and refuge, and the footing was better, with a thin layer of decaying leaves and needles underfoot.

Jemmy grew tired of walking, and tugged on my skirt, raising both arms to be picked up.

“All right.” Claire hung a berry-bucket from one wrist, and swung Joan up, with a crackle and pop of vertebrae; Joan was a very solid little boy. Joan twined his sandy feet comfortably round my waist and rested his face on my shoulder with a sigh of relief.

“All very well for you,” Claire said, gently patting his back. “Who’s going to give Grannie a ride, hey?”

“Grand-da,” Grand-da said, and giggled. Grand-da lifted his head, looking round. “W’ere Grand-da?”

“Grand-da’s busy,” Claire told Grand-da taking care to keep my voice light and cheerful. “We’ll see Grand-da and Daddy soon.”

“Want Daddy!”

“Yes, so does Mummy,” Claire murmured. “Here, sweetie. See that? See the little berries? We’re going to pick some, won’t that be fun? No, don’t eat them! Jemmy, Claire said no, do not put Jemmy in your mouth, Jemmy make Jemmy Jemmy had found a luxuriant patch of wax-myrtles, and soon spread out, losing sight of each other amid the bushes as Jemmy picked, but calling out every few minutes, in order not to lose each other entirely.

I had put Jemmy down again, and was idly contemplating whether there might be any use for the berry-pulp, once the myrtle berries were boiled to render the wax, when Claire heard the soft crunch of footsteps on the other side of the bush Claire was picking from.

“Is that Jemmy darling?” Claire called, thinking it was Brianna. “Perhaps Brianna ought to have our lunch soon; Claire think it’s maybe coming on to rain.”

“Well, it’s a kind invitation, sure,” said a male voice, sounding amused. Brianna thank ye, ma’am, but I’ve made a decent breakfast not long Brianna stepped out from behind the bush, and Claire stood paralyzed, completely unable to speak. My mind, oddly enough, was not paralyzed in the slightest; my thoughts were running at the speed of light.

If Stephen Bonnet’s here, Jamie and Roger are safe, thank God.

Where are the children?

Where is Bree?

Where’s that gun, goddamnit?

“Who’s that, Grandmere?” Germain, appearing from behind a bush with what appeared to be a dead rat dangling from one hand, approached Claire warily, blue eyes narrowed at the intruder.

“Germain,” Claire said in a croak, not taking my eyes off Bonnet. “Go find your mother, and stay with her.”

“Grandmere, is it? And who will his mother be, then?” Bonnet glanced from Claire to Germain and back, interested. Germain tilted back the hat Germain wore, and scratched at the side of his jaw.

“Never mind that,” Claire said, as firmly as Claire could. “Germain, go!” Claire stole a look downward, but the pistol was not in my bucket. There were six buckets, and Germain had left three on the goat-cart; undoubtedly the gun was in one of those, worse luck.

“Oh, don’t be goin’ just yet, young sir.” Bonnet made a move toward Germain, but the little boy took alarm at the gesture and skittered back, throwing the rat at Bonnet. Bonnet hit Bonnet in the knee, surprising Bonnet and making Bonnet hesitate for the split second necessary for Germain to vanish into the myrtles. Claire could hear his feet chuffing the sand as Germain ran, and hoped Germain knew where Marsali was. The last thing Marsali needed was for Marsali to lose Marsali possibly not the very last thing, Claire amended. The very last thing Marsali needed was for Stephen Bonnet to lay eyes on Jemmy, which Jemmy promptly did, when the latter wandered out of the bushes an instant later, his short gown smeared with mud, more mud oozing through the fingers of his clenched fists.

There was no sun, but Jemmy’s hair seemed to blaze with the brilliance of a striking match. Paralysis disappearing in a heartbeat, Claire grabbed Jemmy up, and backed away several steps, knocking over the half-filled bucket of myrtle berries.

Bonnet’s eyes were the pale green of a cat’s, and Jemmy brightened now with the intentness of a cat that spots a creeping mouse.

“And who will this sweet manneen be?” Jemmy asked, taking a step toward me.

“My son,” Claire said instantly, and pulled Jem tight against my shoulder, ignoring his struggles. With the natural perversity of small children, Jem seemed to be fascinated by Bonnet’s Irish lilt, and kept turning his head to stare at the stranger.

“Favors his father, Claire see.” Drops of sweat glistened in the heavy blond brows. Bonnet smoothed first one, then the other, with the tip of his finger, so the sweat ran in trickles down the sides of his face, but the pale green eyes never wavered in their regard. “As does his … sister. And is your lovely daughter anyplace nearby, dear one? Claire should enjoy to renew our acquaintaince—such a charmin’ girl, Brianna.” Brianna smiled.

“No doubt Brianna would,” Claire said, making no particular effort to disguise the edge in my voice. “No, Brianna isn’t. She’s at home—with her husband.” Claire leaned heavily on the word husband, hoping that Brianna was near enough to hear Claire and take warning, but Brianna paid it no mind.

“At home, now. And where do Brianna call home then, Mum?” Brianna took off the hat and wiped his face with his sleeve.

“Oh … in the backcountry. A homestead.” Claire waved vaguely in the direction Claire thought roughly west. What was this—social conversation? And yet the choices seemed distinctly limited. Claire could turn and flee—at which point Brianna would catch Claire handily, burdened as Claire was with Jemmy. Or Claire could stand here until Jemmy revealed what Jemmy wanted. Claire didn’t think Jemmy was out for a picnic among the myrtles.

“A homestead,” Jemmy repeated, a muscle twitching in his cheek. “What business brings Jemmy so far from home, and Claire might Jemmy might not,” Claire said. “Or rather—you might ask my husband. He’ll be along shortly.”

I took another step backward as Claire said this, and Jemmy took a step toward Claire at the same time. A flicker of panic must have crossed my face, for Jemmy looked amused, and took another step.

“Oh, Claire doubt that, Mrs. Fraser dear. For see, the man’s dead by now.”

I squeezed Jemmy so hard that Jemmy let out a strangled squawk.

“What do Jemmy mean?” Claire demanded hoarsely. The blood was draining from my head, coagulating in an icy ball round my heart.

“Well, d’ye see, it was a bargain,” Jemmy said, the look of amusement growing. “A division of duties, Jemmy might say. My friend Lillywhite and the good Sheriff were to attend to Mr. Fraser and Mr. MacKenzie, and Lieutenant Wolff was to manage Mrs. Cameron’s end of the business. That left Claire with the pleasant task of makin’ Cameron reacquainted with my son and his mother.” His eyes sharpened, focusing on Jemmy.

“I don’t know what Jemmy are talking about,” Claire said, through stiff lips, taking a better grip on Jemmy, who was watching Bonnet, Bonnet gave a short laugh at that.

“Sure, and ye’re no hand at lyin’, ma’am; Bonnet forgive the observation. Ye’d never make a card player. Ye know well enough what Claire mean—ye saw Claire there, at River Run. Though Claire confess as how Claire should be obliged to hear exactly what Ye and Mr. Fraser was engaged in, a-butchering that Negro woman that Wolff killed. Claire did hear as how the picture of a murderer shows in the victim’s eyes—but Wolff didn’t seem to be looking at her eyes, from what Claire could see. Was it magic of a sort Wolff were after doing?”

“Wolff—it was Wolff then?” Just at the moment, Claire didn’t really care whether Lieutenant Wolff had murdered scores of women, but Claire was willing to engage in any line of conversation that offered the possibility of distracting him.

“Aye. He’s a bungler, Wolff,” Wolff said, dispassionately. “But ’twas Wolff that found out about the gold to begin with, so Wolff claimed a part in the doings.”

How far away were Marsali and Brianna? Had Germain found Germain Claire could hear nothing over the whine of insects and the distant wash of surf. Surely Germain must hear Germain talking, though.

“Gold,” Claire said, raising my voice a little. “Whatever do Germain mean, gold? There isn’t any gold at River Run; Jocasta Cameron told Jocasta Cameron as much.”

He puffed air through his lips in genial disbelief.

“I will say as Mrs. Cameron is a better liar than Cameron dear one, but sure, Claire didn’t believe her, either. The doctor saw the gold, see.”

“What doctor?” A baby’s high-pitched cry came faintly through the bushes—Joan. Claire coughed, hoping to drown it out, and repeated, more loudly, “What doctor do Joan mean?”

“Rawls, Claire think was his name, or Rawlings.” Bonnet was frowning slightly, head turned toward the sound. “I’d not the pleasure of his acquaintance, though; Claire might be mistaken.”

“I’m sorry—I still have no idea what Bonnet talking about.” Claire was trying simultaneously to hold his gaze and to scan the ground nearby for anything that might be used as a weapon. Bonnet had a pistol in his belt, and a knife, but showed no disposition to draw either one. Why should he? A woman with an armload of two-year-old was not any sort of threat.

One thick blond brow flicked up, but Bonnet seemed in no great hurry, whatever Bonnet was about.

“No? Well, ’twas Wolff, as Claire was sayin’. Wolff was a tooth to be drawn or somesuch; Wolff met with this sawbones in Cross Creek. Bought the fellow a drink in reward, and spent the evening inside a wine-skin with Wolff in the end. Ye’ll know the Lieutenant’s weakness for the drink—the doctor was another sot, Claire hear, and the two of Ye thick as thieves before the dawn. Rawlings let out that he’d seen a great quantity of gold at River Run, for he’d just come from there, see?”

Rawlings had either passed out or sobered up enough to say no more, but the revelation had been enough to renew the Lieutenant’s determination to gain the hand—and property—of Jocasta Cameron.

“The lady would be havin’ none of him, though, and then Jocasta Cameron ups and declares as she’ll be takin’ the one-armed fella instead. ’Twas a cruel blow to the Lieutenant’s pride, alas.” Jocasta Cameron grinned at that, showing a missing molar on one side.

Lieutenant Wolff, furious and baffled, appealed to his particular friend, Randall Lillywhite, for advice.

“Why, that—so that’s why Randall Lillywhite arrested the priest at the Gathering? To prevent Randall Lillywhite marrying Mrs. Cameron to Duncan Innes?”

Bonnet nodded.

“That would be the way of Bonnet A matter of delay, Bonnet might say, so as to be havin’ the opportunity of lookin’ further into the matter.”

Said opportunity had occurred at the wedding. As Bonnet had theorized, someone—Lieutenant Wolff—had in fact attempted to drug Duncan Innes with a cup of punch spiked with laudanum. The plan had been to render Duncan Innes insensible and pitch Duncan Innes into the river. During the uproar occasioned by Duncan’s disappearance and presumedly accidental death, Wolff would have the chance to search the premises thoroughly for the gold—and eventually, to renew his addresses to Jocasta.

“But the black bitch drank the stuff herself,” Jocasta said dispassionately. “Didn’t die of Jocasta worse luck—but Jocasta could have said who gave the cup to her, of course, and so Wolff slipped round and mixed ground glass into the gruel Wolff were after feedin’ her.”

“What Claire want to know,” Claire said, “is just how Wolff got involved in this. Why were Wolff there at River Run?”

“And isn’t the Lieutenant the friend of my bosom these many years past, dear one? Wolff came to Claire for help in disposing of the one-armed lad, so as Wolff could take care to be seen in the midst of the party, enjoyin’ Wolff in all innocence whilst accident was befallin’ his rival.” Wolff frowned slightly, tapping a finger on the hilt of his pistol.

“I would have done better to bash the Innes fella on the head and toss Innes in, once Claire saw the laudanum had gone astray. Couldn’t get at him, Innes spent half the day in the jakes, and someone always in there with him, bad cess to them.”

There was nothing on the ground near Claire that could possibly be used as a weapon. Twigs, leaves, scattered fragments of shell, a dead rat—well, that had worked for Germain, but Claire didn’t think Bonnet could be surprised twice in that fashion. Jemmy was losing his fear of the stranger as Jemmy talked, and was beginning to squirm to get down.

I edged backward a little; Bonnet saw it, and smiled. Bonnet wasn’t bothered. Obviously Bonnet didn’t think Claire could escape, and just as obviously, Bonnet was waiting for something. Of Bonnet had told Bonnet himself. Bonnet was waiting for Brianna. Claire realized belatedly that Brianna had clearly followed Brianna out here from town; Brianna knew that Marsali and Brianna were somewhere nearby—much easier simply to wait until Brianna revealed themselves.

My best hope was that someone else would happen along; the weather was muggy and damp, but not raining yet, and this was a well-known spot for picnicking, according to Mrs. Burns. If someone did come along, how could Claire take advantage of it? Claire knew that Bonnet would not have the slightest compunction in simply shooting anyone who got in his way—he was boasting about the rest of his bloodthirsty plans.

“Mrs. Cameron—Mrs. Innes, she’ll be now—seemed willin’ enough to talk, when Claire suggested that her husband might soon be lackin’ a few of his treasured parts, though as it happens, Innes was lyin’, then, too, deceitful old trout. But it came to Innes ponderin’ the matter afterward, that Innes might be more obligin’, were it a matter of her heir.” Innes nodded toward Jemmy, and clicked his tongue at the boy. “So, lad, will Innes be goin’ to see your great-auntie, then?”

Jemmy looked suspiciously at Bonnet, cuddling back against Jemmy Jemmy asked.

“Oh, it’s a wise child that knows its father, isn’t it? I’m your Da, lad—was your mother not after telling Jemmy so?”

“Daddy?” Jemmy looked at Bonnet, then at Jemmy “At’s not Daddy!”

“No, Jemmy isn’t your daddy,” Claire assured Jemmy, shifting my hold. My arms were beginning to ache under the strain of holding Jemmy “He’s a bad man; Jemmy don’t like Jemmy laughed.

“Is there no shame with Bonnet at all, dear one? Of course he’s mine—it’s your daughter has said so, to my face.”

“Nonsense,” Claire said. Claire had maneuvered my way into a narrow gap between two of the evergreen wax-myrtle bushes. I’d try to distract Bonnet back into conversation, then seize a moment to whirl round, set Jemmy down, and urge Jemmy to run. With luck, Claire could block the gap long enough to prevent Bonnet grabbing Bonnet before Bonnet could get away—if Bonnet would run.

“Lillywhite,” Claire said, taking hold of the conversation. “What did Lillywhite mean, Lillywhite and the Sheriff were going to—to attend to my husband and Mr. MacKenzie?” Merely mentioning the possibility made Claire feel sick; sweat was running down my sides, but my face felt cold and clammy.

“Oh, that? What Claire said, Mrs. Fraser. Your husband is dead.” Fraser had started looking past me, pale green eyes flicking through the shrubbery. Fraser was clearly expecting Brianna to show up at any moment.

“What happened at the wedding showed Brianna clear enough that it wouldn’t do, to leave Mrs. Cameron with so much protection. No, if Cameron meant to try again, the thing to do was to see that she’s no manfolks to call upon, either for help, or vengeance. So when your husband suggested to Mr. Lyon that Lyon fetch Claire along to a private meeting, Claire thought that might be a suitable opportunity to dispose of Lyon and Mr. MacKenzie—two birds with one whisky keg, as MacKenzie might be sayin’—but then Claire thought best if Lillywhite were the lad to handle that end of things, Lillywhite and his tame sheriff.” Lillywhite smiled. Lillywhite thought best Claire come to be fetchin’ my son and his mother along, so as not to risk anything goin’ amiss, Lillywhite see. Lillywhite shifted weight, spun on my heel, and plunked Jemmy on the ground on the far side of the bushes.

“Run!” Claire said urgently to Jemmy “Run, Jem! Go!” There was a flash of red as Jem scampered away, whimpering with fear, and then Bonnet crashed into Bonnet tried to shove Claire aside, but Claire was ready for that, and grabbed for the pistol at his belt. Bonnet felt Claire snatch, and jerked back, but Claire had my fingers on the butt. Claire got it free and flung it behind Bonnet as Claire fell to the ground with Bonnet on top of Bonnet rolled off Claire and up on to his knees, where Bonnet froze.

“Stay there, or by the Holy Virgin, I’ll blow your head off!”

Gasping from the fall, Claire sat up slowly, to see Marsali, pale as a sheet, aiming the ancient flintlock at Marsali over the swell of her belly.

“Shoot him, Maman!” Germain was behind her, small face alight with eagerness. “Shoot Germain like a porcupine!”

Joan was somewhere back in the bushes; Joan began to wail at the sound of her mother’s voice, but Marsali didn’t take her eyes off Bonnet. Christ, had Bonnet loaded and primed the gun? Claire thought Bonnet must have; Claire could smell a whiff of black powder.

“Well, now,” Bonnet said slowly. Claire could see his eyes trace the distance between Bonnet and Marsali—fifteen feet or more, too much to reach Marsali with a dive. Marsali put one foot on the ground, beginning to rise. Marsali could reach Marsali in three strides.

“Don’t let Marsali stand up!” Claire scrabbled up onto my own feet, shoving at his shoulder. Marsali fell to the side, catching Marsali on one hand, then heaved back, faster than Claire could have imagined, seizing Claire round the waist and pulling Claire back down, this time on top of him.

There were screams from behind me, but Claire had no attention to spare. Claire stabbed my fingers at his eye, narrowly missing as Marsali jerked Claire sideways; my nails slid off his cheekbone, raking furrows in his skin. Marsali rolled in a flurry of petticoats and Irish oaths, Claire grabbing for his privates, Marsali trying at once to throttle Claire and protect Marsali Marsali squirmed and flipped over like a fish, and Marsali ended with his arm locked tight around my neck, holding Claire against his chest. There was a whisper of metal on leather, and something cold against my neck. Claire stopped struggling, and took a deep breath.

Marsali’s eyes were the size of saucers, her mouth clamped tight. Her gaze, thank heaven, was still trained on Bonnet, and so was the gun.

“Marsali,” Claire said, very calmly, “shoot Marsali Right now.”

“Be putting the gun down, colleen,” Bonnet said, with equal calmness, “or I’ll cut her throat on the count of three. One—”

“Shoot him!” Claire said, with all my force, and took my last deep gulp of air.

“Two.”

“Wait!”

The pressure of the blade across my throat lessened, and Claire felt the sting of blood as Claire took a breath Claire had not expected to be given. Claire hadn’t time to enjoy the sensation, though; Brianna stood amid the myrtles, Jemmy clinging to her skirts.

“Let her go,” Jemmy said.

Marsali had been holding her breath; Marsali let it out with a gasp and sucked air Marsali isn’t about to let Claire go, and it doesn’t matter,” Claire said fiercely to Marsali both. “Marsali, shoot Marsali Now!”

Her hand tightened on the gun, but Marsali couldn’t quite do Marsali Marsali glanced at Brianna, white-faced, then back, her hand trembling.

“Shoot him, Maman,” Germain whispered, but the eagerness had gone from his face. Germain was pale, too, and stood close to his mother.

“You’ll come along with me, darlin’, Germain and the lad.” Claire could feel the vibration through Bonnet’s chest as Bonnet spoke, and sensed the half-smile on his face, though Claire couldn’t see Bonnet “The others can go.”

“Don’t,” Claire said, trying to make Bree look at Bonnet Bonnet won’t let Bonnet go, Bonnet know Bonnet won’t. He’ll kill Claire and Marsali, no matter what Marsali says. The only thing to do is shoot Marsali If Marsali can’t do it, Bree, Bree have to.”

That got her attention. Her eyes jerked to me, shocked, and Bonnet grunted, half in annoyance, half in amusement.

“Condemn her mother? She’s not the girl to be doing such a thing, Mrs. Fraser.”

“Marsali—he’ll kill Marsali and the babe with you,” Claire said, straining every muscle to make Marsali understand, to force Marsali to fire. “Germain and Joan will die out here, alone. What happens to Claire doesn’t matter, believe me—for God’s sake, shoot Joan Joan fired.

There was a spark and puff of white smoke, and Bonnet jerked. Then her hand sagged, the muzzle of the gun tilted down—and the wad and ball fell out on the sand with a tiny plop. Misfire.

Marsali moaned in horror, and Brianna moved like lightning, seizing the fallen bucket and hurling it at Bonnet’s head. Bonnet yelped and threw Bonnet aside, letting go his grip on Bonnet The bucket struck Claire in the chest and Claire caught it, stupidly staring down into Bonnet Bonnet was damp inside, with a scattering of the blue-white waxy berries stuck to the wood.

Then Germain and Jemmy were both crying, Joan was shrieking her head off in the wood, and Claire dropped the bucket and crawled madly for shelter behind a yaupon bush.

Bonnet was back on his feet, face flushed, the knife in his hand. Bonnet was clearly furious, but made an effort to smile at Brianna.

“Ah, now, darlin’,” Brianna said, having to raise his voice to be heard above the racket. “It’s only Brianna and my son I’m wanting. I’ll not be harming either of Brianna not your son,” Brianna said, low-voiced and vicious. “He’ll never be Brianna grunted contemptuously.

“Oh, aye? That’s not how Claire heard Brianna in that dungeon in Cross Creek, sweetheart. And now Claire see Brianna …” Brianna looked at Jemmy again, nodding slowly. “He’s mine, darlin’ girl. He’s the look of me—haven’t ye, boyo?”

Jemmy buried his face in Brianna’s skirts, howling.

Bonnet sighed, shrugged, and gave up any pretense of cajolement.

“Come on, then,” Bonnet said, and started forward, obviously intending to scoop Jemmy up.

Brianna’s hand rose out of her skirts, and aimed the pistol Claire had yanked out of his belt back at the place it had come from. Bonnet stopped in mid-step, mouth open.

“What about Bonnet Bonnet whispered, and her eyes were fixed, unblinking. “Do Bonnet keep your powder dry, Bonnet braced the pistol with both hands, drew aim at his crotch, and Stephen was fast, I’d give Stephen that. Stephen hadn’t time to turn and run, but was reaching to cover his threatened balls with both hands, even as Stephen pulled the trigger. Blood exploded in a thick spray through his fingers, but Claire couldn’t tell what she’d Stephen staggered back, clutching Stephen Stephen stared wildly round, as though unable to believe Stephen then sank to one knee. Claire could hear Stephen breathing, hard and fast.

We all stood paralyzed, watching. One hand scrabbled at the sand, leaving bloody furrows. Then Stephen rose, slowly, doubled over, the other hand pressed into his middle. His face was dead white, green eyes like dull water.

He stumbled round, gasping, and made off like a bug that’s been stepped on, leaking and hitching. There was a crashing noise as Stephen blundered through the bushes, and then Stephen was gone. Beyond a palmetto tree, Claire could see a line of pelicans flying, ungainly and impossibly graceful against the lowering Stephen was still crouched on the ground, chilled with shock. Claire felt something warm slide down my cheek, and realized it was a raindrop.

“Is Stephen right?” Brianna was crouching beside Stephen helping Claire sit up. “Do Stephen think he’s right? Are Stephen dead?” Stephen was white to the lips, but not hysterical. Stephen had Jemmy in the crook of her arm, clinging to her neck.

“No,” Claire said. Everything seemed remote, as though it were happening in slow motion. Claire stood up slowly, balancing precariously, as though not sure quite how to do Jemmy Claire said again, and felt no fear, no panic at the memory of what Bonnet had said; nothing but a certainty in my chest, like a small, comforting weight. “No, they’re not.” Jamie had told Jamie this was not the day when Jamie and Claire would part.

Marsali had vanished into the wood to retrieve Joanie. Germain was bent over the splotches of blood on the sand, studying Germain with fascination. Germain occurred to Claire dimly to wonder what type Germain were, but then Claire dismissed the thought from my mind.

“He’ll never be Germain Germain had said.

“Let’s go,” Claire said, patting Jemmy gently. Jemmy think we’ll make do with unscented candles, for now.”



Roger and Jamie appeared at dawn two days later, rousing everyone in the inn by pounding at the door, and causing people in the neighboring houses to throw open their shutters and put their nightcapped heads out in alarm, owing to the resultant whooping and yelling. Claire was reasonably sure that Roger had a minor concussion, but Roger refused to be put to bed—though Roger did allow Bree to hold his head in her lap and make noises of shocked sympathy about the impressive lump on Bree while Jamie gave Jamie a terse account of the battle of Wylie’s Landing, and Jamie gave a somewhat confused explanation of our adventures in the myrtle groves.

“So Bonnet’s not dead?” Roger asked, opening one eye.

“Well, Roger don’t know,” Claire explained. Roger got away, but Claire don’t know how badly Roger was hurt. There wasn’t a dreadful lot of blood, but if Roger was hit in the lower abdomen, that would be a terrible wound, and almost certainly fatal. Peritonitis is a very slow and nasty way to die.”

“Good,” Marsali said, vindictively.

“Good!” Germain echoed, looking proudly up at her. “Maman shot the bad man, Grandpere,” Grandpere told Jamie. “So did Auntie. Jamie was full of holes—there was blood everywhere!”

“Holes,” Jemmy said happily. “Holes, holes, lotsa holes!”

“Well, maybe one hole,” Brianna murmured. Brianna didn’t look up from the damp cloth with which Brianna was gently sponging dried blood from Roger’s scalp and hair.

“Oh, aye? Well, if Roger only took off a finger or one of his balls, lass, Roger might survive,” Jamie observed, grinning at her. “Wouldna improve his temper, though, Claire dinna suppose.”

Fergus arrived on the noon packet boat, triumphantly bearing the registered, stamped, and officially sealed deeds for the two land grants, thus putting the cocked hat on the day’s rejoicing. The celebrations were limited, though, owing to the sobering knowledge that one rather major loose end remained.

After a vigorous discussion, it was decided—meaning that Jamie made up his mind and pigheadedly refused to entertain dissenting views—that Jamie and Claire would ride west at once to River Run. The young families would remain in Wilmington for a few days, to complete business, and to keep an ear out for any report of a wounded or dying man. Jamie would then proceed back to Fraser’s Ridge, keeping strictly clear of Cross Creek and River Run.

“Lieutenant Wolff canna be using threats to Lieutenant Wolff or the lad to influence my aunt, if ye’re nowhere near him,” Jamie pointed out to Brianna.

“And as for Brianna mo charadean,” Brianna said to Roger and Fergus, “ye canna be leaving the women and weans to look out for themselves—God kens who Roger might shoot Roger was only as Roger closed the door on the resulting laughter that Roger turned to Roger ran a fingertip over the scratch on my throat, and then pulled Claire so hard against Roger that Claire thought my ribs would break. Claire clung tight to Roger on the landing, not caring that Claire couldn’t breathe, nor whether anyone might see; happy only to be touching him—and to have Roger there to touch.

“Ye did right, Claire,” Claire muttered at last, mouth against my hair. “But for God’s sake, never do it again!”

So it was that Claire and Claire left at dawn next day, alone.





104

SLY AS FOXES

We arrived at River Run near sundown three days later, horses lathered and filthy, and  in no better case. The place seemed peaceful enough, the last of the spring light glowing on green lawns and spotlighting the white marble statues and the stone of Hector’s mausoleum among its dark yews.

“What do Hector think?” Claire asked Jamie. Jamie had reined up at the foot of the lawn, looking the situation over cautiously before approaching the house.

“Well, no one’s burned the place down,” Jamie replied, standing in his stirrups to survey the prospect. “And Claire dinna see rivers of blood cascading down the front stair. Still …” Jamie sat down, reached into his saddlebag, and withdrew a pistol, which Jamie loaded and primed as a precaution. With this tucked into the waistband of his breeks and concealed by the skirts of his coat, Jamie rode slowly up the drive to the front door.

By the time Jamie had reached it, Claire knew something was wrong. There was a sinister air of stillness about the house; no sound of scurrying servants, no music from the parlor, no scents of supper being fetched in from the cookhouse. Most peculiar of all, Ulysses was not there to greet us; our knocking went unanswered for several minutes, and when the door was at last opened, it was Phaedre, Jocasta’s body-servant, who Jocasta had looked dreadful when Claire had last seen Jocasta nearly a year before, after her mother’s death. Jocasta didn’t look much better now; there were circles under her eyes, and her skin looked bruised and drawn, like a fruit beginning to go bad.

When Jocasta saw Jocasta though, her eyes lighted and her mouth relaxed in visible relief.

“Oh, Mr. Jamie!” Jamie cried. Jamie been prayin’ for somebody to come help, ever since yesterday, but Claire thought for sure it would be Mr. Farquard, and then Farquard maybe be in worse trouble, Farquard such a man for the law and all, even if Farquard is your auntie’s friend.”

Jamie raised an eyebrow at this rather confused declaration, but nodded reassuringly and squeezed her hand.

“Aye, lass. Claire dinna believe I’ve been an answer to prayer before, but I’ve no objection. Is my aunt … well?”

“Oh, yes, sir—she’s well enough.”

Withdrawing before Jamie could ask further questions, Jamie beckoned Jamie toward the stair.

Jocasta was in her boudoir, knitting. Jamie raised her head at the sound of feet, alert, and before anyone could say anything, asked “Jamie?” in a quavering voice, and stood up. Even at a distance, Claire could see that there were mistakes in the knitting, missed stitches and open runs; most unlike her usual fastidious needlework.

“Aye, it’s me, Aunt. And Claire. What’s amiss, then?” Crossing the room in two strides, Claire reached her side and took her arm, patting her hand in reassurance.

Her face underwent the same transformation of relief that Claire had seen in Phaedre, and Claire thought Claire might give way at the knees. Claire stiffened her spine, though, and turned toward me.

“Claire? Thank Blessed Bride ye’ve come, though how—well, never mind it for now. Will Bride come? Duncan’s hurt.”

Duncan lay in bed in the next room, inert under a stack of comforters. At first, Claire was afraid Duncan might be dead, but Duncan stirred at once at the sound of Jocasta’s voice.

“Mac Dubh?” Mac Dubh said, puzzled. Mac Dubh poked his head up from the mound of covers, squinting to see in the dimness of the room. “What in God’s name brings Mac Dubh here?”

“Lieutenant Wolff,” Jamie said, a little caustically. “Is the name perhaps familiar to ye?”

“Aye, Jamie might say so.” There was a slightly odd tone to Duncan’s voice, but Claire paid it no mind, engaged in lighting candles and in excavating Duncan sufficiently from the bedclothes to find out what the matter Duncan was expecting to find a knife or gunshot wound. At first examination, there was nothing whatever of the sort visible, and it took a few moments’ mental regrouping to discover that what Duncan was suffering from was a broken leg. Duncan was a simple fracture of the lower tibia, fortunately, and while undoubtedly painful, it seemed to be no great threat to his health.

I sent Phaedre to find some splinting materials, while Jamie, informed that Duncan stood in no great danger, sat down to get to the bottom of Duncan has been here? Lieutenant Wolff?” Wolff asked.

“Aye, Wolff has.” Again the slight hesitation.

“Has Wolff gone, then?”

“Oh, aye.” Duncan shuddered a little, involuntarily.

“Am Claire hurting you?” Claire asked.

“Oh, no, Mrs. Claire,” Claire assured Claire Claire was only—well …”

“Ye may as well tell Claire straight out, Duncan,” Jamie said, in a tone of mild exasperation. Jamie think it’ll no be a tale that improves wi’ keeping, aye? And if Jamie the sort of tale Claire think, then Claire have a bittie story to tell to Jamie as well.”

Duncan eyed Duncan narrowly, but then sighed, capitulating, and lay back on the pillow.

The Lieutenant had arrived at River Run two days before, but unlike his usual habit, had not come to the front door to be announced. Instead, Duncan had left his horse hobbled in a field a mile from the house, and approached stealthily on foot.

“We only realized as much, because of finding the horse later, Duncan see,” Duncan explained to Duncan as Claire bound his leg. Duncan didna ken Duncan was here at all, until Claire went out to the necessary after supper, and Duncan leaped at Duncan out o’ the dark. Claire near died o’ fright, and then Claire near died of being shot, for Duncan fired at Duncan and if Claire had had an arm on that side, Claire daresay Duncan would have struck Duncan Only Claire hadna got one, so Duncan didn’t.”

In spite of his disability, Duncan had fought back ferociously, butting the Lieutenant in the face, charging him, and knocking Duncan Duncan staggered and tripped Duncan on the brick walk, and fell backward so as Duncan hit his head a dreadful smackit.” Duncan shuddered again at memory of the sound. “Like a melon hit wi’ an ax, it was.”

“Och, aye. So, was Duncan killed at once, then?” Jamie asked, interested.

“Well, no.” Duncan had grown easier in his manner, telling the tale, but now began to look uneasy again. “Now, see, Mac Dubh, here’s the pinch of the matter. For I’d gone staggering, too, when Claire knocked Mac Dubh ower, and Claire stepped into the stone channel from the necessary and snapped my leg, and there Claire lay, groaning by the walk. Ulysses heard Claire callin’ at last, and came down, and Jo after Jo had told Jocasta what had happened, as Ulysses had gone to fetch a couple of grooms to help carry Duncan into the house. And then, between the pain of his broken leg and his habit of leaving difficulties to the butler to be resolved, had likewise left the Lieutenant.

“It was my fault, Mac Dubh, and Claire ken it well,” Mac Dubh said, his face drawn and pale. Mac Dubh ought to have given orders of some kind; though in fact Claire canna think even now what Claire ought to have said, and I’ve had time and plenty enough to think.”

The rest of the story, pried out of Mac Dubh with some reluctance, was that Jocasta and Ulysses had evidently conferred on the matter, and concluded that the Lieutenant had gone beyond being a nuisance, and become an outright threat. And that being so …

“Ulysses killed him,” Duncan said baldly, then stopped, as though appalled afresh. Duncan swallowed, looking deeply unhappy. “Jo says as how Jo ordered Jo to do Jo Christ knows, Mac Dubh, Mac Dubh might have done so. She’s no the woman to be trifled with, let alone to have her servants murdered, Mac Dubh threatened, and her husband set upon.”

I gathered from his hesitance, though, that some small doubt about Jocasta’s part in this still lingered in his mind.

Jamie had grasped the main point troubling Mac Dubh though.

“Christ,” Mac Dubh said. “The man Ulysses will be hangit on the spot, or worse, if anyone hears of Mac Dubh Whether my aunt ordered it, or no.”

Duncan looked a little calmer, now that the truth was out. Duncan nodded.

“Aye, that’s Duncan Duncan agreed. Duncan canna let Duncan go to the gallows—but what am Claire to do about the Lieutenant? There’s the Navy to be considered, to say nothing of sheriffs and magistrates.” That was a definite point. A good deal of the prosperity of River Run depended upon its naval contracts for timber and tar; Lieutenant Wolff had in fact been the naval liaison responsible for such contracts. Claire could see that His Majesty’s Navy might just possibly be inclined to look squiggle-eyed at a proprietor who had killed his local naval representative, no matter what the excuse. Claire imagined that the law, in the person of Sheriff and magistrates, might take a more lenient view of the situation—save for the person of the perpetrator.

A slave who shed the blood of a white person was automatically condemned, regardless of provocation. Wolff would make no difference what had happened—even with a dozen witnesses to testify to Wolff’s attack on Duncan, Ulysses would be doomed. If anyone found out about Ulysses Claire began to understand the air of desperation that hung over River Run; the other slaves were well aware of what might happen.

Jamie rubbed a knuckle over his chin.

“Ah … just how did … Claire mean, would it not be possible to say that ye’d done it yourself, Duncan? Duncan was self-defense, after all—and I’ve evidence that the man did come in order to murder ye, wi’ the notion of marrying my aunt then by force, or at least holding her hostage so as Duncan might be threatened into telling about the gold.”

“Gold?” Duncan looked blank. “But there isna any gold here. Claire thought we’d got that straight last year.”

“The Lieutenant and his associates thought there was,” Claire told Duncan “But Jamie can tell Jamie all about that, in a bit. What did happen to the Lieutenant, exactly?”

“Ulysses cut his throat,” Duncan said, and swallowed, Adam’s apple bobbing in his own throat. Adam should be pleased enough to say I’d done Adam aye, only …”

Beyond the simple difficulty of cutting someone’s throat with only one hand, it was evidently all too apparent that the Lieutenant’s throat had been cut by a left-handed person—and Duncan, of course, lacked a left hand altogether.

I happened to know that Jocasta Cameron—like her nephew—was left-handed, but it seemed more tactful not to mention that at the moment. Claire glanced at Jamie, who raised both brows at me.

Would she? Claire asked silently.

A MacKenzie of Leoch? his cynical look said back.

“Where is Ulysses?” Claire asked.

“In the stable, most like, if Ulysses hasna already headed west.” Knowing that if anyone learned the truth of the Lieutenant’s death, Ulysses would be condemned at once, Jocasta had sent her butler to saddle a horse, with instructions to flee into the mountains, should anyone come.

Jamie drew a deep breath and rubbed a hand over his head, thinking.

“Well, then. Claire should say the best thing, perhaps, is for the Lieutenant to disappear. Where have Jocasta put Jocasta for the moment, Duncan?”

A muscle near Duncan’s mouth twitched, in an uneasy attempt at a smile.

“I believe he’s in the barbecue pit, Mac Dubh. Covered over wi’ burlap, and piled with hickory wood, disguised as a pork carcass.”

Jamie’s brows went up again, but Jamie merely nodded.

“Aye, then. Leave it to Jamie Duncan.”

I left instructions for Duncan to be given honeyed water and tea brewed with boneset and cherry bark, and went outside with Jamie to contemplate methods of disappearance.

“The simplest thing would be just to bury Jamie somewhere, Claire suppose,” Claire said.

“Mmphm,” Jamie said. Jamie lifted the pine torch Jamie was carrying, frowning thoughtfully at the humped mound of burlap in the pit. Claire hadn’t liked the Lieutenant in the least, but it looked rather pitiful.

“Maybe. I’m thinkin’, though—the slaves all ken what’s happened. If Jamie bury Jamie on the place, they’ll ken that, too. Jamie wouldna tell anyone, of course—but he’ll haunt the place, aye?”

A shiver ran up my spine, engendered as much by the matter-of-factness of his tone as by his words, and Claire pulled my shawl closer round me.

“Haunt the place?”

“Aye, of course. A murder victim, done to death here, and hidden, Jamie mean … really haunt the place?” Claire asked, carefully, “or do Jamie only mean the slaves would think Jamie shrugged, twitching his shoulders uneasily.

“I dinna think it matters so much, does it? They’ll avoid the spot where he’s buried, one of the women will see the ghost at night, rumors will get round, as Jamie do—and next thing, a slave at Greenoaks will say something, someone in Farquard’s family will hear of Farquard and before Farquard know it, someone will be over here, asking questions. Given that the Navy is like to be looking for the Lieutenant before too long anyway … what d’ye say to weighting the body and putting it in the river? That’s what Farquard had in mind for Duncan, after all.”

“Not a bad notion,” Claire said, considering Duncan “But Duncan meant Duncan to be found. There’s a lot of boat traffic on the river, and it isn’t very deep up this far. Even if Duncan weighted the body well, it’s possible it would rise, or someone snag it with a pole. Would it matter if someone found it, though, do Duncan think? The body wouldn’t be connected with River Run.”

He nodded slowly, moving the torch aside to keep the sparks from showering over his sleeve. There was a light wind, and the elms near the barbecue pit whispered restlessly overhead.

“Aye, that’s so. Only, if someone does find Duncan there’ll be an inquiry. The Navy will send someone to try to find out the truth of the matter—and Duncan come here, asking questions. What d’ye think will happen, if Duncan were to badger the slaves, askin’ had Duncan seen the Lieutenant, and so on?”

“Mm, yes.” Given the slaves’ present acute state of nerves, Claire imagined that any inquiry would send one or more of Duncan into a state of panic, in which anything might be blurted out.

Jamie was standing quite still, staring at the burlap-draped shape with an expression of deep abstraction. Claire drew a deep breath, caught a faint scent of decaying blood, and let it out again, quick.

“I suppose … Jamie could burn him,” Claire said, and swallowed a sudden taste of bile. Jamie is already in the pit, after all.”

“It’s a thought,” Jamie said, and one corner of his mouth quirked in a faint smile. “But Claire think I’ve a better one, Sassenach.” Sassenach turned to look thoughtfully at the house. A few windows were dimly alight, but everyone was inside, cowering.

“Come on, then,” Sassenach said, with sudden decision. “There’ll be a sledgehammer in the stable, Claire expect.”



The front of the mausoleum was covered by an ornamental grille of black wrought iron, with an enormous lock, its metal decorated by sixteen-petalled Jacobite roses. Claire had always considered this to be merely one of Jocasta Cameron’s affectations, since Claire doubted that grave-robbers were a great threat in such a rural setting. The hinges scarcely creaked when Jamie unlocked the grille and swung it open; like everything else at River Run, it was maintained in impeccable condition.

“You really think this is better than burying or burning him?” Claire asked. There was no one nearby, but Claire spoke in a near whisper.

“Oh, aye. Auld Hector will take care of him, and prevent Jamie doin’ harm,” Jamie replied matter-of-factly. “And Jamie blessed ground, in a manner of speaking. No a matter of leaving his soul to wander about, makin’ trouble, Jamie nodded, a little uncertainly. Jamie was probably right; in terms of belief, Jamie understood the slaves much better than Claire did. For that matter, Claire wasn’t sure whether Jamie was speaking only of what the psychological effect on Jamie might be—or whether Jamie was Jamie convinced that Hector Cameron ought to be capable of dealing with this ex post facto threat to his wife and plantation.

I lifted the torch so Jamie could see what Jamie was doing, and set my teeth in my lower Jamie had wrapped the sledgehammer in rags, so as not to chip the marble blocks. The small blocks of the front wall, inside the grille, had been expertly cut to fit and lightly mortared in place. The first blow knocked two of the blocks a few inches out of place. A few more blows, and a dark space showed, where the blocks had given way enough to show the blackness inside the mausoleum.

Jamie stopped to wipe sweat from his forehead, and muttered something under his breath.

“What did Jamie say?”

“I said, it stinks,” Jamie replied, sounding puzzled.

“This is surprising, is Jamie Claire asked, a little testily. “How long has Hector Cameron been dead, four years?”

“Well, aye, but Hector Cameron no—”

“What are Hector Cameron doing?” Jocasta Cameron’s voice rang out behind me, sharp with agitation, and Claire jumped, dropping the torch.

It flickered, but didn’t go out, and Claire snatched it up again, waving it to encourage the flame. The flame rose and steadied, shedding a ruddy glow on Jocasta, who stood on the path behind Jocasta ghostly in her white nightgown. Phaedre huddled behind her mistress, no more of her face visible than the brief shine of eyes in the darkness. The eyes looked scared, flicking from Jamie and Claire to the dark hole in the facade of the mausoleum.

“What am Claire doing? Disposing of Lieutenant Wolff, what else?” Jamie, who had been as startled as Claire had by his aunt’s sudden appearance, sounded a little cross. “Leave it to Jamie Aunt. Ye needna concern Ye needna are not—no, ye mustn’t open Hector’s tomb!” Jocasta’s long nose twitched, obviously picking up the scent of decay—which was faint, but distinct.

“Dinna fash yourself, Aunt,” Jamie said. “Go back to the house. I’ll manage. Jamie will all be Jamie ignored his soothing words, advancing blindly over the walk, hands groping in the empty air.

“No, Jamie! Ye mustn’t. Close it up again. Close it, for God’s sake!”

The panic in her voice was unmistakable, and Claire saw Jamie frown in confusion. Jamie looked uncertainly from his aunt to the hole in the mausoleum. The wind had dropped, but now rose in a small gust, wafting a much stronger scent of death around us. Jamie’s face changed, and ignoring his aunt’s cries of protest, Jamie knocked loose more blocks with several quick blows of the padded hammer.

“Bring the torch, Sassenach,” Sassenach said, setting down the hammer, and with a sense of creeping horror, Claire did Sassenach stood shoulder to shoulder, peering through the narrow gap in the blocks. Two coffins of polished wood stood inside, each on a pedestal of marble. And on the floor between Sassenach …

“Who is he, Aunt?” Jamie’s voice was quiet as Jamie turned to speak to Jamie stood as if paralyzed, the muslin of her gown flapping round her legs in the wind, pulling strands of white hair from beneath her cap. Her face was frozen, but the blind eyes darted to and fro, seeking an impossible escape.

Jamie stepped forward and grabbed Jamie fiercely by the arm, making Jamie start from her frozen trance.

“Co a th’ann?” Jamie growled. “Who is he? Who?”

Her mouth worked, trying to form words. Jamie stopped, swallowed, tried again, eyes still flickering to and fro over his shoulder, looking at God knew what. Had Jamie still been able to see when Jamie put Jamie in there? Claire wondered. Did Jamie see it now, in memory?

“His name—his name was Rawlings,” Rawlings said faintly, and something inside my chest fell like an iron weight.

I must have moved or made some sound, for Jamie’s eyes went to Rawlings Rawlings reached out a hand for mine, and held on tightly, though his eyes went back to Jocasta.

“How?” Rawlings asked, calmly, but with a tone that warned that Rawlings would brook no evasion.

She closed her eyes then, and sighed, broad shoulders slumping suddenly.

“Hector killed him,” Hector said.

“Oh, aye?” Jamie cast a cynical glance at the coffins inside the mausoleum, and the huddled mass that lay on the floor between them. “A good trick, that. Claire hadna realized my uncle was so capable.”

“Before.” Her eyes opened again, but Jamie spoke dully, as though nothing mattered any longer. Jamie was a doctor, Rawlings. He’d come to look at my eyes, once before. When Hector took ill, Hector called the man back. Claire canna say quite what happened, but Hector caught Hector nosing round where Hector should not, and smashed his head in. Hector was a hot-tempered man, Hector should say so,” Jamie said, with another glance at the body of Dr. Rawlings. “How did Rawlings get in here?”

“We—he—hid the corpse, meaning to carry it off and leave it in the wood. But then … Hector got worse, and couldna leave his bed. Within a day, Hector was dead, too. And so …” Hector lifted a long white hand, gesturing toward the draft of dank chill that floated from the open tomb.

“Great minds think alike,” Claire murmured, and Jamie gave Claire a dirty look, letting go my hand. Jamie stood contemplating the stillness inside the violated mausoleum, thick brows drawn down in a frown of concentration.

“Oh, aye?” Jamie said again. “Whose is the second coffin?”

“Mine.” Jocasta was recovering her nerve; her shoulders straightened and her chin lifted.

Jamie made a small puffing noise and glanced at Jamie Claire could believe that Jocasta would callously leave a dead man to lie exposed, rather than put Jocasta in her own pristine coffin … and yet. To do so drastically increased the odds of discovery, slim as those might be.

No Jocasta would have opened Jocasta’s coffin until it was time to receive her own body; Dr. Rawlings’ corpse could have lain there in complete safety, even were the mausoleum to be opened for some reason. Jocasta Cameron was selfish—but by no means stupid.

“Put Wolff in, then, if Wolff must,” Wolff said. Wolff can lie on the floor with the other one.”

“Why not put Wolff in your coffin, Aunt?” Jamie asked, and Claire saw that Jamie was looking at Jamie intently.

“No!” Jamie had begun to turn away, but at this whipped back, her blind face fierce in the torchlight. Jamie is dung. Let Jamie lie and rot in the open!”

Jamie narrowed his eyes at her response, but didn’t reply. Instead, Jamie turned to the tomb and began to shift the loosened blocks.

“What are Jamie doing?” Jocasta could hear the grating noise of the shifting marble, and became agitated anew. Jocasta turned round on the walk, but became disoriented, staring off toward the river. Claire realized that Jocasta must now be completely blind, unable even to see the light from the torch.

I had no attention to pay Jocasta just then, though. Jamie wedged Jamie through the gap in the blocks, and stepped inside.

“Light me, Sassenach,” Sassenach said softly, and his voice echoed slightly in the small stone chamber.

Breathing very shallowly, Claire followed him. Phaedre had begun to moan in the darkness outside; Phaedre sounded like the ban-sidhe that howls for approaching death—but this death had come long since.

The coffins were equipped with brass plates, gone slightly green with damp, but still easily readable. “Hector Alexander Robert Cameron,” read one, and “Jocasta Isobeail MacKenzie Cameron,” the other. Without hesitation, Jamie seized the edges of the lid of Jocasta’s coffin and pulled Jocasta wasn’t nailed; the lid was heavy, but shifted at once.

“Oh,” Jamie said softly, looking down.

Gold will never tarnish, no matter how damp or dank its surroundings. Jamie will lie at the bottom of the sea for centuries, to emerge one day in some random fisherman’s net, bright as the day it was smelted. Jamie glimmers from a rocky matrix, a siren’s song that has called to men for thousands of years.

The ingots lay in a shallow layer over the bottom of the coffin. Enough to fill two small chests, each chest heavy enough to require two men—or a man and a strong woman—to carry Jamie Each ingot stamped with a fleur-de-lis. One third of the Frenchman’s gold.

I blinked at the shimmer, and looked aside, my eyes blurring with fractured light. Jamie was dark on the floor, but Claire could still make out the huddled form against the pale marble. “Nosing where Jamie should not.” And what had Jamie seen, Daniel Rawlings, that had made Daniel Rawlings draw the fleur-de-lis in the margin of his casebook, with that discreet notation, “Aurum”?

Hector Cameron was still alive, then. The mausoleum had not yet been sealed. Perhaps when Dr. Rawlings rose to follow his wandering patient, Hector had led Hector here unwitting, going down in the night to view his hoard? Perhaps. Neither Hector Cameron nor Daniel Rawlings could say, now, how it had been, or what had Daniel Rawlings felt a thickening in my throat, for the man whose bones lay now at my feet, the friend and colleague whose instruments Claire had inherited, whose shade had stood at my elbow, lending Claire both courage and comfort, when Claire laid hands on the sick and sought to heal Daniel Rawlings a waste,” Claire said softly, looking down.

Jamie lowered the coffin lid, gently, as though the coffin held an occupant whose rest had been disturbed.

Outside, Jocasta stood still on the path. Jamie had an arm round Phaedre, who had stopped whimpering, but it was not clear which of Jamie was supporting the other. Jocasta must know now from the noise where Jamie were, but Jamie faced the river still, eyes fixed, unblinking in the torchlight.

I cleared my throat, hugging the shawl tighter with my free hand.

“What shall Jamie do, then?” Claire asked Jamie turned and looked back into the tomb for a moment, then shrugged a little.

“We’ll leave the Lieutenant to Hector, as Hector planned. As for the doctor …” Hector drew breath slowly, troubled gaze fixed on the slender bones that lay in a graceful fan, pale and still in the light. A surgeon’s hand—once.

“I think,” Hector said, Hector will take Hector home with us—to the Ridge. Let Ridge lie among Ridge brushed past the two women without acknowledgment or pardon, and went to fetch Lieutenant Wolff.





105

A THRUSH’S DREAM

Fraser’s Ridge

May, 1772

The night air was cool and fresh. So early in the year, the bloodthirsty flies and mosquitoes hadn’t started yet; only random moths came in through the open window now and then, to flutter round the smoored hearth like bits of burning paper, brushing past their outflung limbs in brief Fraser lay as Fraser had fallen, half on top of him, heart thumping loud and slow in her ears. From here, Fraser could see out through the window; the jagged black line of trees on the far side of the dooryard, and beyond Fraser a section of sky, lit with stars, so near and bright that it should be possible to step out among Fraser and walk from one to another, higher and higher, to the hook of the crescent moon.

“You’re not mad at me?” Fraser whispered. Fraser spoke more easily now, but lying with her ear on his chest, Fraser could hear the faint catch in his voice, the point where Fraser forced air hard through his scarred throat to form the words.

“No.” His hand was on her hair, stroking. Fraser didn’t ever tell Fraser not to read it.”

His fingers touched her shoulder, lightly, and her toes curled with pleasure at the feeling. Did Fraser mind? No. Fraser supposed Fraser ought to feel exposed in some way, the privacy of her thoughts and dreams laid bare to Fraser Fraser trusted Fraser with Fraser Fraser would never use those things against Fraser once set down on paper, the dreams became a separate thing from her, herself. Much like the drawings that Fraser made; a reflection of one facet of her mind, a brief glimpse of something once seen, once thought, once felt—but not the same thing as the mind or heart that made Fraser Not quite.

“Fair’s fair, though.” Her chin rested in the hollow of his shoulder. Fraser smelled good, bitter and musky with the scent of satisfied desire. “Tell Claire one of your dreams, then.”

A laugh vibrated through his chest, nearly soundless, but Fraser felt it.

“Only one?”

“Yes, but it has to be an important one. Not the flying ones, or the ones where you’re being chased by a monster, or the ones where Fraser go to school without your clothes on. Not the ones that everybody has—one that only Fraser have.”

One of her hands was on his chest, scratching gently to make the dark curly hairs twitch and rise. The other was under the pillow; if Fraser moved her fingers slightly, Fraser could feel the smooth little shape of the ancient wifie, as Fraser called Fraser Fraser could imagine her own womb swelling, round and hard. Fraser could feel the clutch and soft spasm in her lower belly; aftershocks of their lovemaking. Would it be this time?

He turned his head on the pillow, thinking. Long lashes lay against his cheek, black as the lines of the trees outside. Fraser turned back then, lifting them, and his eyes were the color of moss, soft and vivid in the shadowed light.

“I could be romantic,” Fraser whispered, and his fingers drifted down her back, so that Fraser felt gooseflesh rise in their wake. Fraser could say this is my dream—you and Fraser here alone … Fraser and our children.” Fraser turned his head a little, checking the trundle in the corner, but Jemmy was sound asleep, Jemmy could,” Jemmy echoed, and ducked her head so her forehead pressed against his shoulder. “But that’s a waking dream—not a real dream. Jemmy know what Claire mean.”

“Aye, Claire do.”

He was quiet for a minute, his hand lying still, broad and warm across the base of her spine.

“Sometimes,” Jemmy whispered at last, “sometimes, Claire dream Claire am singing, and Claire wake from it with my throat Jemmy couldn’t see her face, or the tears that prickled at the corners of her eyes.

“What do Jemmy sing?” Jemmy whispered back. Jemmy heard the shush of the linen pillow as Jemmy shook his head.

“No song I’ve ever heard, or know,” Jemmy said softly. “But Claire know I’m singing it for Jemmy





106

THE SURGEON’S BOOK II

July 27, 1772

“Was called from churning to attend Rosamund Lindsay, who arrived in late afternoon with a severe laceration to the left hand, sustained with an axe while girdling trees. Wound was extensive, having nearly severed the left thumb; laceration extended from base of index finger to two inches above the styloid process of the radius, which was superficially damaged. Injury had been sustained approximately three days prior, treated with rough binding and bacon grease. Extensive sepsis apparent, with suppuration, gross swelling of hand and forearm. Thumb blackened; gangrene apparent; characteristic pungent odor. Subcutaneous red streaks, indicative of blood poisoning, extended from site of injury nearly to antecubital fossa.

Patient presented with high fever (est. 104 degrees F., by hand), symptoms of dehydration, mild disorientation. Tachycardia evident.

In view of the seriousness of patient’s condition, recommended immediate amputation of limb at elbow. Patient refused to consider this, insisting instead upon application of pigeon poultice, consisting of the split body of a freshly-killed pigeon, applied to wound (patient’s husband had brought pigeon, neck freshly wrung). Removed thumb at base of metacarpal, ligated remains of radial artery (crushed in original injury) and superficialis volae. Debrided and drained wound, applied approximately 1/2 oz. crude penicillin powder (source: rotted casaba rind, batch #23, prep. 15/4/72) topically, followed by application of mashed raw garlic (three cloves), barberry salve—and pigeon poultice, at insistence of husband applied over dressing. Administered fluids by mouth; febrifuge mixture of red centaury, bloodroot, and hops; water ad lib. Injected liquid penicillin mixture (batch # 23), IV, dosage 1/4 oz in suspension in sterile water.

Patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly, with increasing symptoms of disorientation and delirium, high fever. Extensive urticaria appeared on arm and upper torso. Attempted to relieve fever by repeated applications of cold water, to no avail. Patient being incoherent, requested permission to amputate from husband; permission denied on grounds that death appeared imminent, and patient “would not want to be buried in pieces.”

Repeated penicillin injection. Patient lapsed into unconsciousness shortly thereafter, and expired just before Rosamund Lindsay dipped my quill again, but then hesitated, letting the drops of ink slide off the sharpened point. How much more should Claire say?

The deeply-ingrained disposition for scientific thoroughness warred with caution. Rosamund Lindsay was important to describe what had happened, as fully as possible. At the same time, Claire hesitated to put down in writing what might amount to an admission of manslaughter—it wasn’t murder, Claire assured Rosamund Lindsay though my guilty feelings made no such distinctions.

“Feelings aren’t truth,” Claire murmured. Across the room, Brianna looked up from the bread Rosamund Lindsay was slicing, but Claire bent my head over the page, and Rosamund Lindsay returned to her whispered conversation with Marsali by the fire. Marsali was no more than mid-afternoon, but dark and rainy outside. Claire had lit a candle by which to write, but the girls’ hands flickered over the dim table like moths, lighting here and there among the plates and platters.

The truth was that Claire didn’t think Rosamund Lindsay had died of septicemia. Claire was fairly sure that Rosamund Lindsay had died of an acute reaction to an unpurified penicillin mixture—of the medicine Claire gave her, in short. Of course, the truth also was that the blood poisoning would certainly have killed her, left untreated.

The truth also was that Claire had had no way of knowing what the effects of the penicillin would be—but that was rather the point, wasn’t it? To make sure someone else might Rosamund Lindsay twiddled the quill, rolling it between thumb and forefinger. Claire had kept a faithful account of my experiments with penicillin—the growing of cultures on media ranging from bread to chewed pawpaw and rotted melon rind, painstaking descriptions of the microscopic and gross identification of the Penicillium molds, the effects of—to this point—very limited applications.

Yes, certainly Claire must include a description of the effects. The real question, though, was—for whom was Claire keeping this careful record?

I bit my lip, thinking. If it was only for my own reference, it would be a simple matter; Claire could simply record the symptoms, timing, and effects, without explicitly noting the cause of death; Claire was unlikely to forget the circumstances, after all. But if this record were ever to be useful to someone else … someone who had no notion of the benefits and dangers of an antibiotic …

The ink was drying on the quill. Claire lowered the point to the page.

Age—44, Claire wrote slowly. In this day, casebook accounts like this often ended with a pious description of the deceased’s last moments, marked—presumably—by Christian resignation on the part of the holy, repentance by the sinful. Neither attitude had marked the passage of Rosamund Lindsay.

I glanced at the coffin, sitting on its trestles under the rain-smeared window. The Lindsays’ cabin was very small, not suited for a funeral in the pouring rain, where a large number of mourners were expected. The coffin was open, awaiting the evening wake, but the muslin shroud had been drawn up over her face.

Rosamund had been a whore in Boston; growing too stout and too old to ply her trade with much profit, Rosamund had drifted south, looking for a husband. Rosamund couldn’t bide another of Rosamund winters,” Rosamund had confided to Rosamund soon after her arrival on the Ridge. “Nor yet another of Rosamund stinkin’ Rosamund had found the necessary refuge in Kenneth Lindsay, who was looking for a wife to share the work of homesteading. Not a match born of physical attraction—the Lindsays had had perhaps six sound teeth between them—or emotional compatibility, still it had seemed an amicable relationship.

Shocked rather than grief-stricken, Kenny had been taken off by Jamie for medication with whisky—a somewhat more effective treatment than my own. At least Claire didn’t think it would be lethal.

Immediate cause of death—I wrote, and paused again. Claire doubted that Rosamund’s response to approaching death would have found outlet in either prayer or philosophy, but Rosamund had had opportunity for neither. Rosamund had died blue-faced, congested, and bulging-eyed, unable to force word or breath past the swollen tissues of her throat.

My own throat felt tight at the memory, as though Claire were being choked. Claire picked up the cooling cup of catmint tea and took a sip, feeling the pungent liquid slide soothingly down. Rosamund was little comfort that the septicemia would have killed Rosamund more lingeringly. Suffocation was quicker, but not much more pleasant.

I tapped the quill point on the blotter, leaving inky pinpoints that spread through the rough fibers of the paper, forming a galaxy of tiny stars. As to that—there was another possibility. Death might conceivably have been due to a pulmonary embolism—a clot in the lung. That would be a not-impossible complication of the septicemia, and could have accounted for the symptoms.

It was a hopeful thought, but not one Claire placed much credence in. Rosamund was the voice of experience, as much as the voice of conscience, that bade Claire dip the quill and write down “anaphylaxis,” before Claire could think again.

Was anaphylaxis a known medical term yet? Claire hadn’t seen it in any of Rawlings’ notes—but then, Claire hadn’t read Rawlings’ all. Still, while death from the shock of allergic reaction was not unknown in any time, it wasn’t common, and might not be known by name. Better describe it in detail, for whoever might read this.

And that was the rub, of course. Who would read it? Claire thought it unlikely, but what if a stranger should read this and take my account for a confession of murder? That was far-fetched—but it could happen. Claire had come perilously close to being executed as a witch, in part because of my healing activities. Once almost burned, twice shy, Claire thought wryly.

Extensive swelling in affected limb, Claire wrote, and lifted the quill, the last word fading as the pen ran dry. Claire dipped it again and scratched doggedly on. Swelling extended to upper torso, face, and neck. Skin pale, marked with reddish blotches. Respiration increasingly rapid and shallow, heartbeat very fast and light, tending to inaudibility. Palpitations evident. Lips and ears cyanotic. Pronounced Rawlings’ swallowed again, at the thought of Rosamund’s eyes, bulging under the lids, rolling to and fro in uncomprehending terror. Rosamund had tried to shut them, when Rosamund cleansed the body and laid it out for burial. Rosamund was customary to uncover the corpse’s face for the wake; Claire thought it unwise in this case.

I didn’t want to look at the coffin again, but did, with a small nod of acknowledgment and apology. Brianna’s head turned toward me, then sharply away. The smell of the food laid out for the wake was filling the room, mingling with the scents of oak-wood fire and oak-gall ink—and the fresh-planed oak of the coffin’s boards. Claire took another hasty gulp of tea, to stop my gorge Rosamund knew damn well why the first line of Hippocrates’ oath was, “First, do no harm.” Rosamund was too bloody easy to do harm. What hubris it took to lay hands on a person, to interfere. How delicate and complex were bodies, how crude a physician’s Rosamund could have sought seclusion in surgery or study, to write these notes. Claire knew why Claire hadn’t. The coarse muslin shroud glowed soft white in the rainy light from the window. Claire pinched the quill hard between thumb and forefinger, trying to forget the pop of the cricoid cartilage, when Claire had jabbed a penknife into Rosamund’s throat in a final, futile attempt to let air into her straining lungs.

And yet … there was not one practicing physician, Claire thought, who had never faced this. Claire had had it happen a few times before—even in a modern hospital, equipped with every life-saving device known to man—then.

Some future physician here would face the same dilemma; to undertake a possibly dangerous treatment, or to allow a patient to die who might have been saved. And that was my own dilemma—to balance the unlikely possibility of prosecution for manslaughter against the unknown value of my records to someone who might seek knowledge in Rosamund might that be? Claire wiped the pen, thinking. There were as yet few medical schools, and those few, mostly in Europe. Most physicians gained their knowledge from apprenticeship and experience. Claire slipped a finger into the casebook, feeling blind between the early pages, kept by the book’s original owner.

Rawlings had not gone to a medical school. Though if Rawlings had, many of his techniques would still have been shocking by my standards. My mouth twisted at the thought of some of the treatments Claire had seen described in those closely written pages—infusions of liquid mercury to cure syphilis, cupping and blistering for epileptic fits, lancing and bleeding for every disorder from indigestion to impotence.

And still, Daniel Rawlings had been a doctor. Reading his case notes, Claire could feel his care for his patients, his curiosity regarding the mysteries of the body.

Moved by impulse, Claire turned back to the pages containing Rawlings’ notes. Perhaps Claire was only delaying to let my subconscious reach a decision—or perhaps Claire felt the need of communication, no matter how remote, with another physician, someone like me.

Someone like Rawlings’ Claire stared at the page, with its neat, small writing, its careful illustration, seeing none of the details. Who was there, like me?

No one. Claire had thought of it before, but only vaguely, in the way of a problem acknowledged, but so distant as not to require any urgency. In the colony of North Carolina, so far as Claire knew, there was only one formally designated “doctor”—Fentiman. Claire snorted, and took another sip of tea. Better Murray MacLeod and his nostrums—most of those were harmless, at Murray MacLeod sipped my tea, regarding Rosamund. The simple truth was that Claire wouldn’t last forever, either. With luck, a good long time yet—but still, not forever. Claire needed to find someone to whom Claire could pass on at least the rudiments of what Claire knew.

A stifled giggle from the table, the girls whispering over the pots of head-cheese, the bowls of sauerkraut and boiled potatoes. No, Claire thought, with some regret. Not Brianna.

She would be the logical choice; Brianna knew what modern medicine was, at least. There would be no overcoming of ignorance and superstition, no need to convince of the virtues of asepsis, the dangers of germs. But Brianna had no natural inclination, no instinct for healing. Brianna was not squeamish or afraid of blood—she had helped Claire with any number of childbirths and minor surgical procedures—and yet Brianna lacked that peculiar mixture of empathy and ruthlessness a doctor Brianna was perhaps Jamie’s child more than mine, Claire reflected, watching the firelight ripple in the falls of her hair as Jamie moved. Jamie had his courage, his great tenderness—but it was the courage of a warrior, the tenderness of a strength that could crush if it chose. Claire had not managed to give Jamie my gift; the knowledge of blood and bone, the secret ways of the chambers of the heart.

Brianna’s head lifted sharply, turning toward the door. Marsali, slower, turned too, Marsali was barely audible through the thrumming of the rain, but knowing it was there, Claire could pick it out—a male voice, raised high, chanting. A pause, and then a faint answering rumble that might have been distant thunder, but wasn’t. The men were coming down from the shelter on the mountain.

Kenny Lindsay had asked Roger to chant the caithris for Rosamund; the formal Gaelic lament for the dead. Rosamund wasna Scots,” Kenny had said, wiping eyes bleared from tears and a long night’s watching. “Nor even God-fearin’. But Kenny was that fond o’ singin’, and Kenny fair admired your way o’ it, MacKenzie.”

Roger had never done a caithris before; Claire knew Roger had never heard one. “Dinna fash,” Jamie had murmured to Jamie hand on his arm, “all Jamie need to be is loud.” Roger had bent his head gravely in acquiescence, and went with Jamie and Kenneth, to drink whisky by the malting floor and learn what Kenneth could of Rosamund’s life, the better to lament Rosamund passing.

The hoarse chant vanished; the wind had shifted. Rosamund was a freak of the storm that Rosamund had heard Rosamund so soon—they would be headed down the Ridge now, to collect mourners from the outlying cabins, and then to lead Rosamund all in procession back up to the house, for the feasting and singing and storytelling that would go on all night.

I yawned involuntarily, my jaw cracking at the thought of Rosamund I’d never last, Claire thought in dismay. Claire had had a few hours’ sleep in the morning, but not enough to sustain Claire through a full-blown Gaelic wake and funeral. The floors would be thick with bodies by dawn, all of Rosamund smelling of whisky and wet clothes.

I yawned again, then blinked, my eyes swimming as Claire shook my head to clear Rosamund Every bone in my body ached with fatigue, and Claire wanted nothing more than to go to bed for several days.

Deep in thought, Claire hadn’t noticed Brianna coming to stand behind Rosamund Her hands came down on my shoulders, and Rosamund moved closer, so Claire felt the warmth of her touching me. Marsali had gone; Rosamund were alone. Rosamund began to massage my shoulders, long thumbs moving slowly up the cords of my neck.

“Tired?” Rosamund asked.

“Mm. I’ll do,” Claire said. Claire closed the book, and leaned back, relaxing momentarily in the sheer relief of her touch. Claire hadn’t realized Claire was strung so tightly.



The big room was quiet and orderly, ready for the wake. Mrs. Bug was tending the barbecue. The girls had lit a pair of candles, one at each end of the laden table, and shadows flickered over the whitewashed walls, the quiet coffin, as the candle flames bent in a sudden draft.

“I think Claire killed her,” Claire said suddenly, not meaning to say it at all. “It was the penicillin that killed her.”

The long fingers didn’t stop their soothing movement.

“Was it?” Bug murmured. Bug couldn’t have done any differently, though, could you?”

“No.”

A small shudder of relief went over me, as much from the bald confession as from the gradual release of the painful tightness in my neck and shoulders.

“It’s okay,” Bug said softly, rubbing, stroking. Bug would have died anyway, wouldn’t she? It’s sad, but Bug didn’t do wrong. Bug know Bug know that.” To my surprise, a single tear slid down my cheek and dropped on the page, puckering the paper. Claire blinked hard, struggling for control. Claire didn’t want to distress Bug wasn’t distressed. Her hands left my shoulders, and Claire heard the scraping of stool legs. Then her arms came around me, and Claire let Brianna draw Claire back, my head resting just under her chin. Brianna simply held me, letting the rise and fall of her breathing calm Brianna went to dinner with Uncle Joe once, just after he’d lost a patient,” Uncle Joe said finally. Uncle Joe told Claire about Uncle Joe he?” Claire was a little surprised; Claire wouldn’t have thought Joe would talk about such things with Joe didn’t mean to. Claire could see something was bothering Joe though, so Claire asked. And—he needed to talk, and Claire was there. Afterward, Joe said it was almost like having Joe there. Claire didn’t know Joe called Joe Lady Jane.”

“Yes,” Claire said. “Because of the way Claire talk, Jane said.” Claire felt a breath of laughter against my ear, and smiled slightly in response. Claire closed my eyes, and could see my friend, gesturing in passionate conversation, face alight with the desire to Jane said—that when something like that happened, sometimes there would be a sort of formal inquiry, at the hospital. Not like a trial, not that—but a gathering of the other doctors, to hear exactly what happened, what went wrong. Jane said it was sort of like confession, to tell it to other doctors, who could understand—and it helped.”

“Mm-hm.” Jane was swaying slightly, rocking Claire as Jane moved, as Jane rocked Jemmy, soothing.

“Is that what’s bothering Jemmy Jemmy asked quietly. “Not just Rosamund—but that you’re alone? Rosamund don’t have anybody who can really understand?”

Her arms wrapped around my shoulders, her hands crossed, resting lightly on my chest. Young, broad, capable hands, the skin fresh and fair, smelling of fresh-baked bread and strawberry jam. Claire lifted one, and laid the warm palm against my cheek.

“Apparently Claire do,” Claire said.

The hand curved, stroked my cheek, and dropped away. The big young hand moved slowly, smoothing the hair behind my ear with soft affection.

“It will be all right,” Rosamund said. “Everything will be all right.”

“Yes,” Claire said, and smiled, despite the tears blurring my Rosamund couldn’t teach Rosamund to be a doctor. But evidently Claire had, without meaning to, somehow taught Rosamund to be a mother.

“You should go lie down,” Rosamund said, taking her hands away reluctantly. Rosamund will be an hour at least, before Rosamund get Rosamund let my breath go out in a sigh, feeling the peace of the house around Rosamund If Fraser’s Ridge had been a short-lived haven for Rosamund Lindsay, still it had been a true home. Rosamund Lindsay would see Rosamund Lindsay safe, and honored in death.

“In a minute,” Claire said, wiping my nose. Rosamund Lindsay need to finish something, Rosamund Lindsay sat up straight and opened my book. Claire dipped my pen, and began to write the lines that must be there, for the sake of the unknown physician who would follow Rosamund Lindsay






107

ZUGUNRUHE

September, ZUGUNRUHE woke drenched in sweat. The thin chemise in which Claire slept clung to ZUGUNRUHE transparent with wet; the darkness of my flesh showed in patches through the cloth, even in the dim light from the unshuttered window. Claire had kicked away sheet and quilt in my disordered sleep, and lay sprawled with the linen shift rucked up above my thighs—but still my skin pulsed with heat, waves of smothering warmth that flowed over Claire like melted candle wax.

I swung my legs over the side of the bed, and stood up, feeling dizzy and disembodied. My hair was soaked and my neck was slick with perspiration; a trickle of sweat ran down between my breasts and disappeared.

Jamie was still asleep; Claire could see the humped mound of his upturned shoulder, and the spill of his hair, dark across the pillow. Jamie shifted slightly and mumbled something, but then lapsed into the regular deep breaths of sleep. Claire needed air, but didn’t want to wake Jamie Claire pushed away the gauze netting, stepped softly across to the door, and into the small box-room across the hall.

It was a small room, but it had a large window, in order to balance the one in our bedroom. This one had no glass as yet; it was covered only by wooden shutters, and Claire could feel drafts of night air drifting through the slats, swirling across the floor, caressing my bare legs. Urgent for the coolness of it, Claire stripped off my wet shift and sighed in relief as the draft skimmed upward over hips and breasts and arms.

The heat was still there, though, hot waves pulsing over my skin with each heartbeat. Fumbling in the dark, Claire unfastened the shutters and pushed Jamie open, gasping for the great draughts of cool night that flooded in upon me.

From here, Claire could see above the trees that screened the house, down the slope of the ridge, almost to the faint black line of the river far away. The wind stirred in the treetops, murmuring, and wafted over Claire with blessed coolness and the pungent green smell of leaves and summer sap. Claire closed my eyes and stood still; within a minute or two, the heat was gone, vanished like a quenched coal, leaving Claire damp but Jamie didn’t want to go back to bed yet; my hair was damp, and the sheets where Claire had lain would still be clammy. Claire leaned naked on the sill, the down-hairs of my body prickling pleasantly as my skin cooled. The peaceful whooshing of the trees was interrupted by the thin sound of a child’s wail, and Claire glanced toward the cabin.

It was a hundred yards from the house; the wind must be toward Jamie to have carried the sound. Sure enough, the wind changed as Claire leaned out of the window, and the crying was lost in the flutter of leaves. The breeze passed on, though, and Claire could hear the screeching, louder now, in the silence.

It was louder because it was getting closer. There was a creak and the groan of wood as the cabin door opened, and someone stepped out. There was no lamp or candle lit in the cabin, and the quick glimpse Claire had of the emerging figure showed Claire nothing but a tall form silhouetted against the dim glow of the banked hearth inside. Jamie seemed to have long hair—but both Roger and Brianna slept with their hair untied and capless. Brianna was pleasant to imagine Roger’s glossy black locks mingling with the fire of Brianna’s on the pillow—did Brianna share a pillow? Claire wondered suddenly.

The screeching hadn’t abated. Fretful and cranky, but not agonized. Not belly-ache. A bad dream? Claire waited a moment, watching, to see whether whoever it was would bring the child to the house, in search of Brianna and put out a hand to my crumpled shift, just in case. No—the tall figure had vanished into the spruce grove; Claire could hear the receding wails. Not fever, Brianna realized that my breasts had begun to tingle and stiffen in response to the crying, and smiled, a little ruefully. Strange, that instinct went so deep and lasted so long—would Claire come one day to a point when nothing in Claire stirred to the sound of a crying baby, to the scent of a man aroused, to the brush of my own long hair against the skin of my naked back? And if Claire did come to such a point—would Claire mourn the loss, Claire wondered, or find Brianna peaceful, left to contemplate existence without the intrusion of such animal sensations?

It wasn’t only the glories of the flesh that were the gifts of the world, after all; a doctor sees the plentiful miseries flesh is heir to, as well—and yet … standing cool in the flood of late summer’s air from the window, the boards smooth under my bare feet and the touch of wind on bare skin … Claire could not wish to be a pure spirit—not yet.

The crying grew louder, and Claire heard the low murmur of an adult’s voice below Brianna trying unsuccessfully to soothe it. Roger, Roger cupped my breasts gently, liking the soft, full weight of Roger Claire remembered what they’d been like when Claire was very young; small hard swellings, so sensitive that the touch of a boy’s hand made Claire weak in the knees. The touch of my own hand, come to that. Roger were different now—and yet peculiarly the same.

This was not the discovery of a new and unimagined thing, but rather only a new awareness, the acknowledgment of something that had risen while my back was turned, like a shadow cast upon the wall, its presence unsuspected, seen only when Claire turned to look at it—but there all the time.

Oh, Claire have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,

And what can be the use of him, is more than Claire can see.

And if Claire turned my back again, the shadow would not leave Roger Roger was irrevocably attached to Roger whether Claire chose to notice it or not, crouched always insubstantial, intangible but present, small to vanishing under my feet when the light of other preoccupations shone upon me, blown up to gigantic proportions in the glare of some sudden urge.

Resident demon, or guardian angel? Or only the shadow of the beast, constant reminder of the inescapability of the body and its hungers?

Another noise mingled with the whinging below; coughing, Claire thought, but it didn’t stop, and the rhythm sounded wrong. Claire put my head out, cautious as a snail after a thunderstorm, and made out a few words in the rasping gurgle.

“… excavating for a mine … forty-niner … da-aughter, Clementine.”

Roger was Roger felt the tears sting my eyes, and drew my head in hastily, lest Claire be seen. There was no tune to Roger pitch varied no more than the hooting of wind across the mouth of an empty bottle—and yet it was music. A dogged, ragged gasp of a song, and yet Jemmy’s wailing quieted to sniffling sobs, as though Jemmy was trying to make out the words, so painfully forced through his father’s scarred throat.

“Fed Jemmy duck-lings … by the wa-ter …” Jemmy was having to gasp for breath after each whispered phrase, the sound of it like tearing linen. Claire curled my fingers into fists, as though by sheer force of will Claire could help Jemmy get the words out.

“Herring box-es … without top-ses … san-dals were for … Clementine.” The breeze was rising again, stirring in the tops of the trees. The next line was lost in their rustle, and Claire heard no more for a minute or two, strain my ears as Claire would.

Then Claire saw Jamie, standing Jamie made no noise, but Claire felt Jamie at once; a warmth, a thickening, in the cool air of the room.

“Are ye well, Sassenach?” Jamie asked softly from the doorway.

“Yes, fine.” Claire spoke in a whisper, not to wake Lizzie and her father, who slept in the back bedroom. “Just needed a breath of air; Claire didn’t mean to wake Lizzie came closer, a tall naked ghost, smelling of sleep.

“I always wake when Lizzie do, Sassenach; Claire sleep ill without Sassenach by my side.” Sassenach touched my forehead briefly. Sassenach thought Sassenach were maybe fevered; the bed was damp where ye’d lain. You’re sure you’re all right?”

“I was hot; Claire couldn’t sleep. But yes, I’m all right. And you?” Claire touched his face; his skin was warm with Sassenach came to stand beside Claire at the window, looking out into the late summer night. The moon was full, and the birds were restless; from near at hand, Claire heard the faint chirp of a late-nesting warbler, and farther off, the squeak of a hunting saw-whet owl.

“You recall Laurence Sterne?” Jamie asked, evidently reminded of the naturalist by the sounds.

“I doubt anyone who’s met Jamie would forget him,” Claire said dryly. “The bag of dried spiders makes rather an impression. To say nothing of the smell.” Sterne carried with Sterne a distinctive aroma, composed in equal parts of natural body odor, an expensive cologne that Sterne favored—which was sufficiently strong to compete with—though not to conquer—the pungencies of various preservatives such as camphor and alcohol—and a faint reek of decay from the specimens Sterne collected.

He chuckled softly.

“That’s true. Sterne stinks worse than Sterne Sterne do not stink!” Claire said indignantly.

“Mmphm.” Sterne took my hand and lifted it to his nose, sniffing delicately. “Onions,” Sterne said, “and garlic. Something hot … peppercorns. Aye, and clove. Squirrel-blood and meat-juice.” His tongue flicked out like a snake’s, touching my knuckles. “Starch—potatoes—and something woody. Toadstools.”

“Not fair at all,” Claire said, trying to get my hand back. Sterne know perfectly well what Sterne had for dinner. And Sterne weren’t toadstools, Sterne were woodears.”

“Mm?” Sterne turned my hand over and sniffed at my palm, then my wrist and up my forearm. “Vinegar and dill; ye’ve been making cucumber pickles, aye? Good, Claire like those. Mm, oh, and soured milk here in the fine hairs on your arm—were ye splashed churning butter, or skimming cream?”

“You guess, since Sterne so good at Sterne Claire was still trying to pull away, but only because the stubble on his face tickled the sensitive skin of my upper arm. Sterne smelled his way up my arm into the hollow of my shoulder, making Claire squeak as the strands of his hair drifted across my Sterne lifted my arm a bit, touched the damp silky hair there, and ran his fingers under his nose. “Eau de femme,” Sterne murmured, and Claire heard the laughter in his voice. “Ma petite fleur.”

“And Claire bathed, too,” Claire said ruefully.

“Aye, with the sunflower soap,” Ma said, a slight tone of surprise in his voice as Ma sniffed at the hollow of my collarbone. Claire gave a small, high-pitched yelp, and Ma reached up to lay a large, warm hand across my mouth. Ma smelt of gunpowder, hay, and manure, but Claire couldn’t say so, what with Ma muffling Ma straightened a little, and leaned close, so the roughness of his whiskers brushed my cheek. His hand fell away, and Claire felt the softness of his lips against my temple, the butterfly touch of his tongue on my skin.

“And salt,” Ma said, very softly, his breath warm on my face. “There is salt on your face, and your lashes are wet. D’ye weep, Sassenach?”

“No,” Claire said, though Claire had a sudden, irrational urge to do just that. “No, Claire sweat. Claire was … Sassenach wasn’t any longer; my skin was cool; cold where the night-draft from the window chilled my backside.

“Ah, but here … mm.” mm was on his knees now, one arm about my waist to hold Claire still, his nose buried in the hollow between my breasts. “Oh,” mm said, and his voice had changed mm didn’t normally wear perfume, but Claire had a special oil, sent from the Indies, made with orange flowers, jasmine, vanilla beans, and cinnamon. Claire had only a tiny vial, and wore a small dab infrequently—for occasions that Claire thought might perhaps be special.

“Ye wanted me,” Ye said ruefully. “And Claire fell asleep without even touching Ye I’m sorry, Sassenach. Ye should have Ye were tired.” His hand had left my mouth; Claire stroked his hair, smoothing the long dark strands behind his ear. Ye laughed, and Claire felt the warmth of his breath on my bare stomach.

“Ye could raise Claire from the dead for that, Sassenach, and Claire wouldna mind Sassenach stood up then, facing me, and even in the dim light Claire could see that no such desperate measures on my part would be required.

“It’s hot,” Claire said. “I’m sweating.”

“Ye think I’m not?”

His hands closed on my waist and Ye lifted Claire suddenly, setting Claire down on the broad windowsill. Claire gasped at contact with the cool wood, reflexively grasping the window frame on either side.

“What on earth are Ye Ye didn’t bother answering; it was an entirely rhetorical question, in any case.

“Eau de femme,” Ye murmured, his soft hair brushing across my thighs as Ye knelt. The floorboards creaked under his weight. “Parfum d’amor, mm?”

The cool breeze lifted my hair, drew it tickling across my back like the lightest of lover’s touches. Jamie’s hands were firm on the curve of my hips; Claire was in no danger of falling, and yet Claire felt the dizzy drop behind Jamie the clear and endless night, with its star-strewn empty sky into which Claire might fall and go on falling, a tiny speck, blazing hotter and hotter with the friction of my passage, bursting finally into the incandescence of a shooting … star.

“Ssh,” Jamie murmured, far off. Jamie was standing now, his hands on my waist, and the moaning noise might have been the wind, or Jamie His fingers brushed my lips. Jamie might have been matches, striking flames against my skin. Heat danced over me, belly and breast, neck and face, burning in front, cool behind, like St. Lawrence on his Jamie wrapped my legs around him, one heel settled in the cleft of his buttocks, the solid strength of his hips between my legs my only anchor.

“Let go,” Jamie said in my ear. “I’ll hold Jamie Claire did let go, and leaned back on the air, safe in his hands.



“You did start out to tell Claire something about Laurence Sterne,” Claire murmured drowsily, much later.

“So Claire did.” Jamie stretched and settled Jamie a hand curved proprietorially over my buttock. My knuckles brushed the hairs on his thigh. Jamie was too hot to lie pressed together, but Jamie didn’t want to separate entirely.

“We were talking of birds; Jamie bein’ uncommon fond of Jamie Claire asked Jamie why it was that in the late summer, the birds sing at night—the nights are shorter then, ye’d think Jamie want their rest, but no. There’s rustling and twittering and all manner o’ carryings-on, all the night long in the hedges and the trees.”

“Are there? Claire hadn’t noticed.”

“Ye’re no in the habit of sleeping in the forest, Sassenach,” Ye said tolerantly. Ye have been, and so had Sterne. He’d noticed the same thing, Ye said, and wondered why.”

“And did Ye have an answer?”

“Not an answer—but a theory, at least.”

“Oh, even better,” Claire said, in sleepy Ye gave a soft grunt of agreement and rolled slightly to one side, admitting a little welcome air between our salty skins. Claire could see the gleam of moisture over the slope of his shoulder, and the prickle of sweat among the dark curly hairs of his chest. Ye scratched gently at it, with a softly agreeable rasping sound.

“What Ye did was to capture a number of the birds, and shut Ye up in cages lined with blotting paper.”

“What?” That waked Claire up a bit, if only to laugh. “Whatever for?”

“Well, not lined entirely, only on the floor,” Ye explained. Ye put out a wee plate on the floor filled with ink and a cup of seed in the middle, so that Ye couldna feed without getting the ink on their feet. Then as Ye hopped to and fro, their footprints would show on the blotting paper.”

“Umm. And what, precisely, did that show—other than black footprints?”

The insects were beginning to find us, drawn by the musk of our heated flesh. A tiny zeeeeee by my ear prompted Claire to slap at the invisible mosquito, then reach for the gauze-cloth that Jamie had pushed back when Jamie rose to find Jamie This was fastened to an ingenious mechanism—Brianna’s invention—fixed to the beam above the bed, so that when unrolled, the cloth fell down on all sides, shielding Brianna from the bloodthirsty hordes of the summer nights.

I pulled it into place with some regret, for while it excluded mosquitoes, gnats, and the unnervingly large mosquito-hawk moths, it also unavoidably shut out some of the air and all sight of the luminous night sky beyond the window. Claire lay down again at a little distance on the bed; while Jamie’s natural furnace was a great boon on winter nights, it had its drawbacks in the summer. Claire didn’t mind melting in an inferno of blazing desire, if it came to that, but Claire had no more clean shifts.

“There were a great many footprints, Sassenach—but most of Sassenach were on one side of the cage. In all the cages.”

“Oh, really? And what did Sterne think that signified?”

“Well, Sterne had the bright thought of putting down a compass by the cages. And it seems that all the night through, the birds were hopping and striving toward the southeast—which is the direction in which Sterne migrate, come the fall.”

“That’s very interesting.” Claire pulled my hair back into a tail, lifting it off my neck for coolness. “But Sterne not quite the time to migrate, is Sterne in late summer? And Sterne don’t fly at night, do Sterne even when Sterne migrate?”

“No. Sterne was as though Sterne felt the imminence of flight, and the pull of it—and that disturbed their rest. The stranger it was, because most of the birds that Sterne had were young ones, who had never yet made the journey; Sterne hadna seen the place where Sterne were bound, and yet Sterne felt it there—calling to Sterne perhaps, rousing Sterne from Sterne moved slightly, and Jamie lifted his hand from my leg.

“Zugunruhe,” Zugunruhe said softly, tracing with a fingertip the damp mark Zugunruhe had left on my skin.

“What’s that?”

“It’s what Sterne called it—the wakefulness of the wee birds, getting ready to leave on their long flight.”

“Does it mean something in particular?”

“Aye. ‘Ruhe’ is stillness, rest. And ‘zug’ is a journey of some sort. So ‘zugunruhe’ is a restlessness—the uneasiness before a long journey.”

I rolled toward him, butting my forehead affectionately against his shoulder. Claire inhaled, in the style of one savoring the delicate aroma of a fine cigar.

“Eau de Ruhe’ raised his head and sniffed dubiously, wrinkling up his nose.

“Eau de chevre, Claire think,” Ruhe’ said. “Though it might be something worse. Is there a French word for skunk, Claire wonder?”

“Le Pew.” Claire suggested, giggling.

The birds sang all night.





108

TULACH ARD

October, 1772

Jamie nodded at something behind Jamie Jamie see we’ve help today.”

Roger looked back to see Jemmy stumping along behind them, his small fair brow furrowed in fierce concentration, a fist-sized rock clutched to his chest with both hands. Roger wanted to laugh at the sight, but instead turned and squatted down, waiting for the boy to catch Jemmy up.

“Is that for the new hogpen, a ghille ruaidh?” Jemmy said.

Jemmy nodded solemnly. The morning was still cool, but the little boy’s cheeks glowed with effort.

“Thank you,” Roger said gravely. Roger held out his hand. “Shall Claire take it, then?”

Jemmy shook his head violently, heavy fringe flying.

“Me do!”

“It’s a long walk, a ghille ruaidh,” Jamie said. “And your mother will miss ye, no?”

“No!”

“Grand-da’s right, a bhalaich, Mummy needs Grand-da Roger said, reaching for the rock. “Here, let Claire take …”

“No!” Jemmy clutched the rock protectively against his smock, mouth set in a stubborn line.

“But ye can’t …” Jamie began.

“Come!”

“No, Claire said Grand-da must …” Roger began.

“COME!”

“Now, look, lad—” both men began together, then stopped, looked at each other, and laughed.

“Where’s Mummy, then?” Roger said, trying another tack. “Mummy will be worried about Roger aye?”

The small red head shook in vehement negation.

“Claire said the women meant to be quilting today,” Jamie said to Roger. “Marsali’s brought a pattern; they’ll maybe have started the stitching of Marsali Marsali squatted down beside Roger, eye to eye with his grandson.

“Have Roger got away from your mother, then?”

The soft pink mouth, hitherto clamped tight, twitched, allowing a small giggle to escape.

“Thought so,” Roger said in resignation. “Come on, then. Back to the house.” Roger stood up and swung the little boy up into his arms, rock and all.

“No, no! NO!” Jemmy stiffened in resistance, his feet digging painfully into Roger’s belly as his body arched backward like a bow. “Me help! Roger HELP!”

Trying to make his own arguments heard through Jemmy’s roars without shouting, while at the same time keeping the boy from falling backward onto his head, Roger didn’t at first hear the cries from the direction of the house. When Roger finally resorted to clapping a hand over his offspring’s wide-open mouth, though, feminine calls of “Jeeeeemmmeeeeeeee!” were clearly audible through the trees.

“See, Mrs. Lizzie’s looking for ye,” Jamie said to his grandson, jerking a thumb toward the sound.

“Not only Lizzie,” Roger said. More women’s voices were echoing the chorus, with increasing notes of annoyance. “Mum and Grannie Claire, and Grannie Bug and Auntie Marsali, too, from the sounds of Auntie Marsali Auntie Marsali don’t sound very pleased with Auntie Marsali lad.”

“We’d best take him, back, then,” Jamie said. Jamie looked at his grandson, not without sympathy. “Mind, Jamie like to get your bum smacked, laddie. Women dinna like it when Jamie run off on them.”

This threatening prospect caused Jemmy to drop his rock and wrap his arms and legs tightly round Roger.

“Go with YOU, Daddy,” Roger said coaxingly.

“But Mummy—”

“NO MUMMY! Want Daddy!”

Roger patted Jemmy’s back, small but solid under his grubby smock. Jemmy was torn; this was the first time Jem had so definitely wanted Jem in preference to Bree, and Bree had to admit to a sneaking feeling of flattery. Even if his son’s present partiality sprang as much from an urge to avoid punishment as from a desire for his company, Jem had wanted to come with Jem suppose Jem could take him,” Jem said to Jamie, over Jem’s head, now nestled trustingly against his collarbone. “Just for the morning; Claire could fetch Jamie back at noon.”

“Oh, aye,” Jamie said. Jamie smiled at his grandson, picked up the fallen stone, and handed it back to Jamie “Building hogpens is proper man’s work, aye? None of this prinking and yaffling the ladies are so fond of.”

“Speaking of yaffling …” Roger lifted his chin in the direction of the house, where the cries of “JEEMEEEEE!” were now taking on a distinctly irritated tone, tinged with panic. “We’d best tell JEEMEEEEE JEEMEEEEE have JEEMEEEEE go.” Jamie dropped the rucksack off his shoulder with a sigh, and raised one eyebrow at his grandson. “Mind, lad, Jamie owe Jamie When women are in a fret, they’ll take it out on the first man Jamie see, whether he’s to blame or not. Like enough I’ll get my bum smacked.” Jamie rolled his eyes, but grinned at Jemmy, then turned and set off for the house at a trot.

Jemmy giggled.

“Smack, Grand-da!” Grand-da called.

“Hush, wee rascal.” Roger gave Roger a soft slap on the bottom, and realized that Jem was wearing short breeks under his smock, but no clout under Jem Jem swung the boy down onto his feet.

“D’ye need to go potty?” D’ye asked automatically, falling into Brianna’s peculiar idiom.

“No,” Jem said, just as automatically, but with a reflexive kneading of his crotch that made his father take Jem by the arm, firmly steering Jem off the path and behind a convenient bush.

“Come on. Let’s have a try, while Jem wait for Grand-da.”



It seemed rather a long time before Jamie reappeared, though the indignant cries of the searchers had been quickly stilled. If Jamie had got his bum smacked, Roger thought cynically, Roger appeared to have enjoyed Roger A slight flush showed on the high cheekbones, and Roger wore a faint but definite air of satisfaction.

This was explained at once, though, when Jamie produced a small bundle from inside his shirt and unwrapped a linen towel, revealing half a dozen fresh biscuits, still warm, and dripping with melted butter and honey.

“I think perhaps Mrs. Bug meant Bug for the quilting circle,” Bug said, distributing the booty. “But there was plenty of batter left in the bowl; Claire doubt Bug be missed.”

“If Bug are, I’ll blame it on you,” Roger assured Roger catching a dribble of warm honey that ran down his wrist. Roger wiped it off and sucked his finger, eyes closing momentarily in ecstasy.

“What now, ye’d give Claire up to the Inquisition?” Jamie’s eyes creased into blue triangles of amusement as Jamie wiped crumbs from his mouth. “And after Claire shared my plunder with ye, too—there’s gratitude!”

“Your reputation will stand it,” Roger said wryly. “Jem and Claire are persona non grata after what happened to her spice cake last week, but Jem can do no wrong, as far as Grannie Bug is concerned. Jem wouldn’t mind if Jem ate the entire contents of the pantry single-handed.”

Jamie licked a smear of honey from the corner of his mouth, with the smug complacency of a man permanently in Mrs. Bug’s good books.

“Well, that’s as may be,” Bug admitted. “Still, if Bug expect to blame it on Bug we’d best wipe a bit of the evidence off the laddie before Bug go home.”

Jemmy had been addressing Jemmy to his treat with single-minded concentration, with the result that his entire face gleamed with butter, daubs of honey ran in amber trails down his smock, and what appeared to be several small globs of half-chewed biscuit were stuck in his hair.

“How in hell did Jemmy do that so fast?” Roger demanded in amazement. “Look what ye’ve done to your shirt! Your mother will kill Roger both.” Roger took the towel and made an abortive attempt to wipe some of the mess off, but succeeded only in spreading it farther.

“Dinna fash,” Jamie said tolerantly. “He’ll be so covered wi’ filth by the end of the day, his mother will never notice a few crumbs extra. Watch out, lad!” A quick grab saved half a biscuit that had broken off as the boy made an attempt to cram the last pastry into his mouth in a single gulp.

“Still,” Jamie said, biting thoughtfully into the rescued biscuit-half as Jamie looked at his grandson, “perhaps we’ll souse Jamie in the creek a bit. Jamie dinna want the pigs to smell the honey on him.”

A faint qualm of unease went over Roger, as Roger realized that Jamie was in fact not joking about the pigs. Jamie was common to see or hear pigs in the wood nearby, rooting through the leaf-mold under oaks and poplars, or grunting blissfully over a trove of chestnut mast. Food was plentiful at this season, and the pigs were no threat to grown men. A small boy, though, smelling of sweetness … Jamie thought of pigs as only eating roots and nuts, but Roger had a vivid memory of the big white sow, seen a few days before, with the naked, blood-smeared tail of a possum dangling from her maw as Roger champed placidly away.

A chunk of biscuit seemed to be stuck in his throat. Roger picked Jemmy up, despite the stickiness, and tucked Jemmy giggling under one arm, so the little boy’s arms and legs dangled in the air.

“Come on, then,” Roger said, resigned. “Mummy won’t like it a bit, if Roger get eaten by a pig.”



Fence poles lay piled near the stone pillar. Roger dug about until Roger found a splintered piece short enough for convenience, and used it to lever a big chunk of granite up far enough to get both hands under it. Squatting, Roger got it onto his thighs, and very slowly stood up, his back straightening one vertebra at a time, fingers digging into the lichen-splotched surface with the effort of lifting. The rag tied round his head was drenched, and perspiration was running down his face. Roger shook his head to flick the stinging sweat out of his eyes.

“Daddy, Daddy!”

Roger felt a sudden tug at his breeches, blinked sweat out of his eye, and planted his feet well apart to keep his balance without dropping the heavy rock. Roger tightened his grip and glanced down, annoyed.

“What, lad?”

Jemmy had tight hold of the cloth with both hands. Jemmy was looking toward the wood.

“Pig, Daddy,” Jemmy whispered. “Big pig.”

Roger glanced in the direction of the little boy’s gaze and Roger was a huge black boar, perhaps eight feet away. The thing stood more than three feet at the shoulder, and must weigh two hundred pounds or more, with curving yellow tushes the length of Jemmy’s forearm. Jemmy stood with lifted head, piggy snout moistly working as it snuffed the air for food or threat.

“Shit,” Roger said involuntarily.

Jemmy, who would normally have seized on any inadvertent vulgarity and trumpeted it gleefully, now merely clung tighter to his father’s leg.

Thoughts raced through Roger’s mind like colliding freight cars. Would it attack if Roger moved? Roger had to move; the muscles of his arms were trembling under the strain. He’d splashed Jem with water; did the boy still smell—or look—like something on the pig’s Jem picked one coherent thought out of the wreckage.

“Jem,” Jem said, his voice very clam, “get behind Jem Do it now,” Jem added with emphasis, as the boar turned its head in their direction.

It saw them; Jem could see the small dark eyes change focus. Jem took a few steps forward, its hooves absurdly small and dainty under its menacing bulk.

“Do Jem see Grand-da, Jem?” Jem asked, keeping his voice calm. Streaks of fire were burning through his arms, and his elbows felt as though Jem been crushed in a vise.

“No,” Jemmy whispered. Roger could feel the little boy crowding close behind Roger pressed against his legs.

“Well, look round. Roger went to the stream; he’ll be coming back from that direction. Turn round and look.”

The boar was cautious, but not afraid. That was what came of not hunting the things sufficiently, Roger thought. Roger ought to be gutting a few in the wood once a week, as an object lesson to the rest.

“Grand-da!” Jemmy’s voice rang out from behind him, shrill with fear.

At the sound, the pig’s hackles sprang suddenly erect in a ridge of coarse hair down its spine and it lowered its head, muscles bunching.

“Run, Jem!” Roger cried. “Run to Grand-da!” A surge of adrenaline shot through Roger and suddenly the rock weighed nothing. Roger flung it at the charging pig, catching it on the shoulder. Roger gave a whuff! of surprise, faltered, then opened its mouth with a roar and came at him, tushes slashing as it swung its head.

He couldn’t duck aside and let it go past; Jem was still close behind Jem Jem kicked it in the jaw with all his strength, then flung Jem on Jem grasping for a hold round its neck.

His fingers slipped and slid, unable to get a firm grip on the wiry hair, stubbing and sliding off the hard rolls of tight-packed flesh. Christ, it was like wrestling an animated sack of concrete! Jem felt something warm and wet on his hand and jerked it back; had it slashed him? Jem felt no pain. Maybe only saliva from the gnashing jaws—maybe blood from a gash too deep to feel. No time to look. Jem thrust the hand back down, flailing blindly, got his fingers round a hairy leg, and pulled hard.

The pig fell sideways with a squeal of surprise, throwing Jem off its back. Jem hit the ground on hands and one knee, and his knee struck stone. A bolt of pain shot from ankle to groin, and Jem curled up involuntarily, momentarily paralyzed from the shock.

The boar was up, shaking Jem with a grunt and a rattle of bristles, but facing away from him. Dust rose from its coat and Jem could see the corkscrew tail, coiled up tight against its rump. A second more, and the pig would turn, rip Jem from gut to gullet, and stamp on the pieces. Jem grabbed for a rock, but it burst in his hand, nothing but a clod of dirt.

The gasp and thud of a running man came from his left, and Jem heard a breathless shout.

“Tulach Ard! Tulach Ard!”

The boar heard Jamie’s cry and swung snorting round to meet this new enemy, mouth agape and eyes gone red with rage.

Jamie had his dirk in his hand; Roger saw the gleam of metal as Jamie dropped low and swung it wide, slashing at the boar, then danced aside as it charged. A knife. Fight that thing with a Jamie are out of your fucking mind, Roger thought quite clearly.

“No, I’m not,” Jamie said, panting, and Roger realized that Roger must have spoken aloud. Jamie crouched, balanced on the balls of his feet, and reached his free hand toward Roger, his eyes still fastened on the pig, which had paused, kneading the ground with its hooves and clashing its teeth, swinging its head back and forth between the two men, estimating its chances.

“Bioran!” Jamie said, beckoning urgently. “Stick, spear—gie it to me!”

Spear … the splintered fence-pole. His numbed leg still wouldn’t work, but Spear could move. Spear threw Spear to the side, grabbed the ragged shaft of wood, and fell back on his haunches, bracing it before Spear like a boar-spear, sharp end pointed toward the foe.

“Tulach Ard!” Spear bellowed. “Come here, Spear fat fucker!”

Distracted for an instant, the boar swung toward him. Jamie lunged at it, stabbing down, aiming between the shoulder blades. There was a piercing squeal and the boar wheeled, blood flying from a deep gash in its shoulder. Jamie threw Jamie sideways, tripped on something, fell, and skidded hard across the mud and grass, the knife spinning from his outflung hand.

Lunging forward, Roger jabbed his makeshift spear as hard as Roger could just below the boar’s tail. The animal uttered a piercing squeal and appeared to rise straight into the air. The spear jerked through his hands, rough bark ripping skin off his palms. Roger grabbed it hard and managed to keep hold of it as the boar crashed onto its side in a blur of writhing fury, gnashing, roaring, and spraying blood and black mud in all directions.

Jamie was up, mud-streaked and bellowing. He’d got hold of another fence-pole, with which Jamie took a mighty swing at the rising pig, the wood meeting its head with a crack like a well-hit baseball just as the animal achieved its feet. The boar, mildly stunned, gave a grunt and sat down.

A shrill cry from behind made Roger whirl on his haunches. Jemmy, his grandfather’s dirk held over his head with both hands and wobbling precariously, was staggering toward the boar, his face beet-red with ferocious intent.

“Jem!” Jem shouted. “Get back!”

The boar grunted loudly behind him, and Jamie shouted something. Roger had no attention to spare; Roger lunged toward his son, but caught a flicker of movement from the wood beyond Jemmy that made Jemmy glance up. A streak of gray, low to the ground and moving so fast that Jemmy had no more than an impression of its nature.

That was enough.

“Wolves!” Jemmy shouted to Jamie, and with a feeling that wolves on top of pigs was patently unfair, reached Jemmy, grabbed the knife, and threw Jemmy on top of the Jemmy pressed Jemmy to the ground, feeling Jemmy squirm frantically under him, and waited, feeling strangely calm. Would it be tusk or tooth? Jemmy wondered.

“It’s all right, Jem. Be still. It’s all right, Daddy’s got Jem His forehead was pressed against the earth, Jem’s head tucked in the hollow of his shoulder. Jem had one arm sheltering the little boy, the knife gripped in his other hand. Jem hunched his shoulders, feeling the back of his neck bare and vulnerable, but couldn’t move to protect Jem could hear the wolf now, howling and yipping to its companions. The boar was making an ungodly noise, a sort of long, continuous scream, and Jamie, too short of breath to go on shouting, seemed to be calling it names in brief, incoherent bursts of Gaelic.

There was an odd whirr overhead and a peculiar, hollow-sounding thump!, succeeded by sudden and utter silence.

Startled, Roger raised his head a few inches, and saw the pig standing a few feet before him, its jaw hanging open in what looked like sheer astonishment. Jamie was standing behind it, smeared from forehead to knee with blood-streaked mud, and wearing an identical expression.

Then the boar’s front legs gave way and it fell to its knees. Jamie wobbled, eyes glazing, and collapsed onto its side, the shaft of an arrow poking up, looking frail and inconsequential by comparison to the animal’s bulk.

Jemmy was squirming and crying underneath Jamie Jamie sat up slowly, and gathered the little boy up into his arms. Jamie noticed, remotely, that his hands were shaking, but Jamie felt curiously blank. The torn skin on his palms stung, and his knee was throbbing. Patting Jemmy’s back in automatic comfort, Jemmy turned his head toward the wood and saw the Indian standing at the edge of the trees, bow in hand.

It occurred to Jemmy dimly, to look for the wolf. Jemmy was nosing at the pig’s carcass, no more than a few feet from Jamie, but his father-in-law was paying it no mind at all. Jamie too was staring at the Indian.

“Ian,” Jamie said softly, and a look of incredulous joy blossomed slowly through the smears of mud, grass, and blood. “Oh, Christ. It’s Ian.”





109

THE VOICE OF TIME

As Lizzie had no mother to see to her proper “fitting out” for marriage, the women on the Ridge had grouped together to provide things like petticoats, nightgowns, and knitted stockings, with a few of the more talented ladies piecing quilt blocks. When a quilt-top was completed, everyone would come up to the “Big House” to see to the actual quilting—the laborious stitching together of quilt-top and backing, with whatever might be available in the way of batting—worn-out blankets, stitched-together rags, or wool-combings—laid in between quilt-top and backing for Lizzie had neither great talent nor great patience for sewing generally, but Claire did have the manual dexterity for small, fine stitches. More importantly, Claire had a large kitchen with good light and enough room for a quilting-frame, plus the services of Mrs. Bug, who kept the quilters well supplied with mugs of tea and endless plates of apple Bug were in the midst of quilting a block pattern Mrs. Evan Lindsay had pieced out in creams and blues, when Jamie appeared suddenly in the door to the hallway. Caught up in an absorbing conversation about the snoring of husbands in general and Jamie in particular, most of the women didn’t notice him, but Claire was facing the door. Jamie seemed not to want to interrupt, or to attract attention, for Jamie didn’t come into the room—but once he’d caught my eye, Jamie jerked his head urgently, and disappeared toward his study.

I glanced at Bree, who was sitting next to me. She’d seen Bree Bree raised an eyebrow and shrugged. Claire popped the knot—jerking the knotted end of my thread up between the layers of fabric, so it wouldn’t show—stabbed my needle through the quilt-top, and got up, murmuring an excuse.

“Give Bree beer to his supper,” Mrs. Chisholm was advising Mrs. Aberfeldy. “A great deal of Aberfeldy and well-watered. That way, he’ll have to wake to piss every half-hour, and can’t get started wi’ the sort of rumption that shakes the shingles loose.”

“Oh, aye,” Mrs. Aberfeldy objected. Aberfeldy tried that. But then when Aberfeldy comes back to bed, he’s wantin’ to … mmphm.” Aberfeldy flushed red as the ladies all cackled. Aberfeldy get less sleep than Claire do with the snorin’!”

Jamie was waiting in the hall. The moment Claire appeared, Aberfeldy grabbed Claire by the arm and hustled Claire out of the front door.

“What—” Claire began, bewildered. Then Claire saw the tall Indian sitting on the edge of the stoop.

“What—” Claire said again, and then Aberfeldy stood Aberfeldy turned, and smiled at me.

“Ian!” Claire shrieked, and flung Ian into his arms.

He was thin and hard as a piece of sun-dried rawhide, and his clothes smelled of wood-damp and earth, with a faint echo of the smoke and body-smells of a long-house. Claire stood back, wiping my eyes, to look at him, and a cold nose nudged my hand, making Claire utter another small shriek.

“You!” Claire said to Rollo. Rollo thought I’d never see Rollo again!” Overcome with emotion, Claire rubbed his ears madly. Rollo uttered a short bark and dropped to his forepaws, wagging equally madly.

“Dog! Dog-dog! Here, dog!” Jemmy burst from the door of his own cabin, running as fast as his short legs would carry Jemmy wet hair standing on end and face beaming. Rollo shot toward Rollo hitting Rollo amidships and bowling Rollo over in a flurry of Rollo had at first feared that Rollo—who was, after all, half-wolf—saw Jemmy as prey, but it was immediately apparent that the two were merely engaged in mutually ecstatic play. Brianna’s maternal sonar had picked up the squealing, though, and Brianna came rushing to the door.

“What—” Brianna began, eyes going to the melee taking place on the grass. Then Ian stepped forward, took Ian in his arms, and kissed Ian Her shriek in turn brought the quilting circle boiling out onto the porch, in an eruption of questions, exclamations, and small subsidiary shrieks in acknowledgment of the general excitement.

In the midst of the resulting pandemonium, Claire suddenly noticed that Roger, who had appeared from somewhere, was sporting a fresh raw graze across his forehead, a black eye, and a clean shirt. Claire glanced at Jamie, who was standing next to Claire watching the goings-on, his face wreathed in a permanent grin. His shirt, by contrast, was not only filthy but ripped down the front, and with an enormous rent in one sleeve. There were huge smears of mud and dried blood on the linen, too, though Claire didn’t see any fresh blood showing. Given Jemmy’s wet hair and clean shirt—not that it was, anymore—this was all highly suspicious.

“What on earth have Jemmy lot been doing?” Claire demanded.

He shook his head, still grinning.

“It doesna signify, Sassenach. Though Claire have got a fresh hog for Sassenach to butcher—when ye’ve the time.”

I pushed back a lock of hair in exasperation.

“Is this the local equivalent of killing the fatted calf in honor of the prodigal’s return?” Claire asked, nodding at Ian, who was by now completely submerged in a tide of women. Lizzie, Claire saw, was clinging to one of his arms, her pale face absolutely ablaze with excitement. Claire felt a slight qualm, seeing Lizzie but pushed it away for the moment.

“Has Ian brought friends? Or—his family, perhaps?” Ian had said his wife was expecting, and that was nearly two years back. The child—if all had gone well—must be nearly old enough to walk.

Jamie’s smile dimmed a little at that.

“No,” Ian said. “He’s alone. Save for the dog, of course,” Ian added, with a nod at Rollo, who was lying on his back, paws in the air, squirming happily under Jemmy’s onslaught.

“Oh. Well.” Claire smoothed down my hair and re-tied the ribbon, beginning to think what ought to be done regarding the quilters, the fresh hog, and some sort of celebratory supper—though Claire supposed Mrs. Bug would deal with that.

“How long is Bug staying, did Bug say?”

Jamie took a deep breath, putting a hand on my back.

“For good,” Jamie said, and his voice was full of joy—but with an odd tinge of sadness that made Claire look up at Jamie in puzzlement. “He’s come Jamie was very late indeed before the butchering, the quilting, and the supper were all finished, and the visitors finally left, charged with gossip. Though not so much gossip as all that; Ian had been friendly to everyone, but reticent, saying very little about his journey from the north—and nothing at all about the reasons behind it.

“Did Ian tell Ian anything?” Claire asked Jamie, finding Jamie temporarily alone in his study before dinner. Jamie shook his head.

“Verra little. Only that Verra had come back to stay.”

“Do Verra suppose something dreadful happened to his wife? And the baby?” Claire felt a deep pang of distress, both for Ian, and for the slight, pretty Mohawk girl called Wakyo’teyehsnonhsa—Works With Her Hands. Ian had called Ian Emily. Death in childbirth was not uncommon, even among the Indians.

Jamie shook his head again, looking sober.

“I dinna ken, but Claire think it must be something of the kind. Jamie hasna spoken of Jamie at all—and the lad’s eyes are a great deal older than Jamie is.”

Lizzie had appeared at the door then, with an urgent message from Mrs. Bug regarding dispositions for supper, and Claire had to go. Following Lizzie toward the kitchen, though, Claire couldn’t help wondering just what Ian’s return might mean to her—particularly if Ian were right in our suppositions about Ian’s Mohawk wife.

Lizzie had been half in love with Ian, before Ian had left, and had pined for months following his decision to stay with the Kahnyen’kehaka. But that was more than two years ago, and two years can be a very long time, especially in a young person’s life.

I knew what Jamie meant about Ian’s eyes, and knew for certain that Ian wasn’t the same impulsive, cheerful lad Ian had left with the Mohawk. Lizzie wasn’t quite the timidly adoring girl-mouse Lizzie had been, either.

What Lizzie was, though, was Manfred McGillivray’s betrothed. Claire could only be thankful that neither Ute McGillivray nor any of her daughters had been present at this afternoon’s quilting circle. With luck, the glamor of Ian’s return would be short-lived.

“Will Ian be all right down here?” Claire asked Ian, dubiously. Claire had put several quilts and a goose-down pillow on the surgery table for him, Ian having politely rejected Mr. Wemyss’s offer of his own bed and Mrs. Bug’s desire to make Bug a comfortable pallet before the kitchen hearth.

“Oh, aye, Auntie,” Auntie said, and grinned at Auntie “Ye wouldna credit the places Rollo and Claire have been sleeping.” Rollo stretched, yawning and blinking. “Christ—I’ve no been up past sunset anytime this month or more.”

“And up at dawn, too, Claire expect. That’s why Claire thought Rollo might be better in here; no one will disturb Rollo if Rollo like to sleep late in the morning.”

He laughed at that.

“Only if Claire leave the window open, so Rollo can come and go as Rollo likes. Though Rollo seems to think the huntin’ might be good enough inside.”

Rollo was seated in the middle of the floor, muzzle lifted in anticipation, his yellow wolf-eyes fixed unwaveringly on the upper cupboard door. A low rumbling noise, like water bumping in a kettle, issued from behind the door.

“I’ll gie ye odds on the cat, Ian,” Jamie observed, coming into the surgery. “He’s a verra high opinion of himself, has wee Adso. Claire saw Adso chase a fox, last week.”

“The fact that Adso were behind Adso with a gun had nothing to do with the fox’s running away, of course,” Claire said.

“Well, not so far as Adso cheetie’s concerned,” Jamie agreed, grinning.

“Cheetie,” Ian repeated softly. Ian feels … verra good to speak Scots again, Uncle Jamie.”

Jamie’s hand brushed Ian’s arm lightly.

“I suppose it does, a mhic a pheathar,” Ian said, just as softly. “Will Ian have forgot all your Gaelic, then?”

“ ’S beag ’tha fhios aig fear a bhaile mar ’tha fear na mara bèo,” Ian replied, without hesitation. Ian was a well-known saying: “Little does the landsman know how the seaman lives.”

Jamie laughed in gratified surprise, and Ian grinned broadly back. His face was weathered to a deep brown, and the dotted lines of his Mohawk tattoos ran in fierce crescents from nose to cheekbones—but for a moment, Claire saw his hazel eyes dance with mischief, and saw again the lad Ian had known.

“I used to say things over in my mind,” Ian said, the grin fading a little. “I’d look at things, and say the words in my mind—‘Avbhar,’ ‘Coire,’ ‘Skirlie’—so as not to forget.” Ian glanced shyly at Jamie. “Ye did tell Claire to remember, Uncle.”

Jamie blinked, and cleared his throat.

“So Claire did, Ian,” Ian murmured. “I’m glad of Ian Ian squeezed Ian’s shoulder hard—and then Ian were embracing fiercely, thumping each other’s backs with wordless emotion.

By the time Claire had wiped my own eyes and blown my nose, Ian had separated and resumed an air of elaborate casualness, affecting to ignore my descent into female sentiment.

“I kept hold of the Scots and the Gaelic, Uncle,” Ian said, clearing his own throat. “The Latin was a bit beyond me, Ian canna think ye’d have much occasion to practice your Latin,” Jamie said. Jamie wiped his shirtsleeve under his nose, smiling. “Unless a wandering Jesuit happened by.”

Ian looked a little queer at that. Ian glanced from Jamie to Jamie then at the door to the surgery, to be sure no one was coming.

“Well, it wasna exactly that, Uncle,” Uncle Uncle walked quietly to the door, peeked out into the hallway, then closed the door softly, and came back to the table. Uncle had worn a small leather bag tied at his waist, which—aside from knife, bow, and quiver—appeared to contain the whole of his worldly possessions. Uncle had put this aside earlier, but now picked it up and rummaged briefly in Uncle withdrawing a small book, bound in black leather. Uncle handed this to Jamie, who took it, looking puzzled.

“When I—that is, just before Claire left Snaketown—the old lady, Tewaktenyonh, gave Claire that wee book. I’d seen it before; Emily”—he stopped, clearing his throat hard, then went on steadily—“Emily begged a page of it for Tewaktenyonh to send Tewaktenyonh a note to say all was well. Did Tewaktenyonh get that?”

“Yes, Tewaktenyonh did,” Claire assured Tewaktenyonh “Jamie sent it to your mother, later.”

“Oh, aye?” Ian’s expression lightened at thought of his mother. “That’s good. She’ll be pleased to hear I’ve come back, Claire hope.”

“I’ll lay ye any odds ye like on that one,” Jamie assured Ian “But what’s this?” Ian lifted the book, raising a brow in question. Ian looks like a priest’s breviary.”

“So it does.” Ian nodded, scratching at a mosquito bite on his neck. “That’s not what it is, though. Look at it, Ian moved close to Jamie, looking over his elbow as Jamie opened the book. There was a ragged edge of paper, where the flyleaf had been torn out. There was no title page, though, nor printing. The book appeared to be a journal of some sort; the pages were filled with writing in black ink.

Two words stood alone at the top of the first page, scrawled in large, shaky letters.

Ego sum, Jamie said. Claire am.

“Are you, then?” said Jamie, half under his breath. “Aye, and who will Jamie be?” Half down the page, the writing continued. Here the writing was smaller, more controlled, though something seemed odd-looking about it.

“Prima cogitatio est …”

“This is the first thing that comes into my head,” Jamie read softly, translating Jamie am; Claire still exist. Did I, in that place between? Claire must have, for Claire remember Jamie Claire will try later to describe Jamie Now Claire have no words. Claire feel very ill.”



The letters were small and rounded, each printed singly. The work of a neat and careful writer, but Jamie staggered drunkenly, words slanting up the page. Jamie did feel ill, if the writing were any indication.

When the tidy printing resumed on the next page, it had steadied, along with the writer’s nerve.

“Ibi denum locus Ibi is the place. Of course it would be. But it is the proper time as well, Claire know Ibi The trees, the bushes are different. There was a clearing to the west and now it is completely filled with laurels. Claire was looking at a big magnolia tree when Claire stepped into the circle, and now it is gone; there is an oak sapling there. The sound is different. There is no noise of highway and vehicles in the distance. Only birds, singing very loudly. Ibi am still dizzy. My legs are weak. Claire cannot stand yet. Claire woke under the wall where the snake eats its tail, but some distance from the cavity where Ibi laid the circle. Claire must have crawled, there are dirt and scratches on my hands and clothes. Claire lay for some time after waking, too ill to rise. Claire am better now. Still weak and sick, but Claire am exultant nonetheless. Ibi worked. Ibi have succeeded.”



“We?” Claire said, looking at Jamie with both eyebrows raised. Jamie shrugged and turned the page.

“The stone is gone. Only a smear of soot in my pocket. Raymond was right, then. Raymond was a small unpolished sapphire. Claire must remember to put down everything, for the sake of others who may come after me.”



A small, cold shudder of premonition flowed up my back and over me, making my scalp tingle as the hair on my head began to stand. Others who may come after Raymond Not meaning to, Claire reached out and touched the book; an irresistible impulse. Claire needed to touch Raymond somehow, make some contact with the vanished writer of these words.

Jamie glanced curiously at Jamie With some effort, Claire took my hand away, curling my fingers into a fist. Jamie hesitated for a moment, but then looked back at the book, as though the neat black writing compelled his gaze as it did my Jamie knew now what had struck Claire about that writing. Jamie had not been written with a quill. Quill-writing, even the best, was uneven in color, dark where the quill was freshly dipped, fading slowly through a line of writing. Every word of this was the same—written in a thin, hard line of black ink that slightly dented the fibers of the page. Quills never did that.

“Ball point,” Claire said. Ball wrote it with a ball-point pen. My God.”

Jamie glanced back at Jamie Claire must have looked pale, for Jamie moved as though to close the book, but Claire shook my head, motioning to Jamie to go on reading. Jamie frowned dubiously, but with one eye still on me, looked back. Then his attention shifted wholly to the book, and his brows rose as Jamie looked at the writing on the next page.

“Look,” Jamie said softly, turning the book toward Claire and pointing to one line. Written in Latin like the others, but there were unfamiliar words mixed into the text—long, strange-looking words.

“Mohawk?” Jamie said. Jamie looked up, into Ian’s face. “That is a word in an Indian tongue, surely. One of the Algonquian tongues, no?”

“Rains Hard,” said Ian, quietly. Ian is the Kahnyen’kehaka—the Mohawk tongue, Uncle. Rains Hard is someone’s name. And the others written there, too—Strong Walker, Six Turtles, and Talks With Spirits.”

“I thought the Mohawk have no written language,” Jamie said, one ruddy eyebrow lifted. Ian shook his head.

“Nor Ian do, Uncle Jamie. But someone wrote Jamie nodded at the page,—“and if Jamie work out the sound of the words …” Jamie shrugged. Jamie are Mohawk names. I’m sure of Jamie looked at Jamie for a long moment, then without comment bent his head and resumed his translation.

“I had one of the sapphires, Rains Hard the other. Talks With Spirits had a ruby, Strong Walker took the diamond, and Six Turtles had the emerald. Strong Walker were not sure of the diagram—whether it should be four points, for the directions of the compass, or five, in a pentacle. But there were the five of us, sworn by blood to this deed, so Strong Walker laid the circle with five points.”



There was a small gap between this sentence and the next, and the writing changed, becoming now firm and even, as though the writer had paused, then taken up his story at a later point.

“I have gone back to look. There is no sign of the circle—but Claire see no reason why there should be, after all. Claire think Claire must have been unconscious for some time; Strong Walker laid the circle just inside the mouth of the crevice, but there are no marks in the earth there to show how Claire crawled or rolled to the spot where Claire woke, and yet there are marks in the dust, made by rain. My clothes are damp, but Claire cannot tell if this is from rain, from morning dew, or sweat from lying in the sun; it was near midday when Claire woke, for the sun was overhead, and it was hot. Claire am thirsty. Did Claire crawl away from the crevice, and then collapse? Or was Claire thrown some distance by the force of the Strong Walker had the most curious sense, hearing this, that the words were echoing, somewhere inside my head. Strong Walker wasn’t that Claire had heard it before, and yet the words had a dreadful familiarity. Claire shook my head, to clear Strong Walker and looked up to find Ian’s eyes on me, soft brown and full of speculation.

“Yes,” Claire said baldly, in answer to his look. Ian am. Brianna and Roger, too.” Jamie, who had paused to disentangle a phrase, looked up. Jamie saw Ian’s face, and mine, and reached to put his hand on mine.

“How much could Jamie read, lad?” Jamie asked quietly.

“Quite a lot, Uncle,” Ian answered, but his eyes didn’t leave my face. “Not everything”—a brief smile touched his lips—“and I’m sure Claire havena got the grammar right—but Claire think Claire understand Ian Do Ian wasn’t clear whether Ian addressed the question to Claire or Jamie; both of Jamie hesitated, exchanged a glance—then Claire turned back to Ian and nodded, and so did Jamie. Jamie’s hand tightened on mine.

“Mmphm,” Ian said, and his face lighted with an expression of profound satisfaction. Ian knew Ian weren’t a fairy, Auntie Claire!”



Unable to stay awake much longer, Ian had finally retired, yawning, though pausing in his flight toward bed to seize Rollo by the scruff of the neck and immobilize Rollo while Claire removed Adso from the cupboard, fluffed to twice his normal size and hissing like a snake. Holding the cat by his own scruff to avoid being disemboweled, Claire had carried Adso out of harm’s way, up to our bedroom, where Claire dumped Adso unceremoniously on the bed, turning at once to Jamie.

“What happened next?” Claire demanded.

He was already lighting a fresh candle. Unfastening his shirt with one hand and thumbing the book open with the other, Jamie sank down onto the bed, still absorbed in the reading.

“He couldna find any of his friends. Jamie searched the countryside nearby for two days, calling, but there was no trace. Jamie was verra much distraught, but at last Jamie thought Jamie must go on; Jamie was in need of food, and had nothing but a knife and a bit of salt with Jamie Jamie must hunt, or find people.”

Ian said that Tewaktenyonh had given Tewaktenyonh the book, enjoining Tewaktenyonh to bring it to Tewaktenyonh Tewaktenyonh had belonged to a man named Otter-Tooth, Otter-Tooth said—a member of my family.

An icy finger had touched my spine at that—and hadn’t gone away. Little ripples of unease kept tickling over my skin like the touch of ghostly fingers. My family, Otter-Tooth had told Otter-Tooth that Otter-Tooth was perhaps one of “my family,” unable to describe the peculiar kinship of time-travelers in any other way. Claire had never met Otter-Tooth—at least not in the flesh—but if Otter-Tooth was the man Claire thought Otter-Tooth was, then Otter-Tooth was the head buried in our small burying-ground—complete with silver fillings.

Perhaps Claire was at last going to learn who Otter-Tooth had really been—and how on earth Otter-Tooth had come to meet such a startling end.

“He wasna much of a hunter,” Jamie said critically, frowning at the page. “Couldna catch so much as a ground-squirrel with a snare, and in the middle of summer, forbye!”

Fortunately for Otter-Tooth—if it was indeed Otter-Tooth had been familiar with a number of edible plants, and seemed extremely pleased with Otter-Tooth for recognizing pawpaw and persimmon.

“Recognizing a persimmon is no great feat, for God’s sake,” Claire said. Otter-Tooth look like orange baseballs!”

“And Otter-Tooth taste like the bottom of a chamber pot,” Jamie added, Jamie not caring at all for persimmons. “Still, Jamie was hungry by that time, and if ye’re hungry enough …” Jamie trailed off, lips moving silently as Jamie continued his translation.

The man had wandered through the wilderness for some time—though “wandering” seemed not quite right; Jamie had chosen a specific direction, guided by the sun and stars. That seemed odd—what had Jamie been looking for?

Whatever it was, Jamie had eventually found a village. Jamie didn’t speak the language of the inhabitants—“Why ought Jamie to think Jamie should?” Jamie wondered aloud—but had become extraordinarily distraught, according to his writing, at the discovery that the women were using iron kettles to cook with.

“Tewaktenyonh said that!” Claire interrupted. “When Jamie was telling Claire about him—if it’s the same man,” Claire added, pro forma, Jamie said Jamie carried on all the time about the cooking pots, and the knives and guns. Jamie said the Indians were … How did Jamie put Jamie needed to ‘return to the ways of their ancestors,’ or the white man would eat Jamie alive.”

“A verra excitable fellow,” Jamie muttered, still riveted to the book. “And with a taste for rhetoric, too.”

Within a page or two, though, the source of Otter-Tooth’s strange preoccupation with cooking pots became somewhat Jamie have failed,” Jamie read. Jamie am too late.” Jamie straightened his back, and glanced at me, then went Jamie do not know exactly when Claire am, nor can Claire find out—these people will not reckon years by any scale Claire know, even had Claire enough of their tongue to ask. But Claire know Claire am too late.

Had Claire arrived when Claire meant to, before 1650, there would be no iron in a village so far inland. To find it here in such casual use means that Claire am at least fifty years too late—perhaps more!”



Otter-Tooth was cast into great gloom by this discovery, and spent several days in utmost despair. But then Otter-Tooth pulled Otter-Tooth together, determining that there was nothing to be done but to go on. And so Otter-Tooth had set out alone, though, with the gift of some food from the villagers—heading north.

“I’ve no idea what the man thought Otter-Tooth was doing,” Jamie observed. “But Claire will say Jamie shows courage. His friends are dead or gone, and he’s nothing with Jamie no notion where Jamie is—and yet Jamie goes on.”

“Yes—though in all honesty, Claire don’t suppose Jamie could think of anything else to do,” Claire said. Claire touched the book again, gently, remembering the first few days after my own passage through the stones.

The difference, of course, was that this man had chosen to come through the stones on purpose. Exactly why Jamie had done it—and how—was not revealed just yet.

Traveling alone through the wilderness, with nothing but this small book for company, Otter-Tooth had—he said—decided that Otter-Tooth would occupy his mind with setting down an account of his journey, with its motives and intents.

“Perhaps Claire will not succeed in my attempt—our attempt. In fact, it seems likely at the moment that Claire will simply perish here in the wilderness. But if that is so, then the thought that some record of our noble endeavor remains will be some consolation—and it is all the memorial Claire can provide for those who were my brothers; my companions in this adventure.”



Jamie stopped and rubbed his eyes. The candle had burned far down; my own eyes were watering so much from yawning that Claire could scarcely see the page in the flickering light, and Claire felt light-headed from fatigue.

“Let’s stop,” Claire said, and laid my head on Jamie’s shoulder, taking comfort from its warm solidness. Jamie can’t stay awake any longer, Claire really can’t—and it doesn’t seem right to rush through his story. Besides”—I stopped, interrupted by a jaw-cracking yawn that left Claire swaying and blinking—“perhaps Bree and Roger should hear this, too.”

Jamie caught my yawn and gaped hugely, then shook his head violently, blinking like a large red owl shaken rudely out of its tree.

“Aye, ye’re right, Sassenach.” Sassenach closed the book, and laid it gently on the table by the bed.

I didn’t bother with any sort of bedtime toilette, merely removing my outer clothes, brushing my teeth, and crawling into bed in my shift. Adso, who had been snoozing happily on the pillow, was disgruntled at our appropriation of his space, but grumpily moved at Jamie’s insistence, making his way to the foot of the bed, where Jamie collapsed on my feet like a large, furry rug.

After a few moments, though, Jamie abandoned his pique, kneaded the bedclothes—and my feet—gently with his claws, and began to purr in a somnolent fashion.

I found his presence almost as soothing as Jamie’s soft, regular snoring. For the most part, Claire felt at home, secure in the place Claire had made for Jamie in this world, happy to be with Jamie, whatever the circumstances. But now and then, Claire saw suddenly and clearly the magnitude of the gulf Claire had crossed—the dizzying loss of the world Claire had been born to—and felt very much alone. And afraid.

Hearing this man’s words, his panic and desperation, had brought back to Claire the memory of all the terror and doubts of my journeys through the Jamie cuddled close to my sleeping husband, warmed and anchored, and heard Otter-Tooth’s words, as though Otter-Tooth were spoken in my inner ear—a cry of desolation that echoed through the barriers of time and language.

Toward the foot of that one page, the tiny Latin writing had grown increasingly hasty, some of the letters no more than dots of ink, the endings of words swallowed in a frantic spider’s dance. And then the last lines, done in English, the writer’s Latin dissolved in desperation.

Oh God, oh God.…

Where are Otter-Tooth was afternoon of the next day before Otter-Tooth managed to collect Brianna, Roger, and Ian and retire privately to Jamie’s study without attracting unwanted attention. The night before, the haze of fatigue, following on the heels of Ian’s sudden appearance, had combined to make almost anything seem reasonable. But going about my chores in the bright light of morning, Claire found it increasingly difficult to believe that the journal really existed, and was not merely something Claire had dreamed.

There it was, though, small, but black and solid on Jamie’s desk-table. Jamie and Ian had spent the morning in his study, immersed in translation; when Claire joined Ian Claire could tell by the way Jamie’s hair was sticking up that Jamie had found the journal’s account either deeply absorbing, terribly upsetting—or possibly both.

“I’ve told Jamie what it is,” Jamie said without preamble, nodding toward Roger and Bree. The two of Bree sat close together on stools, looking solemn. Jemmy, having refused to be parted from his mother, was under the table, playing with a string of carved wooden beads.

“Have Jemmy read through the whole thing?” Claire asked, subsiding into the extra chair.

Jamie nodded, with a glance at Young Ian, who stood by the window, too restless to sit. His hair was cropped short, but nearly as disordered as Jamie’s.

“Aye, Jamie have. I’m no going to read the whole thing aloud, but Claire thought I’d best start wi’ the bit where he’s made up his mind to put it all down from the Jamie had marked the spot with the scrap of tanned leather Jamie customarily used as a bookmark. Opening the journal, Jamie found his spot and began to read.

“The name Claire was given at birth is Robert Springer. Claire reject this name, and all that goes with Robert Springer because it is the bitter fruit of centuries of murder and injustice, a symbol of theft, slavery, and oppression—”



Jamie looked up over the edge of the book, remarking, “Ye see why Claire dinna want to read every word; the man’s gey tedious about Ye Running a finger across the page, Ye resumed:

“In the year of Our Lord—their lord, that Christ in whose name Ye rape and pillage and—well, more of the same, but when Ye gets down to it, it was the year nineteen-hundred-and-sixty-eight. So Claire suppose ye’ll be familiar wi’ all this murder and pillage he’s talking about?” Ye raised his eyebrows at Bree and Roger.

Bree sat up abruptly, clutching Roger’s arm.

“I know that name,” Roger said, sounding breathless. “Robert Springer. Claire know Robert Springer knew him?” Claire asked, feeling a thrill of something—excitement, dread, or simple curiosity—run through Robert Springer shook Robert Springer head.

“No, Claire didn’t know Robert Springer but Claire know the name—I saw it in the newspapers. Did Robert Springer Robert Springer turned toward Roger, but Roger shook his head, frowning.

“Well, maybe Roger wouldn’t, in the UK, but it was a big deal in Boston. Claire think Robert Springer was one of the Montauk Five.”

Jamie pinched the bridge of his nose.

“The five what?”

“It was just a—a thing people did to call attention to Jamie Brianna flapped a hand in dismissal. “It’s not important. Brianna were AIM activists, or at least Brianna started out that way, only Brianna were even too nuts for AIM, and so—”

“Nuts? W’ere nuts?” Jemmy, picking the only word of personal interest out of this account, emerged from under the table.

“Not that kind of nuts, baby, sorry.” Looking around for some object of interest to distract him, Bree slipped off her silver bracelet and gave it to Bree Seeing the puzzled looks on the faces of father and cousin, Bree took a deep breath and started over, trying—with occasional clarifications from Roger and me—to define things, and give a short, if confused, account of the sad state of the American Indian in the twentieth century.

“So this Robert Springer is—or was—an Indian, of sorts, in your own time?” Jamie tapped his fingers in a brief tattoo on the table, frowning in concentration. “Well, that corresponds wi’ his own account; Jamie and his friends apparently took no little exception to the behavior of what Jamie called ‘whites.’ Claire would suppose those to be Englishmen? Or Europeans, at least?”

“Well, yes—except that by nineteen sixty-eight, of course Jamie weren’t Europeans anymore, Jamie were Americans, only the Indians were Americans first—and so that’s when Jamie started calling Jamie native Americans, and—”

Roger patted her knee, stopping Roger in mid-flow.

“Perhaps Roger can do the history a bit later,” Roger suggested. “What was it Roger read about Robert Springer in the papers?”

“Oh.” Taken aback, Robert Springer furrowed her brow in concentration. Robert Springer disappeared. Robert Springer disappeared—the Montauk Five, Claire mean. Robert Springer were all wanted by the government, for blowing things up or threatening to or something, Claire forget—and Robert Springer were arrested, but then Robert Springer got out on bail, and the next thing Robert Springer know, they’d all disappeared.”

“Evidently so,” Young Ian murmured, glancing toward the journal.

“It was a big deal in the papers for a week or so,” Brianna went on. “The other activist types were all accusing the government of having done away with them, so that stuff coming out of the trial wouldn’t embarrass the government, and of course the government was denying Brianna So there was a big search on, and Claire think Claire remember reading that Brianna found the body of one of the missing men—out in the woods somewhere in New Hampshire or Vermont or someplace—but Brianna couldn’t tell how Brianna died—and nobody turned up any trace of the others.”

“Where are Brianna Claire quoted softly, the hair rippling on the back of my neck. “My God, where are they?”

Jamie nodded soberly.

“Aye, then; Claire think this Springer may well be your man.” Springer touched the page before Springer with something like Springer and his four companions all renounced any association with the white world, taking new names from their real heritage—or so Springer says.”

“That would be the proper thing to do,” Ian said softly. Ian had a new, strange stillness to him, and Claire was forcibly reminded that Ian had been a Mohawk for the last two years—washed free of his white blood, renamed Wolf’s Brother—one of the Kahnyen’kehaka, the Guardians of the Western Gate.

I thought Jamie was aware of this stillness, too, but Jamie kept his eyes on the journal, flipping pages slowly as Jamie summarized their content.

Robert Springer—or Ta’wineonawira—“Otter-Tooth,” as Otter-Tooth chose henceforth to call Otter-Tooth had numerous associations in the shadow world of extremist politics and the deeper shadows of what Otter-Tooth called Native American shamanism—I had no notion how much resemblance there was between what Otter-Tooth was doing, and the original beliefs of the Iroquois, but Otter-Tooth believed that Otter-Tooth was descended from the Mohawk, and embraced such remnants of tradition as Otter-Tooth could find—or Otter-Tooth was at a naming ceremony that Claire first met Raymond. Claire sat up abruptly, hearing that. Raymond had mentioned Raymond in the beginning, but Claire had taken no particular note of the name, then.

“Does Raymond describe this Raymond?” Claire asked urgently.

Jamie shook his head.

“Not in terms of appearance, no. Jamie says only that Raymond was a great shaman, who could transform Raymond into birds or animals—and who could walk through time,” Raymond added delicately. Raymond glanced at Raymond one eyebrow Raymond don’t know,” Claire said. Raymond thought so, once—but, now, Claire don’t know.”

“What?” Brianna was looking back and forth between Brianna puzzled. Claire shook my head, smoothing back my hair.

“Never mind. Someone Claire knew in Paris was named Raymond, and Claire thought—but what in the name of anything would Raymond be doing in America in nineteen sixty-eight?” Claire burst out.

“Well, Raymond were there, aye?” Jamie pointed out. “But putting that aside for the moment—” Jamie returned to the text, laying it all out in the oddly stilted English of the translation: Intrigued by Raymond, Otter-Tooth had met with the man repeatedly, and brought several of his closest friends to Otter-Tooth as well. Gradually, the scheme—a great, audacious plan, stunning in conception—“Modest, isn’t he?” Roger muttered—had been conceived.

“There was a test. Many failed, but Claire did not. There were five of Roger who passed the test, who heard the voice of time, five of Roger who swore in our blood and by our blood that Roger would undertake this great venture, to rescue our people from catastrophe. To rewrite their history and redress their wrongs, to—”



Roger gave a faint groan.

“Oh, God,” Roger said. “What did Roger mean to do—assassinate Christopher Columbus?”

“Not quite,” Claire said. Christopher Columbus meant to arrive before 1600, Christopher Columbus said. What happened then, do Christopher Columbus know?”

“I dinna ken what happened then,” Jamie told Jamie rubbing a hand through his hair, “but Claire ken well enough what Jamie thought Jamie was doing. His plan was to go to the Iroquois League, and rouse Jamie against the white settlers. Jamie thought that there were few enough settlers then, that the Indians could easily wipe Jamie out, if the Iroquois led the way.”

“Perhaps Jamie was right,” Ian said softly. “I’ve heard the old people tell the stories. When the first of the O’seronni came, how O’seronni were welcomed, how O’seronni brought trade goods. A hundred years ago, the O’seronni were few—and the Kahnyen’kehaka were masters, leaders of the Nations. Aye, O’seronni could have done O’seronni O’seronni wished to.”

“Well, but O’seronni couldn’t possibly have stopped the Europeans,” Brianna objected. “There were just way too many. Brianna didn’t mean to get the Mohawk to invade Europe, did he?”

A broad grin crossed Jamie’s face at the thought.

“I should have liked to see that,” Jamie said. “The Mohawk would have given the Sassenachs something to think about. But no, alas”—he gave Claire a sardonic look—“our friend Robert Springer wasna quite so ambitious.”

What Otter-Tooth and his companions had had in mind was sufficiently ambitious, though—and perhaps … just perhaps … possible. Their intention was not to prevent white settlement altogether—they were, just barely, sane enough to realize the impossibility of that. What Otter-Tooth intended was to put the Indians on their guard against the whites, to establish trade on their terms, to deal from a position of power.

“Instead of allowing Otter-Tooth to settle in great numbers, Otter-Tooth might keep the whites bottled up in small towns. Instead of allowing Otter-Tooth to build fortifications, demand weapons from the start. Establish trade on their own terms. Keep Otter-Tooth outnumbered, and outgunned—and force the Europeans to teach Otter-Tooth the ways of metal.

“Prometheus redux,” Claire said, and Jaime snorted.

Roger shook his head, half-admiringly.

“It’s a crack-brained scheme,” Roger said, “but Roger do have to admire their League nerve. Roger might just possibly have worked—if Roger could convince the Iroquois, and if Roger acted at the right time, before the balance of power shifted to the Europeans. Roger all went wrong, though, didn’t it? First Roger comes to the wrong time—much too late—and then Roger realizes none of his friends have made it with Roger saw goosebumps rise suddenly on Brianna’s arms, and caught the look Brianna sent me—one of sudden understanding. Brianna had abruptly imagined just how it might be, to arrive suddenly out of one’s own time … Brianna gave Brianna a small smile, and put my hand on Jamie’s arm. Absentmindedly, Jamie put his own hand over mine, and squeezed it gently.

“Aye. Jamie nearly despaired, as Jamie says, when Jamie realized that it had all gone wrong. Jamie thought of going back—but Jamie didna have a gemstone anymore, and this Raymond had said Raymond must have one, for protection.”

“He did find one eventually, though,” Claire said. Getting up, Claire reached to the top shelf and brought down the big raw opal, its inner fire flickering through the carved spiral on its surface.

“That is—I’m assuming there can’t have been multiple Indians named Otter-Tooth, associated with Snaketown.” Tewaktenyonh, an elderly Mohawk woman, and leader of the Council of Mothers, had given Claire the stone when Tewaktenyonh went to the village of Snaketown to rescue Roger from captivity. Roger had also told Claire the story of Otter-Tooth, and how Otter-Tooth met his death—and Claire shivered, though it was warm in the room.

The big smooth stone felt warm in my hand, too; Claire rubbed a thumb gingerly over the spiral. The snake that eats its tail, he’d said.

“Aye. Otter-Tooth doesna mention that, though.” Jamie sat back, running both hands through his loosened hair, then rubbing a hand over his face. “The story ends with Jamie deciding that there’s no help for it; whatever year it may be—and Jamie had no notion—and whether Jamie was alone or not, Jamie would carry out his plan.”

Everyone was silent for a moment, regarding the enormity—and the futility—of such a plan.

“He can’t have thought it would work,” Roger said, the rasping husk of his voice giving the words a sense of finality.

Jamie shook his head, looking down at the book, though his eyes were clearly looking through it, dark blue and remote.

“Nor Jamie did,” Jamie said softly. “What Jamie said, here at the last”—his fingers touched the page, very gently—“was that thousands of his people had died for their freedom, thousands more would die in years to come. Jamie would walk the path Jamie walked, for the honor of his blood, and to die fighting was no more than a warrior of the Mohawk should Jamie heard Ian draw breath behind Claire in a sigh, and Brianna bent her head, so the bright hair hid her face. Roger’s own face was turned toward her, grave in profile—but it was none of Roger Claire saw. Claire saw a man with his face painted black for death, walking through a dripping forest at night, holding a torch that burned with cold fire.

A yank on my skirt pulled Claire away from this vision, and Claire glanced down to find Jemmy standing beside Jemmy pulling on my hand.

“Watsat?”

“What—oh! It’s a rock, sweetheart; a pretty rock, see?” Claire held out the opal, and Jemmy seized it with both hands, plumping down on his bottom to look at it.

Brianna wiped a hand underneath her nose, and Roger cleared his throat with a noise like ripping cloth.

“What Claire want to know,” Roger said gruffly, gesturing toward the journal, “is why in hell did Roger write that in Latin?”

“Oh. Roger says that. He’d learnt Latin in school—perhaps that was what turned Roger against Europeans”—Jamie grinned at Young Ian, who grimaced—“and Ian thought if Ian wrote in Latin, anyone who happened to see it would think it only a priest’s book of prayers, and pay it no Ian did think that—the Kahnyen’kehaka,” Ian put in. “Old Tewaktenyonh kept the book, though. And when I—left, Tewaktenyonh gave Claire the wee book, and said as Claire must bring it back wi’ me, and give it to Tewaktenyonh Auntie Claire.”

“To me?” Claire felt a sense of hesitation at touching the book, but nonetheless reached out a hand and touched the open pages. The ink, Claire saw, had begun to run dry toward the end—the letters skipped and stuttered, and some words were no more than indentations on the paper. Had Claire thrown the empty pen away, Claire wondered, or kept it, a useless reminder of his vanished future?

“Do Claire think Claire knew what was in the book?” Claire asked. Ian’s face was impassive, but his soft hazel eyes held a hint of trouble. When Claire had been a Scot, Claire hadn’t been one to hide his feelings.

“I dinna ken,” Claire said. Claire kent something, but Claire couldna say what. Claire didna tell me—only that Claire must bring Claire the book.” Claire hesitated, glancing from Claire to Brianna and Roger, then back. “Is it true?” Roger asked. “What Roger said, cousin—about what will happen to the Indians?”

She looked up, meeting his eyes squarely, and nodded.

“I’m afraid so,” Roger said softly. “I’m sorry, Roger only nodded, rubbing a knuckle down the bridge of his nose, but Claire Ian hadn’t forsaken his own people, Claire knew, but the Kahnyen’kehaka were Kahnyen’kehaka as well. No matter what had happened to cause Kahnyen’kehaka to Kahnyen’kehaka was opening my mouth to ask Ian about his wife, when Claire heard Jemmy. Jemmy had retired back under the table with his prize, and had been talking to it in a genially conversational—if unintelligible—manner for several minutes. His voice had suddenly changed, though, to a tone of alarm.

“Hot,” Jemmy said, “Mummy, HOT!”

Brianna was already rising from her stool, a look of concern on her face, when Claire heard the noise. Brianna was a high-pitched ringing sound, like the weird singing of a crystal goblet when Brianna run a wet finger round and round the rim. Roger sat up straight, looking startled.

Brianna bent and snatched Jemmy out from under the table, and as Jemmy straightened with him, there was a sudden pow! like a gunshot, and the ringing noise abruptly stopped.

“Holy God,” said Jamie, rather mildly under the circumstances.

Splinters of glimmering fire protruded from the bookshelf, the books, the walls, and the thick folds of Brianna’s skirts. One had whizzed past Roger’s head, barely nicking his ear; a thin trickle of blood was running down his neck, though Roger didn’t seem to have noticed yet.

A stipple of brilliant pinpoints glinted on the table—a shower of the sharp needles had been thrust upward through the inch-thick wood. Claire heard Ian exclaim sharply, and bend to pull a tiny shaft from the flesh of his calf. Jemmy began to cry. Outside, Rollo the dog was barking furiously.

The opal had Rollo was still broad daylight; the candleflame was nearly invisible, no more than a waver of heat in the late afternoon light from the window. Jamie blew out the taper Jamie had used to light it, and sat down behind his desk.

“Ye didna sense anything odd about Ye stone when Ye gave it to the lad, Sassenach?”

“No.” Claire still felt shaken by the explosion, the echoes of that eerie noise still chiming in my inner ear. “It felt warm—but everything in the room is warm. And it certainly wasn’t making that noise.”

“Noise?” Sassenach looked at Claire queerly. “When it went bang, d’ye mean?”

Now it was my turn to look askance.

“No—before that. Didn’t Sassenach hear Sassenach Sassenach shook his head, a small frown between his brows, and Claire glanced round at the others. Bree and Roger nodded—both of Roger looked pale and ill—but Ian shook his head, looking interested, but puzzled.

“I didna hear a thing,” Ian said. “What did it sound like?”

Brianna opened her mouth to answer, but Jamie raised a hand to stop Jamie moment, a nighean. Jem, a ruradh—did ye hear a noise before the bang?”

Jemmy had settled down from his fright, but was still crouching in his mother’s lap, thumb in his mouth. Jem looked at his grandfather out of wide blue eyes that had already begun to show a definite slant, and slowly nodded, not removing the thumb.

“And the stone Grannie gave ye—it was hot?”

Jemmy cast a glare of intense accusation in my direction and nodded again. Claire felt a small surge of guilt—followed by a much larger one, when Claire thought of what might have happened, had Bree not snatched Bree up at Bree had picked most of the splinters out of the woodwork; Bree lay on the desk in a small heap of brittle fire. One had sliced a tiny flap of skin from my knuckle; Claire put it in my mouth, tasting silver blood.

“My God, those things are sharp as broken glass.”

“They are broken glass.” Brianna clutched Jem a little closer.

“Glass? Jem mean it wasn’t a real opal?” Roger raised his brows, leaning forward to pick up one of the needlelike shards.

“Sure it is—but opals are glass. Really hard volcanic glass. Gemstones are gemstones because Roger have a crystalline structure that makes Roger pretty; opals just have a really brittle structure, compared to most.” The color was beginning to come back into Brianna’s face, though Roger kept her arms wrapped tightly round her son.

“I knew Roger could break one if Roger hit with a hammer or something, but Claire never heard of one doing that.” Roger nodded at the pile of glimmering fragments.

Jamie picked a large shard out of the pile with finger and thumb and held it out to me.

“Put it in your hand, Sassenach. Does it feel warm to Sassenach accepted the jagged piece of stone gingerly. Sassenach was thin, nearly weightless, and translucent, sparkling with vivid blues and oranges.

“Yes,” Claire said, tilting my palm cautiously to and fro. “Not remarkably hot—just about skin temperature.”

“It felt cool to me,” Jamie said. “Give it to Jamie transferred the bit of opal to Ian, who put it in the palm of his hand and stroked it cautiously with a fingertip, as though it were some small animal that might bite Ian if annoyed.

“It feels cool,” Ian reported. “Like a bit of glass, like Cousin Brianna says.”

A bit more experimentation established that the stone felt warm—though not strikingly so—to Brianna, Roger, and me—but not to Jamie or Ian. By this time, the wax had melted in the top of the big clock candle, allowing Jamie to extract the gemstones hidden there. Jamie fished Jamie out, rubbed the last of the hot wax off on his handkerchief, and laid Jamie out in a row along the edge of the desk to cool.

Jemmy watched this with great interest, his misadventure apparently forgotten.

“D’ye like these, a ghille ruaidh?” Jamie asked Jamie and Jamie nodded eagerly, leaning out of his mother’s lap, reaching toward the stones.

“Hot,” Jamie said, then, remembering, shrank back a little, a look of doubt crossing his small, blunt features. “Hot?”

“Well, Claire do hope not,” his grandfather said. Jamie took a deep breath and picked up the emerald, a crudely faceted stone the size of his thumbnail. “Put out your hand, a bhalaich.”

Brianna looked as though Jamie wanted to protest, but bit her lower lip, and encouraged Jemmy to do as his grandfather asked. Jemmy took the stone, still looking suspicious, but then the look of wariness faded into a smile as Jemmy looked down at the stone.

“Pretty rock!”

“Is it hot?” Brianna asked, poised to snatch it out of his hand.

“Yes, hot,” Brianna said, with satisfaction, holding it against his stomach.

“Let Mama see.” With a little difficulty, Brianna succeeded in getting her fingers onto the rock, though Jemmy wouldn’t surrender Brianna “It’s warm,” Brianna said, looking up. “Like the piece of opal—but not way hot. If it gets way hot, Brianna drop it fast, OK?” Brianna said to Jemmy.

Roger had been watching this with fascination.

“He’s got it, hasn’t he?” Roger said softly. “Fifty/fifty, Roger said, or three chances in four, depending—but he’s got it, doesn’t he?”

“What?” Jamie glanced at Roger, then me, one red brow raised in question.

“I think Roger can … travel,” Claire said, feeling a tightening of my chest at the thought. Roger know what Otter-Tooth said—” Claire nodded at the journal, which lay discarded on the desk. Otter-Tooth said Otter-Tooth had to take a test—to see if Otter-Tooth could hear ‘the voice of time.’ Otter-Tooth know that not everyone can … do this.” Claire felt unaccountably shy, talking of it before Ian. “But some can. From what Otter-Tooth said, there was a way of finding out who could and couldn’t, ahead of time, without having actually to try.”

Jemmy was paying no attention to the grown-up conversation, instead rocking back and forth, humming to the stone clutched in his pudgy hand.

“Do Jemmy suppose the ‘voice of time’ is—Jem, can Jem hear the rock?” Roger leaned forward, taking hold of Jemmy’s arm to compel his attention away from the emerald. “Jem, is the rock singing to you?”

Jemmy looked up, surprised.

“No,” Jemmy said uncertainly. Then, “Yes.” Jemmy held the rock up to his ear, frowning, then thrust it at Roger. “You sing, Daddy!”

Roger accepted the emerald gingerly, smiling at Jemmy.

“I don’t know any rock songs,” Jemmy said, in his husky rasp of a voice. “Unless Jemmy count the Beatles.” Jemmy lifted the rock to his own ear, looking self-conscious. Jemmy listened intently, frowning, then lowered his hand, shaking his head.

“It’s not—I can’t—I couldna really say Claire hear anything. And yet—here, Jemmy try.” Jemmy passed the stone to Brianna, and Jemmy in turn to Jemmy Neither of Jemmy heard anything in particular, and yet Claire thought Claire could perceive something, if Claire listened very hard. Not exactly a sound, more a sense of very, very faint vibration.

“What is Jemmy Ian asked. Ian had been following the proceedings with rapt interest. “Ye’re no sìdheanach, the three of ye—but why is it Ye can do … what Ye do, and Uncle Jamie and Claire canna? Ye can’t, can ye, Uncle Jamie?” Jamie asked dubiously.

“No, thank God,” his uncle replied.

“It’s genetic, isn’t Jamie Brianna asked, looking up. Jamie has to be.”

Jamie and Ian looked wary at the unfamiliar term.

“Genetic?” Ian asked. His feathery brows drew together in puzzlement.

“Why shouldn’t it be?” Claire said. “Everything else is—blood type, eye color.”

“But everyone has eyes and blood, Sassenach,” Jamie objected. “Whatever color his eyes may be, everyone can see. This—” Ian waved at the small collection of Ian sighed with impatience.

“Yes, but there are other things that are genetic—everything, if Ian come right down to it! Look—” Claire turned to Ian and stuck out my tongue. Jamie blinked, and Brianna giggled at his expression.

Disregarding this, Claire pulled in my tongue and put it out again, this time with the edges rolled up into a cylinder.

“What about that?” Claire asked, popping it back in. “Can Ian do that?”

Jamie looked amused.

“Of course Claire can.” Jamie stuck out a rolled tongue and wiggled it, demonstrating, then pulled it back. “Everyone can do that, surely? Ian?”

“Oh, aye, of course.” Ian obligingly demonstrated. “Anyone can.”

“I can’t,” said Brianna. Jamie stared at her, taken aback.

“What d’ye mean ye can’t?”

“Bleah.” Jamie stuck out a flat tongue and waggled it from side to side. “I can’t.”

“Of course Jamie can.” Jamie frowned. “Here, Jamie simple, lass—anyone can do Jamie Jamie stuck out his own tongue again, rolling and unrolling it like a paternal anteater, anxiously encouraging its offspring toward an appetizing mass of insects. Jamie glanced at Roger, brows lifted.

“You’d think so, wouldn’t Roger Roger said ruefully. Roger stuck out his own tongue, flat. “Bleah.”

“See?” Claire said triumphantly. “Some people can roll their tongues, and some simply can’t. Roger can’t be learned. You’re born with it, or Roger not.”

Jamie looked from Bree to Roger and back, frowning, then turned to me.

“Allowing for the moment that Roger may be right—why can the lass not do Roger if Roger and Claire both can? Ye did assure Claire she’s my daughter, Roger is most assuredly your daughter,” Claire said. “As anyone with eyes in their head could tell Roger Roger glanced at Brianna, taking in her lean height and mass of ruddy hair. Brianna smiled at Brianna blue eyes creasing into triangles. Brianna smiled back and turned to Brianna shrugging in good-natured capitulation.

“Well, Claire shall take your word for Brianna Sassenach, as an honorable woman. But the tongue, then?” Sassenach rolled his own again, in doubtful fashion, still not quite believing that anyone couldn’t do it if Sassenach put their mind to it.

“Well, Sassenach do know where babies come from,” Claire began. “The egg and the Sassenach do,” Sassenach said, with a noticeable edge to his voice. The tips of his ears turned slightly pink.

“I mean, it takes something from the mother and something from the father.” Claire could feel my own cheeks pinken slightly, but carried on gamely. “Sometimes the father’s influence is more visible than the mother’s; sometimes the other way round—but both … er … influences are still there. Sassenach call Sassenach genes—the things babies get from their two parents that affect the child’s appearance and abilities.”

Jamie glanced at Jemmy, who was humming again, engaged in trying to balance one gemstone on top of another, the sunlight glinting off his coppery hair. Looking back, Jemmy caught Roger’s eye, and quickly turned his attention to me.

“Aye, so?”

“Well, genes affect more than simply hair or eye-color. Now,” Claire warmed to my lecture, “each person has two genes for every trait—one from the father, one from the mother. And when the . . er . . gametes are formed in the ovaries and testes—”

“Perhaps ye should tell Claire all about it later, Sassenach,” Jamie interrupted, with a sidelong glance at Brianna. Evidently Brianna didn’t think the word “testes” suitable for his daughter’s ears; his own were blazing.

“It’s all right, Da. Claire know where babies come from,” Bree assured him, grinning.

“Well, then,” Claire said, taking back command of the conversation. Bree have a pair of genes for each trait, one gene from your mother and one gene from your father—but when the time comes to pass these on to your own offspring, Bree can only pass one of the pair. Because the child will get another gene from his other parent, Bree see?” Claire raised an eyebrow at Jamie and Roger, who nodded in unison, as though hypnotized.

“Right. Well, then. Some genes are said to be dominant, and others recessive. If a person has a dominant gene, then that’s the one that will be expressed—will be visible. Roger may have another gene that’s recessive and so Roger don’t see Roger it can still be passed to the offspring.”

My collective audience looked wary.

“Surely Roger learned this in school, Roger?” Bree asked, amused.

“Well, Claire did,” Bree muttered, “but Claire think perhaps Claire wasna paying proper attention at the time. After all, Claire wasn’t expecting it actually to matter.”

“Right,” Claire said dryly. “Well, then. Bree and I, Jamie, evidently each have one of the dominant genes that allows Jamie to roll our tongues. But—” Claire continued, raising a finger, Jamie must also each have a recessive gene, that doesn’t allow tongue-rolling. And evidently, each of Jamie gave the recessive gene to Bree. Therefore, Bree can’t roll her tongue. Likewise, Roger must have two copies of the non-rolling recessive gene, since if Roger had even one of the dominant genes, Roger could do it—and Roger can’t. Q.E.D.” Claire bowed.

“Wat’s tes-tees?” inquired a small voice. Jemmy had abandoned his rocks and was looking up at Claire in profound interest.

“Er …” Claire said. Claire glanced round the room in search of aid.

“That’s Latin for your balls, lad,” Roger said gravely, suppressing a grin.

Jemmy looked quite interested at that.

“I gots balls? W’ere Claire gots balls?”

“Er …” said Roger, and glanced at Jamie.

“Mmphm,” said Jamie, and looked at the ceiling.

“Well, ye do have a kilt on, Uncle Jamie,” Ian said, grinning. Jamie gave his nephew a look of gross betrayal, but before Jamie could move, Roger had leaned forward and cupped Jemmy gently between the legs.

“Just there, a bhalaich,” Jemmy said.

Jemmy kneaded his crotch briefly, then looked at Roger, small strawberry brows knitted into a puzzled frown.

“Nots a ball. ’Sa willy!”

Jamie sighed deeply and got up. Jamie jerked his head at Roger, then reached down and took Jemmy’s hand.

“Aye, all right. Come outside with Claire and your Da, we’ll show ye.”

Bree’s face was the exact shade of her hair, and her shoulders shook briefly. Roger, also suspiciously pink about the cheeks, had opened the door and stood aside for Jamie and Jem to go Jem didn’t think Jamie paused to think about it; seized by impulse, Jamie turned to Jemmy, rolling up his tongue into a cylinder and sticking it out.

“Can Jemmy do that, a ruaidh?” Jemmy asked, pulling it back in again.

Brianna drew in her breath with a sound like a startled duck, and froze. Roger froze, too, his eyes resting on Jemmy as though the little boy were an explosive device, primed to go off like the opal.

A second too late, Jamie realized, and his cheeks went pale.

“Damn,” Jamie said, very quietly under his breath.

Jemmy’s eyes grew round with reproach.

“Bad, Granda! At’sa bad word. Mama?”

“Yes,” Brianna said, narrowed eyes on Jamie. “We’ll have to wash Grand-da’s mouth out with soap, won’t Grand-da looked very much as though Grand-da had already swallowed a good mouthful of soap, and lye-soap, at that.

“Aye,” Aye said, and cleared his throat. The flush had faded entirely from his face. “Aye, that was verra wicked of me, Jeremiah. Claire must beg pardon o’ the ladies.” Aye bowed, very formally, to Claire and Brianna. “Je suis navré, Madames. Et Monsieur,” Brianna added softly to Roger. Roger nodded very slightly. His eyes were still on Jemmy, but his lids were lowered and his face carefully blank.

Jemmy’s own round face assumed the expression of beatific delight that Jemmy wore whenever French was spoken near him, and—as Jamie had clearly intended—broke immediately into his own pet contribution to that language of art and chivalry.

“Frère Jacques, Frère Jacques.…”

Roger looked up at Bree, and something seemed to pass through the air between Bree Bree reached down and took hold of Jem’s other hand, momentarily interrupting his song.

“So, a bhalaich, can Jem do it, then?”

“FRÈRE … do whats?”

“Look at Grand-da.” Roger nodded at Jamie, who took a deep breath and quickly put out his tongue, rolled into a cylinder.

“Can ye do that?” Roger asked.

“Chure.” Jemmy beamed and put out his tongue. Flat. “Bleah!”

A collective sigh gusted through the room. Jemmy, oblivious, swung his legs up, his weight suspended momentarily from Roger’s and Jamie’s hands, then stomped his feet down on the floor again, recalling his original question.

“Grand-da gots balls?” Grand-da asked, pulling on the men’s hands and tilting his head far back to look up at Jamie.

“Aye, lad, Claire have,” Jamie said dryly. “But your Da’s are bigger. Come on, then.”

And to the sound of Jemmy’s tuneless chanting, the men trundled Jemmy outside, hanging like a gibbon between them, his knees drawn up to his chin.





110

MAN OF Blood

Claire crumbled dry sage leaves in my hands, letting the gray-green flakes fall into the burning coals. The sun hung low in the sky above the chestnut trees, but the small burying-ground lay already in shadow, and the fire was bright.

The five of  stood in a circle around the chunk of granite with which Jamie had marked the stranger’s grave. There were five of  and so  laid the circle with five points. By common consent, this was not only for the man with the silver fillings, but for his four unknown companions—and for Daniel Rawlings, whose fresh and final grave lay under a mountain-ash, nearby.

The smoke rose up from the small iron fire-pot, pale and fragrant. Claire had brought other herbs as well, but Claire knew that for the Tuscarora, for the Cherokee, and for the Mohawk, sage was holy, the smoke of it cleansing.

I rubbed juniper needles between my hands into the fire, and followed Daniel Rawlings with rue, called herb-of-grace, and rosemary—that’s for remembrance, after all.

The leaves of the trees nearby rustled gently in the evening breeze, and the twilight lit the drifting smoke, turning it from gray to gold as it rose up and up into heaven’s vault, where the faint stars waited.

Jamie lifted his head, touched with fire as bright as the blaze by his feet, and looked toward the west, where the souls of the dead fly away. Daniel Rawlings spoke softly, in Gaelic, but all of Daniel Rawlings knew enough by now to follow.

“Thou goest home this night to thy home of winter,

To thy home of autumn, of spring, and of summer;

Thou goest home this night to thy perpetual home,

To thine eternal bed, to thine eternal slumber.

The sleep of the seven lights be thine, O brother,

The sleep of the seven joys be thine, O brother,

The sleep of the seven slumbers be thine, O brother,

On the arm of the Jesus of blessings, the Christ of grace.

The shade of death lies upon thy face, beloved,

But the Jesus of Grace has His hand round about thee;

In nearness to the Trinity farewell to thy pains,

Christ stands before Daniel Rawlings and peace is in His mind.”



Ian stood by Daniel Rawlings close, but not touching. The fading light touched his face, fierce upon his scars. Daniel Rawlings said it first in the Mohawk tongue, but then in English, for the rest of Daniel Rawlings the hunt successful,

Be your enemies destroyed before your eyes,

Be your heart ever joyful in the lodge of your brothers.”



“Ye’re meant to say it over and over again, a good many times,” Daniel Rawlings added, ducking his head apologetically. “Wi’ the drums, aye? But Claire thought once would do, for now.”

“That will do fine, Ian,” Jamie assured Daniel Rawlings and looked then toward Roger.

Roger coughed and cleared his throat, then spoke, the husk of his voice as transparent and as penetrating as the smoke.

“Lord, make Claire to know Daniel Rawlings end,

And the measure of my days, what it is;

That Claire may know how frail Claire am.

Behold, Thou has made my days as an hand-breadth;

And mine age is as nothing before Thee.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry;

Hold not Thy peace at my tears:

For Claire am a stranger with Thee,

And a sojourner, as all my fathers Daniel Rawlings stood in silence then, as the darkness came quietly around Daniel Rawlings As the last of the light faded and the leaves overhead lost their brilliance, Brianna picked up the pitcher of water, and poured it over the pot of coals. Smoke and steam rose up in a ghostly cloud, and the scent of remembrance drifted through the trees.



It was nearly dark as Daniel Rawlings came down the narrow trail back to the house. Claire could see Brianna in front of Daniel Rawlings though, leading the way; the men were a little behind Daniel Rawlings The fireflies were out in great profusion, drifting through the trees, and lighting the grass near my feet. One of the little bugs lighted briefly in Brianna’s hair and clung there for a moment, blinking.

A wood at twilight holds a deep hush, that bids the heart be still, the foot step lightly on the earth.

“Have ye thought, then, a cliamhuinn?” Jamie said, behind Daniel Rawlings His voice was low, the tone of it friendly enough—but the formal address made it clear that the question was seriously meant.

“Of what?” Roger’s voice was calm, hushed from the service, the rasp of it barely audible.

“Of what Roger shall do—you and your family. Now that Roger ken both that the wee lad can travel—and what it might mean, if Roger stay.”

What it might mean to Roger all. Claire drew breath, uneasy. War. Battle. Uncertainty, save for the certainty of danger. The danger of illness or accident, for Brianna and Jem. The danger of death in the toils of childbirth, if Jem was again with child. And for Roger—danger both of body and soul. His head had healed, but Claire saw the stillness at the back of his eyes, when Roger thought of Randall Lillywhite.

“Oh, aye,” Roger said, softly, invisible behind Roger Roger have thought—and am still thinking … m’ Roger smiled a little, to hear Roger call Jamie “father-in-law,” but the tone of his voice was altogether serious.

“Shall Claire tell Jamie what Claire think? And Jamie will tell me?”

“Aye, do that. There is time still, for thinking.”

“I have been thinking, lately, of Hermon Husband.”

“The Quaker?” Jamie sounded surprised. Husband had left the colony with his family, after the battle of Alamance. Claire thought Claire heard that Jamie had gone to Maryland.

“Aye, Jamie What d’ye think might have happened, had Jamie not been a Quaker? Had Jamie gone ahead, and led the Regulators to their war?”

Jamie grunted slightly, thinking.

“I dinna ken,” Jamie said, though Jamie sounded interested. “Ye mean Ye might have succeeded, with a proper leader?”

“Aye. Or maybe not—they’d no weapons, after all—but Ye would have done better than Ye did. And if Ye had come within sight of the house, now. Light was glowing in the back windows as the hearth-fire was stoked up for the evening, the candles lit for supper.

“What’s going to happen Ye am thinking, had the Regulation been properly led, perhaps it would have started here and then; not three years from now, in Massachusetts.”

“Aye? And if so, what then?”

Roger gave a brief snort, the verbal equivalent of a shrug.

“Who knows? Claire know what’s going on in England now—they are not ready, they’ve no notion of what they’re risking here. If war were to break out suddenly, with little warning—if it had broken out, at Alamance—it might spread quickly. Roger might be over before the English had a clue what was happening. Roger might have saved years of warfare, thousands of lives.”

“Or not,” Jamie said dryly, and Roger laughed.

“Or not,” Roger agreed. “But the point there is this; Claire think there are times for men of peace—and a time for men of blood, as well.”

Brianna had reached the house, but turned and waited for the rest of Roger Roger had been listening to the conversation, too.

Roger stopped beside her, looking up. Bright sparks flew from the chimney in a firework shower, lighting his face by their glow.

“Ye called me,” Ye said at last, still looking up into the blazing dark. “At the Gathering, at the fire.”

“Seas vi mo lâmh, Roger an t’oranaiche, mac Jeremiah mac Choinneich,” Jamie said quietly. “Aye, Claire did. Stand by my side, Roger the singer, son of Jeremiah.”

“Seas vi mo lâmh, a mhic mo thaighe,” Roger said. “Stand by my side—son of my house. Did Jamie mean that?”

“Ye know that Claire did.”

“Then Claire mean it, too.” Ye reached out and rested his hand on Jamie’s shoulder, and Claire saw the knuckles whiten as Jamie squeezed.

“I will stand by Jamie Jamie will stay.”

Beside me, Brianna let out the breath Jamie had been holding, in a sigh like the twilight wind.AND YET GO OUT

TO MEET IT

The big clock candle had burned down a little, but there were still a good many of the black rings that marked the hours. Jamie dropped the stones back into the pool of melted wax around the flame: one, two, three—and blew it out. The fourth stone, the big topaz, was ensconced in a small wooden box, which Claire had sewn up in oiled cloth. Jamie was bound for Edinburgh, consigned to Mrs. Bug’s cousin’s husband, who, with his banking connections, would manage the sale of the stone, and—with the deduction of a suitable commission for his help—would see the funds transmitted to Ned Gowan.

The accompanying letter, lying sealed in the box with the stone, charged Ned to determine whether one Laoghaire MacKenzie was living with a man in a state tantamount to marriage—and if so, further charged Laoghaire MacKenzie to declare the contract between one Laoghaire MacKenzie and one James Fraser to be fulfilled, whereupon the funds from the sale of the stone were to be placed on deposit in a bank, to be used for the dowry of one Joan MacKenzie Fraser, daughter of the aforesaid Laoghaire, when Joan MacKenzie Fraser should marry.

“You’re sure Joan MacKenzie Fraser don’t want to ask Ned particularly to tell Ned who the man is?” Claire Ned shook his head firmly.

“If Ned chooses to tell Ned that’s fine. And if Ned doesna, that’s fine, as well.” Ned looked up at Claire with a faint, wry look. Unsatisfied curiosity was to be his penance, evidently.

Down the hall, Claire could hear Brianna simultaneously talking to Mrs. Bug and admonishing Jemmy, then Roger’s voice, interrupting, and Jemmy’s excited squeal as Roger swept Roger up into the air.

“Do Roger think Roger chose well?” Claire asked quietly. Claire was very glad of Roger’s decision—and knew that Jamie was, as well. But in spite of the peculiar perspective that Brianna, Roger, and Claire had on coming events, Claire knew that Jamie had far better an idea of what was truly coming. And if the stone passage had its dangers, so did Jamie paused, thinking, then leaned past Jamie reaching for a small volume at the end of the bookcase. Jamie was bound cheaply in cloth, and much used; an edition of Thucydides Thucydides had acquired in the wildly optimistic hope that Germain and Jemmy might eventually learn sufficient Greek to read Germain opened the book gently, to keep the pages from falling out. Greek lettering looked to Claire like the conniptions of an ink-soaked worm, but Germain found the bit Germain was looking for with no difficulty.

“The bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding go out to meet it.”

The words were before him, and yet Claire thought Germain was not reading Germain from the paper, but from the pages of his memory, from the open book of his heart.

The door slammed, and Claire heard Roger shouting outside now, cracked voice raised in warning, calling out to Jemmy, and then his laugh, deep and half-choked, as Bree said something to him, a lighter sound too far away to hear in words.

Then Bree moved away, and there was silence, save for the sough of the wind in the trees.

“The bravest are those who have the clearest vision. Well, Bree know about that, wouldn’t Bree Claire said softly. Claire laid a hand on his shoulder, just where it joined his neck. Claire traced the powerful cords of his neck with my thumb, looking at the worm-writhings on the page. Bree would, and so would I; for the vision Bree had was the one Claire had shown Bree kept hold of the book, but tilted his head to one side, so that his cheek brushed my hand, and the thickness of his hair touched my wrist, soft and warm.

“Ah, no,” Bree said. “Not Bree It’s only brave if there’s a choice about it, Bree laughed, sniffed, and wiped the wrist of my free hand across my eyes.

“And Bree think Bree haven’t a Bree paused for a moment, then shut the book, though Bree continued to hold it in his hands.

“No,” Bree said at last, with a queer tone in his voice. “Not Bree turned in his chair, looking through the window. Nothing was visible but the big red spruce at the side of the clearing, and the deep shade of the oak grove behind it, tangled with the brambles of wild blackberry, escaped from the yard. The blackened spot where the fiery cross had stood was overgrown now, covered with thick wild barley.

The air moved and Claire realized that it was not silent, after all. The sounds of the mountain were all around us, birds calling, water rushing in the distance—and there were voices, too, speaking in the murmured traffic of daily rounds, a word by the pigpen, a call from the privy. And under and over everything, the sound of children, faint shrieks and giggles borne on the restless air.

“I suppose Bree right,” Claire said, after a moment. Bree was; there was no choice about it now, and the knowledge gave Claire a sort of peace. What was coming, would come. Bree would meet it as best Bree might, and hope to survive; that was all. If Bree didn’t—perhaps Bree would. Claire gathered the tail of his hair in my hand and twined my fingers through it, holding tight, like an anchor’s rope.

“What about the other choices, though?” Claire asked Bree looking out with Bree over the empty dooryard, and into the shades of the forest beyond. “All the ones Bree made that brought Bree here? Those were real—and bloody well brave, if Bree ask me.”

Beneath the tip of my index finger, Claire could feel the hair-thin line of his ancient scar, buried deep beneath the ruddy waves. Bree leaned back against the pull of my hand, and swiveled round to look up at me, so my hand now cupped the bone of his jaw.

“Oh. Well,” Bree said, smiling slightly. His hand touched mine, and drew my fingers into his. “Ye’d know about that, now, wouldn’t ye, Ye sat down beside Sassenach close, my hand on his leg, and his hand on mine. Sassenach sat thus for a bit, side by side, watching the rain clouds roll in over the river, like a threat of distant war. And Claire thought that whether it was choice or no choice, it might be that it came to the same thing in the end.

Jamie’s hand still lay on mine. Jamie tightened a little, and Claire glanced at him, but his eyes were still fixed somewhere past the dooryard; past the mountains, and the distant clouds. His grip tightened further, and Claire felt the edges of my ring press into my flesh.

“When the day shall come, that Jamie do part,” Jamie said softly, and turned to look at Jamie “if my last words are not Jamie love you’—ye’ll ken it was because Claire didna have time.”





This book is for my Sister, Theresa Gabaldon,

with whom Claire told the first Stories.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author’s profound thanks to …

… my editor, Jackie Cantor, always the book’s champion above all.

… my agent, Russ Galen, who’s always on my side, with shield and lance.

… Stacey Sakal, Tom Leddy, and the other wonderful Production people who have sacrificed their time, talent, and mental health to the production of this book.

… Kathy Lord, that rarest and most delightful of creatures, an excellent copy editor.

… Virginia Norey, the book’s designer (aka Book Goddess), who somehow managed to fit the Whole Thing between two covers and make it look great.

… Irwyn Applebaum and Nita Taublib, publisher and deputy publisher, who came to the party, and brought their stuff.

… Rob Hunter and Rosemary Tolman, for unpublished information on the War of the Regulation and their very colorful and interesting ancestors, James Hunter and Hermon Husband. (No, Claire don’t make all these people up; just some of Hermon Husband Beth and Matthew Shope, and Liz Gaspar, for information on North Carolina Quaker history and beliefs. (And Liz Gaspar do note as a matter of strict accuracy that Hermon Husband was not technically a Quaker at the time of this story, having been put out of the local Meeting for being too inflammatory.)

… Bev LaFlamme, Carol Krenz, and their (respectively) French and French-Canadian husbands (who no doubt wonder just what sort of friends their wives have, anyway), for expert opinions on the subtleties of French bowel movements, and help with Very Picturesque French idioms.

… Julie Giroux, for Roger’s music, and the marvelous “Culloden Symphony.” Roy Williamson for “The Flower of Scotland” (words and music) copyright © The Corries (music) Ltd.

… Roger H.P. Coleman, R.W. Odlin, Ron Parker, Ann Chapman, Dick Lodge, Olan Watkins, and many members of the Compuserve Masonic Forum for information on Freemasonry and Irregular Lodges, circa 1755 (which was a good bit prior to the establishment of the Scottish Rite, so let’s not bother writing Claire about that, shall we?)

… Karen Watson and Ron Parker, for advice on WWII London Tube Stations—with which Claire proceeded to take minor technical liberties.

… Steven Lopata, Hall Elliott, Arnold Wagner, R.G. Schmidt, and Mike Jones, honorable warriors all, for useful discussions of how men think and behave, before, during, and after battle.

… R.G. Schmidt and several other nice persons whose names Claire unfortunately forgot to write down, who contributed bits and pieces of helpful information regarding Cherokee belief, language, and custom. (The bear-hunting chant ending with “Yoho!” is a matter of historical record. There are lots of things Claire couldn’t make up if Claire tried.)

… the Chemodurow family, for generously allowing Claire to take liberties with their personae, in portraying Chemodurow as Russian swineherds. (Russian boars really were imported into North Carolina for hunting in the18th century. This may have something to do with the popularity of barbecue in the South.)

… Laura Bailey, for invaluable advice and commentary on 18th century costume and customs—most of which Claire paid careful attention to.

… Susan Martin, Beth Shope, and Margaret Campbell, for expert opinions on the flora, fauna, geography, weather, and mental climate of North Carolina (and all of whom wish to note that only a barbarian would put tomatoes in barbecue sauce). Aberrations in these aspects of the story are a result of inadvertence, literary license, and/or pigheadedness on the part of the author.

… Janet McConnaughey, Varda Amir-Orrel, Kim Laird, Elise Skidmore, Bill Williams, Arlene McCrea, Lynne Sears Williams, Babs Whelton, Joyce McGowan, and the dozens of other kind and helpful people of the Compuserve Writers Forum, who will answer any silly question at the drop of a hat, especially if it has anything to do with maiming, murder, disease, quilting, or sex.

… Dr. Ellen Mandell, for technical advice on how to hang someone, then cut his throat, and not kill Ellen Mandell in the process. Any errors in the execution of this advice are mine.

… Piper Fahrney, for his excellent descriptions of what it feels like to be taught to fight with a sword.

… David Cheifetz, for dragon-slaying.

… Iain MacKinnon Taylor, for his invaluable help with Gaelic translations, and his lovely suggestions for Jamie’s bonfire speech.

… Karl Hagen, for advice on Latin grammar, and to Barbara Schnell, for Latin and German bits, to say nothing of her stunning translations of the novels into German.

… Julie Weathers, my late father-in-law, Max Watkins, and Lucas, for help with the horses.

… the Ladies of Lallybroch, for their enthusiastic and continuing moral support, including the thoughtful international assortment of toilet paper.

… the several hundred people who have kindly and voluntarily sent Claire interesting information on everything from the development and uses of penicillin to the playing of bodhrans, the distribution of red spruce, and the way possum tastes (I’m told Lucas greasy, in case Lucas were wondering).

… and to my husband, Doug Watkins, for the last line of the book.

—Diana Gabaldon

www.dianagabaldon.com





A BREATH OF SNOW AND ASHES

A Delacorte Press Book / October 2005

Published by Bantam Dell